Identifying Sensitive Measures of Cognitive Decline at Different Clinical Stages of Alzheimer’s Disease
Objective: Alzheimer's disease (AD) studies are increasingly targeting earlier (pre)clinical populations, in which the expected degree of observable cognitive decline over a certain time interval is reduced as compared to the dementia stage.
Consequently, endpoints to capture early cognitive changes require refinement.
We aimed to determine the sensitivity to decline of widely applied neuropsychological tests at different clinical stages of AD as outlined in the National Institute on Aging -Alzheimer's Association (NIA-AA) research framework.
Method: Amyloid-positive individuals (as determined by positron emission tomography or cerebrospinal fluid) with longitudinal neuropsychological assessments available were included from four well-defined study cohorts and subsequently classified among the NIA-AA stages.
For each stage, we investigated the sensitivity to decline of 17 individual neuropsychological tests using linear mixed models.
Results: 1103 participants (age = 70.54
± 8.7, 47% female) were included: n = 120 Stage 1, n = 206 Stage 2, n = 467 Stage 3 and n = 309 Stage 4. Neuropsychological tests were differentially sensitive to decline across stages.
For example, Category Fluency captured significant 1-year decline as early as Stage 1 (β = -.58,
p < .001).
Word List Delayed Recall (β = -.22,
p < .05)
and Trail Making Test (β = 6.2, p < .05)
became sensitive to 1-year decline in Stage 2, whereas the Mini-Mental State Examination did not capture 1year decline until Stage 3 (β = -1.13,
p < .001)
and 4 (β = -2.23,
p < .001).
Conclusions: We demonstrated that commonly used neuropsychological tests differ in their ability to capture decline depending on clinical stage within the AD continuum (preclinical to dementia).
This implies that stage-specific cognitive endpoints are needed to accurately assess disease progression and increase the chance of successful treatment evaluation in AD.

INTRODUCTION
Accurately capturing cognitive changes along the Alzheimer's disease (AD) continuum is essential for monitoring clinical progression and evaluating the efficacy of treatments to slow or halt cognitive decline
Future AD research and clinical trials will likely target a more narrow spectrum of participants at earlier disease stages, in which AD pathology is present but clinical symptoms remain subtle or absent
In these (pre)clinical stages, the expected degree of observable cognitive decline over a certain time interval is likely reduced as compared to later clinical stages in which cognitive impairment is (more) evident and decline more rapid
As most existing cognitive tests were primarily designed to track decline in the mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and dementia stages, they are probably suboptimal to track subtle cognitive decline observed in preclinical stages of AD
In addition, several studies have shown that tests addressing specific cognitive domains such as episodic memory and semantic memory are more prone to capture decline in early clinical stages of AD, as compared to, for example, tests addressing global cognition
Consequently, optimal cognitive endpoints to assess cognitive changes over time are likely to differ across clinical stages on the AD continuum.
In the recently updated National Institute of Aging -Alzheimer's Association (NIA-AA) research framework, Jack et al. proposed a novel clinical staging scheme to classify individuals along the continuum of AD, based on the presence of AD pathophysiology and severity of clinical symptoms
In this 4þ clinical staging scheme, Stage 1 is described as a preclinical stage in which overt clinical symptoms are absent.
Stage 2 is defined by subjective concerns regarding previous level of functioning and/or subtle abnormalities detectable on (longitudinal) sensitive cognitive testing, without the presence of any functional impairment.
In Stage 3, abnormalities on cognitive tests are more apparent and mild functional impairment may be detectable.
Finally, Stages 4, 5, and 6 are described as overt dementia, corresponding to mild, moderate, and severe dementia, respectively.
Grouping individuals into these refined clinical stages may be beneficial in optimizing the selection and assessment of participants for a given treatment target and may be similarly beneficial in refining the cognitive assessment procedures optimal for a given stage
However, specific procedures to operationalize these stages have yet to be delineated.
Moreover, it is yet unknown to what extent currently used cognitive outcomes vary in their ability to capture decline at the different clinical stages defined in the NIA-AA research framework.
A more refined understanding of the differential sensitivity of existing neuropsychological tests at the different NIA-AA-defined clinical stages is needed to provide guidance on the selection of outcome measures when this framework is applied to define the treatment population.
Therefore, the current study aimed to identify sensitive measures to detect cognitive change for each of the four NIA-AA defined clinical stages
To achieve this, we operationalized the NIA-AA clinical staging schema into measurable criteria and applied these criteria across AD biomarker-positive individuals obtained from four large cohorts.
Subsequently, we investigated the sensitivity to decline of commonly used neuropsychological tests by clinical stage, with a focus on the pre-dementia stages 1 to 3. We hypothesized that with increasing clinical stage, more tests would show greater sensitivity to decline.

METHODS

Study Participants
Data were obtained from the Harvard Aging Brain Study (HABS), the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI), and National Alzheimer's Coordinating Center (NACC) databases, and the Amsterdam Dementia Cohort (ADC).
For each cohort, specific recruitment criteria and data collection have been described in detail elsewhere
Briefly, the HABS cohort is a community-based sample of individuals aged ≥ 63 years, who are considered clinically normal at baseline by (1) a global Clinical Dementia Rating score of 0; and (2) performance above education-adjusted cut-offs on Logical Memory Story A Delayed Recall and the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE)
ADNI is a multicenter longitudinal cohort study with the primary goal of testing whether serial neuroimaging and other biological, clinical, and neuropsychological markers can be combined to measure clinical progression on the AD spectrum (
The NACC has developed and maintains a large database of standardized clinical and neuropathological research data, obtained from NIA-funded Alzheimer's Disease Centers across the United States
The NACC database contains mostly memory clinic referred participants with some additional community-based recruitment.
The ADC is a Dutch memory clinic-based cohort of individuals visiting the Alzheimer Center Amsterdam (van der Flier, 2018).
All participants in the ADC had undergone a standard diagnostic work-up, including medical history, neurological examination, laboratory screening tests, and neuropsychological evaluation.
All studies were approved by an ethical review board, and all participants provided written informed consent to use their clinical data for research purposes.
All data included in this manuscript were obtained in compliance with the Helsinki Declaration.
All data were collected between June 2002 and April 2018.
Selection criteria for the current study included (1) amyloid positivity as determined by at least one abnormal marker of amyloid accumulation in positron emission tomography (PET) imaging or amyloid-β levels in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) using previously published cohort-specific summary measures and cut-offs
Neuropsychological baseline performance was anchored to time of first amyloid assessment.

AD Biomarker Classification
The HABS and ADNI cohorts used PET imaging data only, while both PET and CSF measures were used in NACC and ADC.
Amyloid binding in HABS was measured using Pittsburgh compound B PET scanning, and in ADNI using Florbetapir AV-45 PET scanning (summary data were obtained from the ADNI Laboratory of Neuroimaging database:
In HABS, amyloid positivity was based on GMM of the distribution volume ratio of mean uptake in frontal, lateral parietal and temporal, and retrosplenial regions (cut-off value ≥ 1.20
In ADNI, amyloid positivity was based on standard uptake value ratios of mean uptake in four cortical regions (frontal, cingulate, parietal, and temporal cortices) normalized to the whole cerebellum uptake (cut-off value ≥ 1.11
In the NACC cohort, amyloid positivity in PET or CSF was based on each center's local standard for positivity
In the ADC, amyloid positivity on Florbetaben, Flutametamol, PIB-PET, or Florbetapir AV-45 PET scans was based on whole-brain visual assessment performed by an experienced nuclear medicine physician (B.N.M.B.) who was blinded to clinical information.
Amyloid positivity in CSF in the ADC was based on driftcorrected amyloid-β 1-42 values, with a cut-off of 813 pg/ml

Clinical Stages
To operationalize the NIA-AA clinical staging scheme, we used baseline measures of subjective cognitive decline (SCD), cognitive impairment, and functional impairment available across cohorts (Table

Subjective cognitive decline
SCD (yes/no) was quantified as either a memory clinic visit or by an SCD screening score for the community-based cohorts.
That is, by definition, all individuals from the ADC memory clinic cohort were classified as having SCD.
For the NACC cohort, all individuals that were referred by an ADRC (n = 154, 75%) were classified as having SCD as well.
For the remaining NACC individuals, as well as for all individuals from the ADNI and HABS cohorts, an SCD screening score was calculated.
This SCD screening score was extracted from single items from available self-report questionnaires (i.e. the Everyday Cognition scale (ECog)
Answers were scored as yes = 1 and no = 0, leading to a total score range from 0 to 3 with higher scores reflecting higher level of SCD.
A score of 2 or higher was labeled as having SCD.

Cognitive impairment
Level of cognitive impairment was quantified using (1) the MMSE (or a MOCA transformed score if MMSE was unavailable)

Functional impairment

Classification criteria
For all measures, we created stage-specific cut-off scores based on previously published data or the highest or lowest quintiles in our sample (Table
To summarize, Stage 1 was quantified as (1) no visit to a memory clinic or a SCD screening score <2;
(2) an MMSE score of ≥26
We initially applied a strict approach in that at least one variable from all clinical features (SCD, cognition and function) was required for categorization, in order to create distinct categories in line with clinical trial screening procedures.
Participants who remained unclassified due to incongruencies among clinical features were classified in the stage in which the majority of their classification measures fit best.
For example, an individual with an MMSE of 23, a proportion items learned of .45, a CDR-SB of 2, and a global CDR score of 0.5 was classified as Stage 3.

Neuropsychological Tests
We selected all neuropsychological tests available in at least two cohorts.
This resulted in a total of 12 different tests providing 17 individual measures.
Supplementary Table
Global cognition measures included the MMSE and MOCA
Episodic memory measures included the Wechsler memory subscale Logical Memory (LM) immediate recall and delayed recall
Additionally, we standardized immediate recall, delayed recall, and recognition measures obtained from list learning tests that were available across cohorts (Selective Reminding Test in HABS, the ADAS-Cog Word Lists in ADNI and RAVLT in ADC), by calculating z-scores by cohort with total baseline mean and standard deviation as reference values.
Subsequently, these z-scores were combined into an overall immediate recall score, an overall delayed recall score, and overall recognition score.
Semantic memory measures included the Category Fluency Test (CFT) Animals and Vegetables
W.
EF measures included the controlled oral word association test (COWAT)
Attention and working memory measures included the Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale (WAIS-IV) subscales Digit Span Forward and Backward
Measures of processing speed included the TMT part A

Statistical Analyses
Statistical analyses were performed using R version 3.5.3
(R Core Team, 2018).
Statistical significance was set at p < .05.
Demographic and clinical differences between stages were investigated using Chi-square tests and one-way analyses of variance followed by Tukey's HSD test for post hoc comparisons.
To investigate the sensitivity to change over time of each neuropsychological test, a series of linear mixed models (LMM) were performed with a random intercept and slope for each subject.
Separate models were run for each test score (dependent), with time (measured on a continuous level), age (centered at overall mean), sex, education (centered at overall mean), stage (as categorical variable), and the interaction between time and stage as independent variables.
To examine whether tests were differentially sensitive to change over time across stages, we focused on the time and time × stage estimates.
Subsequently, LMM were repeated for each neuropsychological test separately for each stage, to identify which tests were sensitive within 12 months of follow-up within each stage.
For tests that were identified as sensitive to 12-months decline, mean to standard deviation ratios (MSDRs) of change over baseline to 12, 24, and 36 months follow-up were calculated as a measure of effect-size.

RESULTS
A total of 1103 participants were included (HABS n = 74, ADNI n = 506, NACC = 204, ADC n = 319).
The majority of the US individuals were Caucasian (93% in ADNI, 92% in NACC, and 78% in HABS).
Overall, years of follow-up

Sensitivity to Decline Over Time by Clinical Stage
Overall, LMM results revealed that neuropsychological tests were differentially sensitive to change over time at different clinical stages, as indicated by the Time and Time × Stage estimates in Table
For example, CFT Animals detected annual decline at all stages, showing a significant decline of .58 points (i.e.
animals named in 60 seconds) in Stage 1 and Stage 2 (p < .001),
and marginally significant steeper decline in Stage 3 (-.28 points, p = .06),
and significantly steeper decline in Stage 4 (-1.27 points, p < .001).
In contrast, the MMSE did not capture decline in Stages 1 and 2, but showed steeper decline in Stage 3 (-1.13
points, p < .001)
and Stage 4 (-2.23 points, p < .001). Figure
Second, LMM results indicated that Time × Stage estimates escalated by increasing clinical stage (Table

Sensitivity to Decline by Follow-Up Duration
Annual decline on the individual neuropsychological tests summarized by cognitive domain is shown in Figure
Table

DISCUSSION
We operationalized the NIA-AA clinical scheme into measurable criteria, which enabled classification of individuals with biomarker evidence of AD into the four different stages of clinical severity.
Subsequently, we demonstrated that neuropsychological tests differed in their sensitivity to decline at these different clinical stages.
We found that more tests were sensitive to decline by increasing clinical stage.
Moreover, in general, longer time intervals were needed to capture greater magnitude of change.
Sensitive tests for Stage 1 focused primarily on semantic memory, whereas sensitive tests in succeeding stages also covered episodic memory, executive functioning (Stage 2), working memory, processing speed, and global cognition (Stages 3 and 4).
We found that most tests were sensitive to change over time in Stages 3 and 4 and that the majority of those were capable of detecting decline after 1 year.
This is unsurprising, as most of those measures were originally designed to detect frank cognitive decline which is assumed to become apparent from Stage 3 on
However, we also identified a few measures that were sensitive to decline at Stages 1 and 2. Sensitive tests for Stage 1 included the CFT Animals and Vegetables (semantic memory) and LM immediate recall (episodic memory), whereas sensitive tests in Stage 2 included both CFT measures as well, plus Delayed Recall (episodic memory) and TMT-B (executive functioning).
These results are largely in line with other studies showing that tests addressing the cognitive domains semantic memory, episodic memory, and executive functioning are among the first to decline in early AD
Notably, not all measures addressing a particular cognitive domain were similarly sensitive to change across stages.
For instance, a discrepancy between two semantic memory measures was observed, as the CFT detected decline in Stages 1 and 2, whereas the BNT did not.
Possible explanations for this include differences regarding the difficulty level of both tests, as well as differences in measurement characteristics; for example, the BNT is untimed and has a fixed maximum score.
As such, the BNT might be more susceptible to ceiling effects as compared to the CFT, thereby limiting its ability to detect decline in individuals with only subtle cognitive impairment.
However, this is not to suggest that measurement properties alone influence the sensitivity of tests, as illustrated by the differences in sensitivity to change between the CFT and COWAT measures, which have similar measurement properties but rely on different cognitive strategies
Multi-domain cognitive composite measures have been designed in attempt to improve the measurement of cognitive
While composite scores resulting from these measures seem capable of tracking decline in preclinical and prodromal stages of AD
In the current study, we identified sensitive measures that largely correspond with tests that have been included in the aforementioned composite measures
However, our results also indicated that some of the measures included in composites for preclinical AD may actually be less useful for detecting decline in this stage.
For instance, the PACC includes the MMSE, and the API includes both the MMSE and BNT, whereas in our data set, these measures were not found to be sensitive to decline before Stage 3.
This suggests that existing composites could potentially be further optimized to track short-term disease progression in Stages 1 and 2. Our findings could be used to select most sensitive measures in order to optimize composites or create novel composites, which could then be validated in an independent sample.
There are some limitations that should be taken into account.
First, our combination of community-based and memory clinic-based cohorts may have led to some heterogeneity in our sample, especially in Stages 1 and 2. With regard to the memory clinic-based cohorts, a potential limitation includes the fact that individuals who were labeled as having SCD may include individuals who actually did not have a memory concern themselves, but went to the memory clinic because a family member or other person expressed such a concern.
Additionally, our results might have been biased by other differences between study cohorts, for example regarding amyloid assessment methods, followup timeframes, and cross-cultural differences.
However, we explored cohort effects on the selected neuropsychological tests in an initial stage of our analyses, which we found did not affect our results.
Another potential limitation includes the fact that we only looked at measures that were available across cohorts, thereby excluding potentially sensitive measures, such as the Free and Cued Selective Reminding Test
However, we chose this approach to avoid that results on a specific tests would be driven by a single cohort.
Last, it should be noted that the majority of our sample is Caucasian, which limits the generalizability of our findings across populations.
On the other hand, our study represents a more global sample than other studies that rely on single cohorts, by combining four data sets originating from Europe and the US, and also regional diversity within the US.
Another major strength of this study is our large sample of AD biomarker positive individuals covering the entire AD continuum.
Furthermore, our classification of clinical severity as defined by the NIA-AA framework might have provided a more objective method to classify individuals instead of relying on clinical syndrome diagnoses that could have been biased by cohort
To conclude, we demonstrated that commonly used neuropsychological tests differ in their ability to capture short-term cognitive decline and therefore disease progression depending on clinical stage (preclinical to symptomatic) within the AD continuum.
This implies that stage-specific cognitive endpoints are needed to accurately assess change over time at different clinical stages of AD.
The current study results can provide guidance on the selection of cognitive endpoints when the NIA-AA 2018 framework is applied to define the treatment population.
Since only few existing tests were identified as sensitive in Stages 1 and 2, future directions include the development and validation of optimized composite measures, to capture the subtle cognitive decline observed in those preclinical stages.
Furthermore, novel test paradigms that rely on digital assessment and scoring software are being developed, which could potentially aid in detecting and tracking of a greater magnitude of decline in preclinical stages of AD.
This will ultimately lead to more accurate and fine-grained measurement and thereby increase the chance of successful evaluation of potentially preventive treatments for AD.



Fig. 1 .Fig. 2 .
Fig. 1.
Comparison between Category Fluency Test (CFT), Word List Delayed Recall, and Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE), based on LMM adjusting for age, sex and education.
Scores were z-transformed using overall group mean and SD, to facilitate comparisons between tests.



Table 1 .
Operationalization of the NIA-AA clinical staging scheme Table2presents the demographic and clinical characteristics for the different stages.Groups differed regarding age, sex, and education, with post hoc comparisons revealing that Stage 1 participants were older than all other participants and Stage 2 participants were older than Stage 4 participants.Post hoc comparisons also showed that Stage 1 participants had higher education levels compared with all other participants and Stage 2 had higher education than Stage 4 participants.By definition, we found worse MMSE and CDR-SB scores with increasing clinical stage.All HABS participants fell into Stages 1 and 2, all ADC participants were classified into Stages 2 to 4, and ADNI and NACC participants were distributed among all stages.Overall, the four stages were in correspondence with clinical diagnoses as established in the original cohorts, given that Stage 1 only included cognitively normal participants, and that most SCD, MCI, and dementia participants fell into Stages 2, 3, and 4, respectively (Table2).


. Only three measures captured significant decline after 12 months in Stage 1 (CFT Animals, CFT Vegetables, LM Immediate Recall), and only four measures captured decline after 12 months in Stage 2 (CFT Animals, CFT Vegetables, Word List Delayed Recall and TMT-B).
Six additional measures detected decline in Stage 3, (Digit Span Backward, Digit Span Forward, Word List Recognition, MMSE, MOCA, and TMT-A).
In Stage 4, all measures detected decline after 12 months, except for



Table 2 .
Demographic and clinical characteristics for each clinical stage



Table 3 .
Regression coefficients from linear mixed models investigating change over time in cognitive test scores



Table 4 .
Cognitive tests identified as sensitive to decline after 12 months, including mean to standard deviation ratios (MSDRs) of change from baseline over succeeding follow-up time points