Advanced analytical methodologies in Alzheimer’s disease drug discovery
Despite the constant progress in the understanding of the etiopathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease (AD) over the last 50 years, just four long-standing drugs are currently used for AD therapy.
This article reviews the analytical methodologies developed and applied in the last five years to address the early-stage tasks of the AD drug discovery process: the fast selection of active compounds (hits) and the comprehension of the ligand binding mechanism of the compound chosen to be the lead in the forthcoming development.
The reviewed analytical methodologies face the most investigated pharmacological protein targets (amyloids, secretases, kinases, cholinesterases) and specific receptor-and enzyme-mediated effects in neurotransmission, neuroprotection and neurodegeneration.
Some of these methodologies are noteworthy for their use in middle/high-throughput screening campaigns during hit selection (e.g.
surface plasmon resonance biosensing, fluorescence resonance energy transfer assays), whereas some others (circular dichroism and nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopies, ion mobility-mass spectrometry) can provide indepth information about the structure, conformation and ligand binding properties of target proteins.

Introduction
Pharmaceutical analysis largely contributes to and eases the drug discovery process by offering suitable tools and methods to assess key parameters, from the identification of biomarkers and the investigation of the absorption, distribution, metabolism, excretion and toxicity (ADMET) of drugs in pre-clinical and clinical studies, up to quality control and validation during drug manufacturing.
In recent years, advanced analytical methodologies have been increasingly applied at various stages of early drug discovery (hit identification, structure-properties relationships), with applications spanning from simple in vitro assays on single molecules to complex investigations on biological samples.
The technological improvements in separation sciences, the advent of soft-impact mass spectrometry (MS) methods and the increasing use of biophysical tools for molecular recognition studies, such as surface plasmon resonance (SPR), ensures accuracy and reproducibility for a wide range of analytes, going from simple organic molecules to biopharmaceuticals, and can strongly assist the drug discovery process.
Moreover, the development of automated high-throughput screening (HTS) greatly contributes to hit selection and to the characterization of the mechanism of action of new drug candidates.
In the present review, a selection of analytical approaches developed in the last five years for Alzheimer's disease (AD) drug discovery is provided, mainly focusing on their application in hit selection and in the characterization of the most studied target proteins and their interactions with drug-like molecules.
AD is a multifactorial disorder in which genomic alterations, epigenetic abnormalities, cerebrovascular damage and environmental risk factors joined together induce a premature and progressive neuronal loss.
Statistics recognize AD as the most significant and widespread neurodegenerative disorder.
Since the identification of AD by Alois Alzheimer in 1906, the amyloid-tau hypotheses have laid down the basis for drug discovery campaigns with the evidence of amyloid plaques and neurofibrillary tangles in the post mortem brain of patients affected by the disease; however, the drug discovery for AD began in 1984 with the cholinergic hypothesis of memory impairment.
Acetylcholinesterase (AChE), catalyzing the hydrolysis of acetylcholine, emerged as a promising target for the discovery of inhibitors capable of temporally restoring the cognitive impairment by increasing neurotransmitter levels in the central nervous system.
During the last 40 years, only five drugs for the treatment of AD have been launched on the market (Figure
Since then, no new drug for AD has been approved by the health authorities, tacrine being withdrawn for hepatotoxicity reasons.
Hence, the research in drug discovery for AD is still very active in the search of new effective drug candidates: Figure
Although a quite large number of molecular targets have been investigated in the search for new therapeutic avenues, the most intense research has been focused on amyloid and tau aggregation, on cholinesterase enzymes, on secretase enzymes implicated in the production of amyloid beta peptides (Aβ) and on kinases participating in the hyperphosphorylation of tau protein.
The high number of investigations on these targets is partially due to the prominence of the cholinergic and amyloid hypotheses, followed by the tau hypothesis, which have led the drug discovery research in AD for decades, with alternative targets only emerging in more recent times.
This review will therefore discuss the main analytical techniques used to identify new chemical entities addressing AD in the last five years (January 2014-June 2019).
The paper is divided into three parts, dealing with different analytical techniques: (a) spectroscopic methods; (b) MS-based methods; (c) microscopybased methods.
Major advantages and critical issues of these promising techniques are highlighted, and the methods of choice to obtain a complete view of the pathological mechanisms of AD, as well as new approaches, are discussed.

Spectroscopic methods
The most adopted assays for the screening of compounds designed and synthesized as inhibitors toward the most important targets of AD are based on spectroscopic measurements.
Clear evidence of this aspect is the application of the ultraviolet-visible (UV-Vis)-based Ellman's assay for the screening of cholinesterase inhibitors
Moreover, the importance of developing new and more efficient methods and the necessity to draw up alternative solutions to radiometric assays have led to the evolution of classical assays into new spectroscopic methods.

Fluorescence-and luminescence-based assays
Many assays based on the detection of fluorescence were developed adopting the fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) principle, which is based on the energy transfer between a donor and an acceptor when they are in the resonance state.
The efficiency of this phenomenon is strictly related to the distance between the donor and acceptor groups.
FRET can be used in a wide range of applications, dealing with the detection of conformational changes for macromolecules or the investigation of ligands binding to their targets
The use of FRET has been largely directed to the development of in-solution methods for the in vitro characterization of beta-secretase (beta-site amyloid precursor protein-cleaving enzyme 1 or BACE1) inhibitors.
For this purpose, synthetic peptides, based on the sequence of the Swedish mutation of the amyloid precursor protein (APP) and bearing a fluorophore (donor group) and a quencher (acceptor group), were used as substrates
In the non-cleaved substrate, the fluorescence of the donor is quenched by the adjacent acceptor, provided that the emission spectrum of the donor well overlaps to the absorption spectrum of the acceptor and that the two groups are positioned within the Förster radius of each other (which is about 3-6 nm and is defined as the distance at which half the excitation energy of the donor is transferred to the acceptor).
When the peptide chain is cleaved by BACE1, the donor-specific fluorescence is no longer quenched and it can be measured
The application of these substrates was not only circumscribed to in-solution methods: indeed, the same substrates were adopted for on-line methods based on the use of immobilized enzyme reactors (IMERs) containing BACE1
Recently, the FRET principle has been applied for the development of an inkjet printing-based assay for the screening of BACE1 inhibitor.
A rhodamine-based substrate was printed on parchment paper in order to be cleaved by the enzyme printed on the same spot.
The inhibition was detected by monitoring the fluorescence profile obtained by maintaining the substrate concentration constant and by increasing the amount of inhibitor (Figure
One of the most important advantages of this method is the very low amount of enzyme and substrate required to carry out inhibition experiments.
Indeed, this novel assay requires a 1.4 × 10 3 smaller quantity of BACE1 and substrate than the conventional in-solution assay with multi-well plate.
The good reproducibility of results obtained for the evaluation of the inhibitory activity of well-known inhibitors makes this assay suitable for the HTS of BACE1 inhibitors
The same phenomenon can also be applied to detect protein-ligand binding.
That was the case of protein kinase C (PKC), an enzyme correlated to cell signaling pathways and involved both in cancer and in AD.
The crucial step of PKC activation is the binding of diacylglycerol (DAG) to the C1 domain
The most common method used for the characterization of PKC ligands targeting to the C1 domain is a radioisotope assay
A novel FRET-based competitive assay has been developed for the detection of PKC ligands.
To this purpose, a DAG-lactone linked to diethylaminocoumarin at the α-alkylidene position (sn-2 DEAC-type DAG-lactone) and a fluorescein-labeled δC1b domain (Fl-δC1b) were synthesized as the donor and acceptor molecules, respectively.
The donor shows moderate binding affinity for the δC1b domain of PKC (residues 231 to 281), while the fluorescein moiety is bound to the Val 235 residue, at a suitable distance for the FRET phenomenon to occur.
When a test compound competes with the binding of the sn-2 DEAC-type DAGlactone to the δC1b domain of PKC, a decrease in the fluorescence intensity for fluorescein can be detected due to the displacement of the donor (Figure
The developed assay allows the screening of ligands for PKC but can be applied to the investigation of other protein-ligand interactions
Different studies were also performed applying fluorescently labeled peptides or targets for the characterization of target protein-ligand or protein-protein interactions.
The application of a fluorescently labeled peptide allowed developing a peptide-tungsten disulfide (WS2) nanosheet-based biosensing platform for the detection of BACE1 activity and inhibitors characterization (Figure
The sensing platform is obtained using the interaction between the peptide and the WS2 nanosheet.
In the absence of BACE1, the fluorescently labeled peptide is adsorbed onto the WS2 nanosheet surface and fluorescence quenching occurs.
In the presence of the enzyme, the hydrolysis of the peptide leads to the release of the fluorescent label.
Since the fragment cannot be adsorbed on the WS2 nanosheet, the fluorescence is restored.
The monitored change in fluorescence is then related to the enzymatic activity.
Different substrates can be used in this assay, since the WS2 nanosheet can act as a common energy acceptor for different types of fluorescent dyes.
Moreover, different proteases can be adopted as targets and studied by this simple and immediate method
Fluorescence-based assays can also be applied for the study of compounds able to interfere in some protein-protein interactions.
That was the case of cellular prion protein (PrP C ) interacting with Aβ; PrP C acts as a receptor for synaptotoxic oligomeric forms of Aβ in AD.
Therefore, the identification of compounds able to bind to PrP C and stabilize its native fold may be of considerable interest since these entities may act as pharmacological chaperones, blocking prion propagation and pathogenesis and inhibiting the binding of toxic species involved in AD.
The development of HTS assays based on the use of a nitrobenzoxadiazole (NBD)labeled protein allowed the screening of 1200 compounds and the selection of Chicago Sky Blue 6B as the first small PrP C ligand capable of inhibiting Aβ binding.
The fluorescence signal of the NBD label was monitored using 485 and 535 nm as excitation and emission wavelengths, respectively.
Fluorescence intensities recorded after incubation of the PrP C protein with different compounds and upon Aβ addition were compared to identify active compounds
Other than new fluorescence-based assays, a novel luminescence turn-on assay has been recently developed for the detection of AChE activity.
The assay, proposed by Law et al., is based on the supramolecular self-assembly of alkynylplatinum(II) complexes.
This assay is founded upon the selfassembly behavior of Pt(II) complexes through noncovalent Pt(II)•••Pt(II) and π-π stacking interactions.
In the presence of AChE, acetylthiocholine undergoes hydrolysis to thiocholine with the consequent in situ formation of a cationic Ag(I)-thiocholine coordination polymer.
The aggregation is then facilitated by the electrostatic interactions between the anionic Pt(II) complex molecules and the cationic coordination polymer, leading to a low-energy red emission turn-on (Figure

Figure 5.
Rationale for the luminescence turn-on assay for AChE using anionic alkynylplatinum(II) complexes, acetylthiocholine and Ag(I) ions.
Reprinted with permission from Ref.
Copyright (2019) American Chemical Society.

Surface plasmon resonance (SPR) biosensing
The major targets involved in the etiology and development of AD, such as BACE1, glycogen synthase kinase 3β (GSK-3β) and AChE, were studied by biosensor-based approaches.
In the last few decades, the application of biosensing devices has proven to be innovative and suitable for carrying out different kinds of analysis.
Among the different types of optical biosensors, the SPR-based biosensor is considered a versatile and informative tool
It is based on the detection of changes in refractive index occurring on the surface of a sensor chip as a result of the binding of biomolecules.
A glass substrate and a thin gold film are the components that normally constitute the sensor surface.
Indeed, the SPR phenomenon arises when light is reflected from a conducting film at the interface between two media of different refractive index (Figure
The binding of biomolecules to the sensor chip surface increases the refractive index of the solution near the sensor surface due to the changes in the momentum of the surface plasmons and their associated evanescent wave.
The consequent change in the incident angle is related to an angle shift, which is directly proportional to the change in mass on the gold surface.
Indeed, the response obtained is directly related to the mass of the analyte binding to the surface.
Based on this principle, SPR biosensing can provide a qualitative evaluation on whether the molecules bind or not to the immobilized target and allows the quantitative determination of binding affinities and kinetic rate constants for the interaction.
These features are relevant in the drug discovery process, since association ( on ) and dissociation ( off ) rate constants are important parameters for the characterization of a new hit compound
From a practical point of view, the main advantage of this technique is that none of the interacting entities need to be labeled, which is convenient in terms of time and cost.
Different immobilization strategies can be used, lowering the possibility of occluding binding sites and reducing the risk of false negative or positive signals.
Moreover, the analyzed proteins are studied in a state as close to their native one as possible.
On the other hand, target immobilization needs to be carefully chosen to avoid structural alterations, leading to a different behavior from the one observed in solution
Different strategies may be adopted for the immobilization of the ligand on the surface, such as covalent and capture coupling.
Among the covalent coupling strategies, the most used is the amine coupling procedure.
The high content of lysine residues in biomolecules makes amino groups usually available for linkage to the surface.
In addition, both the biosensor and the biomolecules can be derivatized to introduce functional groups suitable for the coupling procedure on the biosensor surface or in the structure of the biomolecule.
Indeed, the surface can be functionalized to have groups that can efficiently react with aldehydes or thiol groups
A popular strategy to obtain a homogeneous population of oriented molecules on the surface is the affinitycapture approach, which exploits antibody-antigen interactions, streptavidin-functionalized surfaces for biotinylated ligands or metal chelation for histidine-tagged ligands
Due to the wide range of protocols that can be adopted for the immobilization of a ligand on the surface, the choice of the strategy is closely related to the chemical properties of the biomolecules and its stability.
In most cases, the application of SPR biosensing is specifically directed at evaluating the affinity of active molecules toward a selected target, which is usually expressed in terms of the equilibrium dissociation constant ( D ) of the binding complex.
The experimental procedure followed to reach the  D value of molecules toward the immobilized target consists in carrying out the immobilization protocol for two flow cells: a reference cell is generated by activation and deactivation without any target protein, while the sample cell containing the enzyme is generated through activation, immobilization and deactivation steps.
The tested molecules solutions are flushed on the chip surface.
The obtained sensorgrams are then subjected to the automatic correction for non-specific bulk refractive index effect.
The blank-corrected sensorgrams are used to derive the affinity constants by curve fitting using an appropriate kinetic model.
In the drug discovery process, SPR biosensing can be fruitfully exploited to perform structure-affinity relationship (SAR) studies for the optimization of hit scaffolds into more active and clinically useful lead drugs.
Han et al. applied a SPR-based approach to the evaluation of a class of pyrazole-5-carboxamides as potential inhibitors of the receptor for advanced glycation end-products (RAGE)
RAGE-Aβ interactions promote the transport of Aβ into the brain and are suggested to activate the nuclear factor kappa-light-chainenhancer of activated B cells (NF-κB), a transcription factor involved in many inflammatory responses.
A NF-κB-responsive element in the RAGE gene promoter then induces the hyperexpression of RAGE
The inhibition of RAGE is therefore considered a promising strategy for decreasing the rate of deposition of Aβ and inhibiting the inflammatory response of Aβ in the brain.
All the synthesized pyrazole-5carboxamides derivatives were biologically evaluated and ranked by a SPR-based assay for their affinity to the immobilized receptor using biotinylated RAGE.
The consequent SAR allowed the identification of the most active compound, and the binding interaction was confirmed by docking simulations
The capturing strategy of Aβ1-42 and tau in flow cells was used to characterize the most promising compound belonging to the class of acridone derivatives designed and synthesized by Lv et al.
The adopted experimental conditions are reported in Table
The blank-corrected sensorgrams were analyzed using the Langmuir model to fit the kinetic data.
The non-covalent inhibition for the most promising 1,2,3,4-tetrahydro-1-acridone was assessed by SPR analysis giving rise to the possibility of further development for this molecule
The SPR methodology was also applied for the characterization of a series of 2-substituted-thio-N-(4substituted-thiazol/1H-imidazol-2-yl)acetamide derivatives as BACE1 inhibitors
BACE1 was immobilized adopting the conditions described in Table
The blank-corrected sensorgrams were then used to derive the affinity constants by curve fitting using a steady-state model.

Valaasani et al. employed SPR biosensing to study two benzothiazole phosphonate derivatives as inhibitors
of the mitochondrial Aβ binding alcohol dehydrogenase (ABAD), a promoter of (Aβ)-mediated mitochondrial and neuronal dysfunction with consequent decline in transgenic AD mouse models
The protein was covalently immobilized on a CM5 sensor chip using a standard amine coupling reaction (Table
The kinetic analysis of ligand binding was carried out by fitting data to the Langmuir 1:1 binding model:
where  (M) is the inhibitor concentration,  eq (RU) is the response at the steady state and  max (RU) is the maximal response.
Both tested compounds showed strong binding affinities to ABAD ( D values in the nanomolar range), in agreement with their biological activity since they are able to reduce ABAD enzymatic binding activity, reduce the calcium-induced formation of the mitochondrial permeability transition pore (mPTP), decrease the Aβ mitochondrial dysfunction and to increase cytochrome c oxidase and adenosine triphosphate (ATP)
Another interesting application concerned compound P7C3 as a potent neurogenesis-promoting agent able to bind to the glucagon-like peptide 1 receptor (GLP-1R), which is involved in regulating the expression of neurogenesis-related proteins
The mechanism of action of P7C3 was studied and appeared to be unique compared to that of other active derivatives of the same class.
The binding of P7C3 to GLP-1R protein was analyzed by SPR biosensing after immobilization of the receptor on an amine coupling sensor chip (Table
The experimental  D value was derived applying a 1:1 binding model, and the results were in agreement with molecular modeling predictions
The SPR assay was also adopted for other purposes, such as the detection of the high-affinity interaction ( D = 1 nM) of the chaperone clusterin with biologically relevant Aβ1-42 oligomers
Several classes of molecules (peptides, antibodies, proteins and molecular chaperones) influence the aggregation of Aβ peptides
Molecular chaperones are endogenous proteins whose role is to suppress the formation of aggregates and promote the clearance of misfolded species
The sensing surface was prepared by immunoaffinity capture using immobilized anti-Aβ antibody 4G8; the investigation of the specific binding of clusterin for a subpopulation of Aβ1-42 oligomers was then carried out.
These oligomeric species were demonstrated to be biologically active in vivo
The results showed that a sub-stoichiometric concentration of clusterin prevented oligomers to interact with the antibody 4G8.
This indicates that the chaperone protects some hydrophobic residues exposed on the oligomeric assemblies.
Since the exposure of hydrophobic motifs is considered fundamental for the toxicity of oligomers
SPR was also used to investigate interaction between Aβ1-42 and glycogen synthase kinase 3α (GSK-3α).
The tau hyperphosphorylation mediated by GSK-3α was found to be stimulated by Aβ1-42 in an in vitro phosphorylation assay
The SPR study based on a sensing surface containing Aβ1-42 allowed characterizing the interaction in terms of  D .
The immobilization was carried out using Aβ1-42 as monomer.
After coupling on the dextran matrix (Table
Hence, the high affinity parameter refers to the binding of GSK-3α to both monomers or oligomers
This finding also represents an opportunity to study the early molecular events in the disease, to provide a deeper understanding of kinase activation and to find factors able in modulating the affinity.
Park et al. used SPR to study cyclophilin D (CypD), a protein implicated in the formation of mPTP, which leads to the disruption of mitochondrial homeostasis with consequent cell death.
Moreover, since the formation of mPTP promoted by CypD in brain mitochondria occurs upon the binding to Aβ, CypD is considered a promising AD target.
The aim of the study was to assess whether a pool of compounds, previously selected by a combination of virtual screening and cell-based assays, could directly bind CypD.
After CypD covalent immobilization on CM5 sensor chip by amine coupling a  D value in the nanomolar range was found for one of the tested compounds.
These results were consistent with the predicted binding mode
The use of a SPR-based approach has also been proposed as a complement to the most frequently used methods for the screening of AChE inhibitors, namely those based on the electrochemical detection of choline and acetylcholine using IMERs
The first application of an AChE sensing surface (based on AChE from Electrophorus electricus) for the characterization of inhibitors was reported by Milkani et al. in 2011 which used the functionalized surface to study two AChE inhibitors, i.e. neostigmine and eserine
Recently, a SPR-based assay was developed using the human form of the enzyme by Fabini et al.
The sensing surface was obtained by amine coupling (Table
The same protocol, apart from the enzyme immobilization was adopted for the reference channel.
The studied inhibitors were tacrine and donepezil (mixed-mode competitors), galantamine and edrophonium (substrate-competitive). Solutions of different compounds were presented on the functionalized surface in order to evaluate the capability of discriminating different inhibitors.
The results obtained in terms of affinities were consistent with the inhibitory potencies reported in literature.
The analysis revealed rapid on/off rates for the complexes formed by AChE with tacrine and edrophonium, as evinced from the squared-shaped sensorgrams (Figure
On the other hand, slower dissociation events were observed for galantamine-AChE and donepezil-AChE complexes.
The application of the 1:1 binding model (Eq. 1) allowed obtaining the association and dissociation rate constants for each compound.
Compounds with similar  D values may show large differences in both  on and  off values, resulting in different in vivo efficacy.
The determination of rate constants can help finding a good balance between therapeutic and adverse effects by correlating the duration of action of a drug to the kinetic properties of its binding interaction with the target.
Residence times were then derived from the dissociation rate constants, and compounds were classified in two groups: tacrine and edrophonium, showing a residence time lower than 5 s, were classified as fast-reversible binders, while galantamine and donepezil were characterized as slow-reversible binders.
All compounds show a quite fast dissociation from their binding site; this behavior might be explained by the nature of the target enzyme.
AChE is a terminator of signal transduction and some adverse effects can arise when the inhibitory effects are extensively prolonged
Since the pharmacological effects of drugs are influenced by their ADMET profiles, the authors also explored the binding of AChE inhibitors to human serum albumin (HSA); the measured affinities were then converted to bound fractions.
A nice correlation with the pharmacokinetic data obtained in clinical study was observed for donepezil and galantamine
The SPR application reported by Fabini et al. may be proposed as a solution to implement classic inhibition data with a detailed characterization of the pharmacokinetic profile of new drug candidates.

Circular dichroism (CD) spectroscopy
Circular dichroism (CD) is a physical phenomenon responsible for the different absorption of left and right circularly polarized radiation by chiral molecules.
The spectroscopic evaluation of CD across the UV (electronic CD or ECD) and IR (vibrational CD or VCD) spectral regions can provide useful information about the stereochemical properties of a chemical system, such as the absolute configuration of small molecules and the conformational arrangement of biological macromolecules or supramolecular assemblies at equilibrium
CD spectroscopy in the far-UV region
The effect of ligand binding on the secondary structure of several targets involved in AD has been investigated in recent years, including AChE
One of the key molecular mechanisms involved in AD is the misfolding of amyloidogenic proteins, such as Aβ and tau, from a prevalently disordered conformation to a secondary structure rich in β-strands
It is thus not surprising that the main application of CD spectroscopy in the field of AD drug discovery is focused on the evaluation of potential inhibitors of amyloid aggregation as modulators of misfolding phenomena (Table
In recent years, CD assays on misfolding have been primarily applied to the characterization of Aβ1-42
CD studies on misfolding are usually performed by incubating the protein in the absence and in the presence of ligands at single or multiple concentrations.
The effect of ligand binding on misfolding can then be determined at a single time after the conformational transition of the isolated protein has taken place, or its evolution can be evaluated at different times after sample preparation (Figure
After CD analysis, the relative contribution of disordered and β-strand structures can be derived using one of the available algorithms for secondary structure estimations (s.s.e.), such as CONTIN
In this framework, the combination of CD studies with ThT-based fluorescence assays and microscopybased methods represents a valuable and comprehensive strategy to investigate the inhibitory activity of potential drugs at all the different stages of amyloid aggregation.

Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy
Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) arises from the absorption of radiofrequency radiation by atomic nuclei subjected to a strong external magnetic field; the resonance frequencies of the resulting transitions between nuclear spin states are strongly influenced by the chemical environment surrounding the nuclei
NMR spectroscopy is a powerful technique that allows to gather extremely detailed information about molecular structures with resolution at the atomic level, and the development of several multi-dimensional experiments with complex pulse sequences opened the path for the application of NMR spectroscopy to proteins and protein-ligand complexes
For instance, two-dimensional heteronuclear single quantum coherence (2D HSQC) experiments can be used to gain insight on the secondary structure of proteins, thanks to the correlation of signals arising from the amide N-H groups in the protein backbone, also allowing the assignment of peaks to single amino acidic residues
A recent application of 1 H- 13 C and 1 H- 15 N HSQC NMR to study Aβ1-40 highlighted the ability of chlorin e6, a porphyrin photosensitizer, to interact with the Nterminal region and selectively react with histidine residues, reducing the binding affinity of Aβ1-40 toward Cu 2+ and inhibiting amyloid aggregation
Protein-based NMR binding assays rely on the perturbation of chemical shifts observed for residues involved in the interaction with ligands.
The improvement in analysis time introduced by 1 H- 15 N band-selective optimized-flip-angle short-transient heteronuclear multiple quantum coherence (SOFAST-HMQC)
In the field of AD drug discovery, 1 H-15 N SOFAST-HMQC experiments have been primarily
employed to investigate the interaction of Aβ1-40 and Aβ1-42 with several potential inhibitors of amyloid aggregation, such as glycosylated polyphenols
multifunctional aminoquinoline compounds
Another popular protein-based NMR experiment, transverse relaxation-optimized spectroscopy (TROSY)
On the other hand, saturation transfer difference (STD) experiment is one of the most popular approaches for ligand-based NMR binding assays
STD NMR exploits the negative nuclear Overhauser effect (NOE) acting on bound ligands when the protein is selectively irradiated, allowing to confirm binding events and determine the so-called group epitopes of ligands, i.e. the atoms involved in the interaction.
In the field of AD drug discovery, this powerful technique has been fruitfully applied to investigate the binding of known and potential cholinesterase inhibitors, such as galantamine
STD NMR has also been employed to study the interaction of Aβ1-42 with flavonoids
Outside the realm of multi-dimensional NMR, a noteworthy application of 1 H NMR spectroscopy to AD drug discovery is concerned with the inhibition of the enzymatic activity of AChE: to this purpose, a kinetic assay was developed exploiting the different chemical shifts for the methyl groups of acetylcholine (2.24 ppm) and acetate (2.16 ppm)
This approach was recently employed to determine the inhibition of AChE from Electrophorus electricus by guanylhydrazones

Fourier-transform infrared (FT-IR) spectroscopy
Although infrared (IR) spectroscopy is mostly used in AD for diagnostic purposes, the application of Fouriertransform (FT)-IR spectroscopy for the structural characterization of proteins has largely increased.
Some FT-IR based assays have been carried out for investigating more deeply the mechanism of action of some anti-aggregating molecules.
The analysis is based on the detection of amide bonds, which display distinct IR signals depending on the different folding of proteins and peptides.
The amide I (1600-1690 cm -1 C=O stretching) and amide II (1480-1575 cm -1 CN stretching, NH bending) are the two most prominent vibrational IR bands used to reveal conformational changes in the backbone of peptides and proteins
On this basis, the conformational change of Aβ25-35 due to aggregation and the subsequent restoration upon treatment with natural extracts was evaluated
The transition from unordered to β-sheet structure was related to an increase in absorption at 1628 cm -1 .
A maximum absorbance at 1518 cm -1 was detected for the Aβ25-35 aggregates, whereas for the treated peptide a shift in the maximum absorbance at 1550 cm -1 was detected.
The results obtained by FT-IR analysis demonstrated the ability of the extract from Gelidiella acerosa to interact with Aβ25-35 and prevent its aggregation

UV resonance Raman (UV-RR) spectroscopy
UV resonance Raman (UV-RR) spectroscopy has been employed to follow the change in the secondary structure of tau during its side-chain packing and fibril formation, in the presence of heparin as inducer.
The tau fibrillization process is characterized by two stages: the first one involves the formation of nonfibrillar, dye-negative "pre-tangles", while the second stage is related with the formation of mature, dye-positive neurofibrillary tangles
ThT fluorescence assays, light scattering-based methods and electron microscopy studies are useful in detecting ligand-induced, nucleation-dependent polymerization, but cannot distinguish between the different stages of conformational conversion and fibril growth.
Conversely, UV-RR spectroscopy allows monitoring the formation of fibrils in both stages, since the position and the intensities of the amide Raman bands varies in two different steps, corresponding to the stages of the fibril formation process.
Spectral changes for the Am III3 (the most sensitive frequency of the Am III region) and Am I amide bands give the opportunity of monitoring the aggregation process.
For instance, Am III3 bands in the 1240-1279 cm -1 region can be assigned to disordered structures, while bands in the 1220-1230 cm -1 region can be ascribed to β-sheets.
Hence, the change in band position from 1238 cm -1 to 1230 cm -1 is typically observed upon transition from unordered to β-sheet structures.
For the Am I band, a change from 1681 cm -1 (monomer in the absence of heparin) to 1670 cm -1 (aggregated fibrillar process) occurs during tau fibril formation (Figure
That is important for understanding the structural events that occur during the aggregation of tau and give the opportunity of designing and selecting new and specific aggregation inhibitors
Reprinted with permission from Ref.
Copyright (2014) American Chemical Society.

Fluorescence correlation spectroscopy (FCS)
Fluorescence correlation spectroscopy (FCS) is a correlation analysis of fluctuations in the intensity of fluorescence; this technique enables the detection of molecular motion at the nanomolar level in small sample volumes, thus allowing real-time monitoring of protein-protein interactions.
FCS can be successfully used to monitor protein aggregation in real time using a mixture of labeled (in trace amount) and unlabeled (in large excess) proteins or peptides.
Since the unlabeled molecule is in large excess, the fluorescent species remain constant, while the diffusion time gradually decreases.
Fluctuations in fluorescence reflect variations of the diffusion properties of the species in solution, which depend on the size of the species in solution and on changes in the ratio between free and labeled molecules in the forming aggregates.
The technique allows examining whether a candidate inhibitor can interfere with protein aggregation, as well as investigating inhibition mechanism.
This approach has been applied to the study of the anti-aggregating properties of a natural compound from Centella asiatica

Mass spectrometry (MS)-based methods
Since the development of electrospray ionization (ESI) and other soft ionization techniques, as matrixassisted laser desorption ionization (MALDI), MS has been fruitfully employed for a large and steadily increasing range of applications
Recently, MS has been defined as a "multifaceted weapon" exploitable in the battle against AD
MS, indeed, has been widely employed to unveil the molecular mechanisms at the basis of AD, assess new biomarkers and screen the efficacy of new potential drugs
In the attempt to develop new multipotent drugs against AD, MS has been predominantly used to screen anti-Aβ agents, characterize the target protein-ligand interactions, identify promising active molecules through fishing experiments and assess target enzyme activity by monitoring the product formation.
In the following subsections, the main MS-based analytical approaches in the context of AD drug discovery, along with the most significant examples, are reported and critically discussed.

Assessment of anti-Aβ agents
The amyloid hypothesis proposes that the accumulation of Aβ leads to synaptic dysfunction, neurodegeneration, and ultimately AD symptoms; therefore, the vast majority of potential disease-modifying treatments developed in recent years has been directed against Aβ and includes molecules capable to inhibit secretase enzymes or Aβ aggregation
Secretase inhibition, however, is problematic since these enzymes can cleave APP and other substrates involved in different biological processes
Among the inhibitors of Aβ aggregation, several organic molecules, peptides or peptidomimetics and nanoparticles have been recently developed and their activity has been often assessed exploiting MS-based analytical tools
The ability to screen for compounds able to disrupt protein aggregation is one of the ultimate in the field of AD drug discovery; therefore, diverse analytical approaches have been exploited to assess the inhibition of fibril formation, including microscopic and spectroscopic techniques along with immunology-based methods for quantification of Aβ
However, the assessment of the potentially toxic oligomers destined to amyloid fibril formation is a significant challenge because of the heterogeneous, transient and low-populated nature of these species.
The most mentioned biophysical techniques lack the sensitivity and the resolution for their detection and characterization.
In the past, MS-based analytical approaches have shown to be extremely fruitful both for the assessment of the kinetic of aggregation of Aβ peptides and for the development of anti-Aβ agents
Recently, a great contribution to the fine characterization of Aβ soluble oligomers and to the assessment of the early-stage mechanism of Aβ aggregation has been offered by the combination of ion mobility and mass spectrometry (IM-MS)
Depending on the time necessary to pass through the buffer gas in the ion mobility spectrometer, different Aβ oligomers are characterized by different arrival time distributions (ATD) (Figure
Ion mobility spectrometry (IMS) allows the simultaneous characterization of different conformational states of Aβ oligomers and can lead to an enhanced understanding of the mechanism by which small molecules modulate and/or inhibit amyloid formation.
Changes in Aβ conformation with the concomitant appearance or disappearance of different oligomeric states can be monitored over time, with a distinct advantage over complementary biophysical techniques (CD, NMR, and FT-IR) which yield population-average data
A representative application of IM-MS is reported in the work by Lee et al. on the development of a novel promising anti-Aβ compound named ML
The capacity of ML to inhibit in vitro amyloid aggregation was demonstrated by IM-MS analysis.
The ATD of the z/n = -5/2 peak of Aβ1-42 alone (Figure
These results indicate that the formation of hexamer and dodecamer is inhibited by ML.
This has been considered a promising result, since the Aβ1-42 dodecamer is considered a key neurotoxic intermediate in the fibril formation.
Aβ1-42 dodecamer, indeed, was previously observed to seed the formation of extended, linear preprotofibrillar β-sheet structures and has been identified as neurotoxic in AD brain and in transgenic mice
IM-MS was also used to assess the ability of ML to disaggregate Aβ1-42 pre-formed dodecamers (Figure
IM-MS analysis was also used to investigate the effects of two modified Aβ39-42 derivatives on the early assembly of Aβ1-42
Finally, Kocis exploited IM-MS to evaluate the anti-aggregating activity of tramiprosate
A novel MS-based approach to study Aβ oligomerization was proposed in 2012 by Cernescu et al.
It is based on the use of the laser-induced liquid bead ion desorption (LILBID)-MS in which desorption of the analyte from micro-droplets is induced by irradiation with mid-IR laser pulses.
Under optimized conditions, this method preserves specific protein-protein interactions and allows monitoring the oligomerization process of Aβ up to 20-mers.
As reported by Stark, LILBID-MS could also be fruitfully employed to assess the inhibition capacity of the newly-synthesized peptidomimetic compound 18 toward Aβ1-42 aggregation
When Aβ1-42 aggregation occurs, signals for oligomer species up to 8-mer could be detected; on the other hand, the spectra for the freshly dissolved samples, as well as for Aβ1-42 samples incubated with compound 18, showed mainly monomeric Aβ with small amounts of dimers, trimers, tetramers and pentamers (Figure
The LILBID-MS analysis not only confirmed the anti-aggregating activity of compound 18 but also showed its capacity to partially reverse the aggregation process (Figure

Non-covalent Aβ-ligand interactions
Identifying protein-ligand interactions is a key step during early-stage drug discovery
The assessment of the interaction of anti-Aβ agents with Aβ peptides provides important information on their mechanism of action
Notwithstanding, some Aβ inhibitors are capable to covalently bind Aβ peptides, most of the tested compounds are involved in noncovalent interactions.
MS analysis of non-covalent interactions has recently been applied to this field, since recent advances enable the determination of the molecular mass of protein-ligand complexes without the disruption of non-covalent interactions.
This approach is called "native MS" or "MS under non-denaturing conditions"
Native MS is considered a powerful diagnostic tool since, along with the detection of non-covalent complexes, it allows the identification of the sites involved in the interaction upon isotope or covalent labeling (see work by Liu et al. on the amyloidogenic beta-2 microglobulin
Native MS has been successfully used to study the interaction between Aβ and transition metal ions (Cu 2+ , Zn 2+ , Ir 3+ ) and anti-Aβ active compounds
IM-MS analysis allows the preservation of non-covalent protein-ligand complexes, so that the binding interactions of small molecules to target peptides can be observed concomitantly with changes in the relative abundances and distributions of oligomeric species.
These changes can be directly correlated to alterations of the fibril formation rate or yield and allow the identification of novel inhibitors.
Moreover, IM-MS can be used for HTS binding assays, with a rate of up to 5000 molecules per day
An interesting work exploiting IM-MS to analyze the mode of interaction of a series of small molecules with Aβ1-40 was reported by Young et al.
The interaction of Aβ1-40 with three inhibitors of Aβ aggregation, tramiprosate, hemin and epigallocatechin gallate (EGCG), was investigated
IM-MS unveiled the nature of the interaction of the tested compounds with Aβ1-40.
In particular, the analysis showed that no interaction occurred between Aβ1-40 and hemin (Figure
As a result, neither tramiprosate nor hemin were able to inhibit amyloid fibril formation (Figure
Conversely, EGCG specifically bound Aβ1-40 (Figure
These results highlight how a specific binding to Aβ1-40 is crucial for the inhibition of amyloid aggregation.

Covalent modifications of target proteins
The currently available MS-based methodologies are considered the most suitable for the analysis of protein covalent modifications.
MS analysis provides high accuracy, sensitivity and unbiased identification of modified residues, along with quantitative information
The covalent modifications affecting the structure of proteins can be assessed by top-down and bottom-up approaches, which are often used in combination, unveiling complementary information.
Generally, the top-down approach is at first employed for the detection of the global pattern of modifications affecting the target protein
These studies are preferentially performed taking the advantages of the currently available high-resolution mass spectrometry (HR-MS)-based methodologies, which allow unbiased identifications.
A workflow including both the top-down and bottom-up approaches was reported by Taniguchi et al., who proposed a promising therapeutic approach to counteract Aβ aggregation based on the photo-oxygenation of Aβ1-42 using riboflavin (vitamin B2) catalysis and visible light irradiation under physiological conditions (pH 7.4, 37°C)
At first, MALDI-time-of-flight (MALDI-TOF) MS was exploited to monitor the yield of Aβ1-42 oxygenation at selected times.
Afterwards, the use of MS allowed the fine characterization of the structural changes induced by the oxidative reaction; indeed, MALDI-TOF analyses performed on Aβ1-16, Aβ17-28 and Aβ29-42, obtained by digestion with the endoproteinase Arg-C, showed that oxygenation affected mainly Aβ1-16.
Finally, the combined use of ESI-quadrupole-time-of-flight (ESI-QTOF) LC-ESI-MS/MS analyses allowed the identification of Tyr 10 , His 13 , His 14 and Met 35 as the sites of the oxidative modifications.
A very recent work has reported on the use of ESI-MS for the assessment of the interaction between Aβ1-42 and promising anti-Aβ agents belonging to the class of carbon monoxide-releasing molecules (CORM)
In detail, a top-down approach was exploited for the relative quantification of the adduct between Aβ1-42 and compound CORM-3, while a bottom-up strategy was used to identify the Aβ1-42 residues involved in this interaction.
Finally, ESI-MS flow injection analyses were employed to monitor the Aβ1-42 monomer abundance over time which offers an estimation of the rate of formation of insoluble fibrils.

Ligand fishing
Medicinal plants still represent an important source of novel drug leads.
Indeed, several medicinal plants in crude form, or their isolated active compounds, have shown to reduce pathological features associated with AD
However, the identification of bioactive constituents is a critical and challenging step due to the chemical complexity of natural extracts.
Bioassay-guided fractionation of natural extracts has been the mainstream method to identify bioactive compounds, but this approach shows several drawbacks, such as the long and laborious procedures and the possible loss of scarcely abundant active compounds
In this context, the combined use of affinity-based techniques, such as ligand fishing, and MS has gained increasing interest.
Ligand fishing exploits the selective binding of compounds to their targets for their isolation and identification.
Different approaches have been used for the ligand fishing experiments including magnetic beads, equilibrium dialysis and ultrafiltration; the most exploited analytical approach for ligand identification, however, is MS, often coupled to LC separation
Concerning AD drug discovery, in recent years, ligand fishing-based workflows entailing the immobilization of target enzymes (AChE and monoamine oxidases) have been developed for the identification of new bioactive compounds
The online ligand fishing platform based on an immobilized capillary AChE-based reactor is particularly attractive since the incubation, ligand isolation and LC-MS analysis were carried out in an automated fashion, greatly enhancing the screening efficiency.

Evaluation of target enzyme activity
MS is considered a valid alternative to in-solution assays to monitor the activity of enzymes including those involved in AD progression.
MS detection is particularly fruitful when the reference substrate is a peptide and the enzymatic reaction involves either a covalent modification or a cleavage.
In comparison with fluorescent or colorimetric assays, MS represents a sensitive, fast, and label-free technique which requires low amount of sample; the latter feature is particularly advantageous when highly expensive recombinant proteins or peptides are used in the assay.
A label-free MS assays recently proposed for the HTS of compounds capable of modulating the activity of sirtuin 1 (SIRT1), a nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD) deacetylase implicated in age-related diseases
In the optimized experimental conditions, the assay mixture containing the substrate of SIRT1, a 21residued peptide containing the acetylated Lys 9 of the N-terminal portion of histone H3 (H3K9), was directly analyzed by ESI-MS and the enzyme activity was calculated from the H3K9 acetylation degree.
In the same year, Peng et al. developed a new analytical approach for the evaluation of AChE activity and its inhibition based on the use of acetylcholine-d4 as a surrogate substrate.
The catalysis rate could be determined by monitoring the formation of the reaction product, choline-d4, by LC-ESI-MS/MS
A MS-based analytical approach for the evaluation of GSK-3β inhibitors was recently presented by De Simone et al.
In 2017, Schejbal et al. proposed a novel capillary electrophoresis (CE)-MS method for the screening of BACE1 inhibitors

Microscopy-based methods

Single

Transmission electron microscopy (TEM)
TEM is a static imaging tool that is used either alone or, most often, in combination with other highthroughput, in-solution detection methods to image structures at nanometer resolution.
In TEM, an electron beam, emitted by a cathode ray source, is focused on an electron-transparent specimen.
The electrons transmitted through the specimen generate an image which gives information about the structure of the specimen.
Negative staining of the macromolecular structures by a contrast-enhancing stain reagent is usually applied to visualize the target of interest; studies are carried out on dried samples
As other imaging techniques employed in AD drug discovery, TEM has been used to: (a) retrieve morphological information on a molecular target of interest, in order to understand pathological mechanisms; (b) evaluate the effect of a new active compound on the specific target, which could be either a single target molecule (generally aggregated proteins), cells or tissues.
Likely due to the simplicity of sample preparation (when in vitro studies are carried out on protein aggregates, a small aliquot of the sample is deposited onto a proper grid, dried and stained) and the ease of access to TEM instrumentation in most research centers, the number of publications which include a TEM study is quite high: 176 articles published in the last 5 years were found by searching the words "TEM", "Alzheimer" and "treatment" in the abstract (Scopus).
In AD drug discovery, this technique has been mostly used to visualize Aβ and tau aggregates in the absence and in the presence of a candidate inhibitor.
In few cases, TEM has also been used to visualize morphological alterations in cells and tissues upon administration of a potential drug candidate to animal models.
Studies on Aβ represent the most common application, with more than 100 articles involving TEM (Scopus).
Indeed, the visualization of the eventual formation of amyloid fibrils allows assessing the anti-aggregating properties of a new inhibitor and excluding false positive results, which may arise from optical interference when a fluorescence dye like ThT is used.
Some morphology-related considerations can be also drawn when recent instruments with a sufficiently high resolution are used.
Also, some quantitative considerations can be made by evaluating fibril density from the TEM images of individual samples.
However, quantitative studies are quite limited and most published works use TEM for the qualitative assessment of the presence or absence of aggregates upon treatment.
TEM has been also used to investigate the disaggregating properties of candidate anti-Aβ agents.
In this case, a slightly different experimental set up is used, in which Aβ is aggregated prior to the addition of the tested disaggregating agent.
TEM images are acquired before the addition (fibrils are formed at this stage) and after a suitable incubation time.
Comparison of images acquired in the absence and in the presence of the compound under evaluation allows confirming or excluding disaggregating properties.
In most cases, the ThT fluorescence-based assay and TEM are carried out in parallel for this purpose.
Although the number of publications involving TEM imaging of amyloid aggregation is high (> 100), the scope of TEM application and the employed protocols are very similar among studies, and results are mostly discussed in terms of qualitative evaluation.
Hence, a bare list of manuscripts published in the last five years in this field would provide, in our opinion, no additional benefit to the readers, who can refer to the most recent literature (15 manuscripts published in the first 5 months of 2019)
Indeed, the most critical part is not the preparation of TEM grids and acquisition of TEM images, but the definition of a reliable protocol for reproducible fibrillization of amyloid peptides.
TEM studies for the identification of anti-aggregating compounds toward tau protein and those on anti-Aβ agents share the same objectives, i.e., providing proof of the anti-aggregating properties of a new antiaggregating agent
The use of TEM imaging to investigate tau is the subject of a review article by Huseby and Kuret published in 2016
TEM analysis is usually carried out as an end-point analysis upon in vitro aggregation.
Either the full-length protein, its truncated isoforms or the hexapeptide core fragment 306 VQIVYK 311 (PHF6), located in the third repeat of the microtubule-binding region of the tau protein

Scanning electron microscopy (SEM)
SEM is a type of electron microscopy in which a beam of high-energy electrons is scanned over a specimen.
Most commonly, a sample image is generated by collecting the secondary electrons emitted by atoms upon the excitation by the electron beam (primary electrons).
Since the intensity of secondary electrons emitted by biological materials is too low to create an image, samples are coated with a very thin layer of metal before the analysis to facilitate emission.
Furthermore, the specimen is completely dried since water vaporization interferes with image clarity
The use of SEM to investigate common targets in AD is limited: SEM was used to assess the in vivo activity of a naphthoquinone-tryptophan derivative on a transgenic model for tauopathies.
Overexpression of human tau in Drosophila triggers neurodegeneration which can be monitored in the Drosophila eyes ('rough eye' phenotype); SEM examination of eye defects in flies treated or untreated anti-aggregating properties of extracts from the marine red alga Gelidiella acerosa toward Aβ25-35
Finally, Ma et al. used CLSM to assess the protective effects of the monoterpene glycoside paeoniflorin against okadaic acid-induced hyperphosphorylation of tau in SH-SY5Y cells; in this work, the microtubuleassociated protein 2 (MAP-2) and beta III-tubulin were visualized as markers of neuron microtubule damage

Atomic force microscopy (AFM)
AFM is a scanning probe microscopy technique, in which a tip attached to a flexible cantilever scans the sample surface.
The force between the tip and the sample is measured by monitoring the deflection of the cantilever.
The vertical movement of the tip generates the surface contour and a topographic map of the sample is generated
Beside topographical images at sub-nanometer resolution, AFM can also probe interactions at a single-molecule level under physiologically relevant conditions; this feature is obviously of great importance in biomedical studies and in drug discovery, for which conditions close to the physiological or pathological ones are desirable.
Applications of AFM in the biomedical field have been reviewed by
In drug discovery for AD, AFM imaging has been frequently useful to understand aggregation phenomena at the nanoscale level, as well as to detect interference by active compounds.
In its simplest application, AFM can be performed in air with dry samples to visualize protein assemblies, either amyloid or tau, upon their aggregation in vitro, helping scientists to distinguish between aggregates with different morphology and aggregate families, i.e., stable oligomers, protofilaments, and fibrils.
As for other imaging techniques, the use of multiple techniques may help elucidating the whole process
Further information on the effect of the inhibitor can be also retrieved by measuring the major and minor axes of fibrils and the number of aggregates (Figure
This approach can give further hints on the possible mechanism of action of the tested compound, in combination with other studies.
Either amyloid or tau aggregates have been structurally characterized by AFM operating in air, thus using dehydrated, pre-aggregated samples.
Concerning the amyloid peptide, AFM has been applied to the investigation of the anti-aggregating properties of a wide variety of compounds, both synthetic and from natural sources
In comparison to TEM, the number of AFM applications is more limited, likely because of the lower availability of AFM instruments, the higher level of expertise required for a proper sample preparation and the longer acquisition times.
AFM has been used to investigate tau aggregation and its inhibition to a smaller extent, likely because the recombinant tau isoforms/fragments required to perform in vitro studies have become available only recently.
Similarly to what observed for TEM-based studies, AFM has been used to visualize aggregates formed by different tau forms, including the full-length human recombinant protein 2N4R (Figure
Copyright (2019), with permission from IOS Press.
As recent examples (2019), in the works by Phan et al.
Similarly, Downey et al. and
Siposova et al. used AFM to evaluate both the inhibitory and disaggregating properties of the rationally designed compound [AC0107]
The most peculiar applications of AFM are, however, those operating in aqueous solution.
This approach allows imaging biological samples and cells in their physiological environment.
The more recent advent of high-speed AFM (HS-AFM), which enables probing transient states, has enabled the investigation of dynamic processes such as oligomers formation and their evolution into protofilaments and fibrils.
Lowmolecular-weight oligomers are thought to be the actual pathological species
Thanks to the high speed of acquisition, time-lapse HS-AFM enabled the visualization of the structural dynamics of oligomers at nanometer resolution on a millisecond time scale and allowed the authors to visualize the fluctuation of pentamers and heptamers between single-globular and multi-globular assembly species.

Conclusions
The drugs against AD currently available on the market show limited short-term clinical effects for some patients and mild to moderate cholinergic adverse effects in a minority of patients, as well as potentially underappreciated long-term toxicity; This makes the research for new effective drugs an urgent need.
In the last few years, new analytical tools have become available to support the discovery of new drugs against AD.
Some of these advanced methodologies have the great advantage of exploiting miniaturization facilitating the HTS of compounds for fast hit identification.
Other major benefit of such techniques is the ability to allow a reliable and quick identification of positive hits and the rapid definition SARs which is mandatory to tune lead structures to improved activity and bioavailability.
Moreover, new approaches focus on a deeper characterization of the mechanisms involved in molecular recognition processes by probing the structure and folding of target proteins and monitoring structural and morphological changes upon binding with ligands.
Significant advances in pre-clinical sciences, with the discovery of new targets and pathogenetic mechanisms, support a certain degree of optimism that effective therapeutic interventions against AD will be found in a not so distant future.
In fact, enhanced capabilities in the production of large amounts of highquality proteins, including membrane proteins, will increase the number of assays in the drug discovery portfolio that can benefit from these methods.
The reviewed methodologies provide the necessary analytical tools to ease the discovery of new targets and ligands, showing the fundamental feature of being adaptable to the investigation of diverse target-ligand interactions.
We reported the main applications of the discussed techniques in Table
We are confident that the application of the new analytical approaches will accelerate the AD discovery process, bringing new active molecules to clinical trials.



Figure 1 .
Figure 1.
Molecular targets for AD.
Targets are classified into "established", if drugs directed toward these targets are available on the market, and "under investigation" if no drug toward these targets has already been approved.
Based on the review article by Bjørklund et al. (2019) [2].



Figure 2 .
Figure 2. Detection of BACE1 inhibitory activities using inkjet printing.
(a) Printing order of ink solutions to perform the inhibition assay.
(b) Images of fluorescence produced after the cleavage of FRET peptide by BACE1 obtained with different amount of inhibitor printed.
Quantitative plot of the reduction of fluorescence intensity obtained on the reaction spot for (c) Inhibitor IV and (d) peptide-based statine derivative STA.
Fluorescence intensity was measured using a confocal microscope ( exc = 545 nm;  em = 585 nm).
Reprinted from Ref. [15], Copyright (2018), with permission from Elsevier.



Figure 3 .
Figure 3. Schematic representation of the FRET-based competitive assay of PKC ligands.
The FRET-on condition occurs in the presence of the donor (sn-2 DEAC-type DAG-lactone), which causes the fluorescent emission of fluorescein on the acceptor (Fl-δC1b).
A decrease in fluorescence intensity for the acceptor can be detected after displacement of the donor by a test compound (FRET-off).
Reprinted with permission from Ref. [20].



Figure 4 .
Figure 4. WS 2 nanosheet-based sensing platform for fluorescent analysis of BACE1.
Republished with permission of Royal Society of Chemistry, from Ref. [21].
Copyright (2018); permission conveyed through Copyright Clearance Center, Inc.



Figure 6 .
Figure 6.
The SPR detection system and a typical sensorgram showing the association and dissociation steps occurring after ligand immobilization in a biosensor assay.
Reprinted from Ref. [27], Copyright (2017), with permission from Elsevier.


mM HEPES + 150 mM NaCl + 3 mM EDTA; HBS-T: HBS + 0.005% v/v Tween 20; PBS-T: 10 mM PB + 150 mM NaCl + 0.005% v/v Tween 20; PB-T: 100 mM PB + 0.025 v/v Tween 20; TBS-T: 20 mM Tris + 150 mM NaCl + 0.1% v/v Tween 20.



Figure 7 .
Figure 7. Affinity and kinetic studies of the four selected inhibitors binding to the immobilized human AChE chip surface: donepezil (A), tacrine (B), galantamine (C), edrophonium (D).
Reprinted from Ref. [41], Copyright (2018), with permission from Elsevier.



Figure 8 .
Figure 8. CD spectra of Aβ1-42 samples at different times after sample preparation: (a) in the absence of CORM-3; (b) in the presence of CORM-3 at 1:1 molar ratio; (c) in the presence of excess CORM-3 at 5:1 molar ratio.
Reprinted fromRef.
Copyright (2019) American Chemical Society.



Figure 9 .
Figure 9. 1 H-15 N SOFAST-HMQC NMR analysis of Aβ-flavonoid interactions.
(a) Spectra of 15 N-labeled Aβ1-40 in the absence (red) and in the presence of a 10:1 molar excess of morin (blue).
(b-e) Chemical shift perturbations (CSP) on 15 N-labeled Aβ1-40 upon the addition of morin, quercetin, galangin and luteolin.
Average CSP values (dashed) and standard deviations (dotted) were plotted for reference: higher values are indicative of noticeable interactions of flavonoids with the corresponding residues.
Reproduced from Ref. [108]published by The Royal Society of Chemistry.



Figure 10 .
Figure 10.
Schematic working model for the formation of fibrils by the repeat domain of tau in the presence of heparin.



Figure 11 .
Figure 11.
Aβ1-42 mass spectrum (a) and arrival time distribution (b) for the Aβ1-42 at a z/n ratio of -5/2 (n = number of Aβ1-42 monomers involved in the formation of the oligomer).
The peaks in (b) are due to oligomers with even numbers of monomer components, the smallest of which would be the dimer with five negative charges.
The arrival time distributions are complex and indicate the presence of Aβ1-42 dimers, tetramers, hexamers and dodecamers are present.
Adapted by permission from Springer Nature Customer Service Centre GmbH: Springer Nature, Ref. [155], Copyright (2019).



Figure 12 .
Figure 12.
ATD profiles for (a) pure Aβ1-42 and (b) 1:5 mixture of Aβ1-42 and ML sample, respectively.
(c) ATD for the z/n = -5/2 peak of the Aβ1-42 sample prepared and placed on ice for ca. 4 h and (d) ATD for the z/n = -5/2 peak of the preincubated Aβ1-42 sample immediately following the addition of ML (ca. 5 min).
Adapted with permission from Ref. [109].Copyright (2014) American Chemical Society.



Figure 13 .
Figure 13.
(a) LILBID-MS spectra of Aβ1-42 (100 μM) with and without a 4-fold excess of inhibitor (compound 18).
The sample was incubated for 48 h at 4 °C.
The inlet shows the monomer/oligomer ratios for these spectra.
(b) LILBID-MS spectra of an Aβ1-42 sample (100 μM) incubated for 48 h at 4 °C (black) and treated afterward with 400 μM inhibitor 18 for 70 min (blue) and 48 h (red).
The different Aβ1-42 oligomers are indicated.
The inlet shows the monomer/oligomer ratio for those three spectra.
Adapted with permission from Ref. [141].
Copyright (2017) American Chemical Society.



Figure 14 .
Figure 14.
ESI mass spectrum of (a) Aβ1-40 (numbers adjacent to the peaks denote oligomer order, with the positive charge state of the ions in superscript).
Positive-ion ESI mass spectra of Aβ1-40 (32 μM) incubated in the presence of (b) 320 μM tramiprosate, (c) 320 μM hemin or (d) 320 μM EGCG.
(e) ThT fluorescence intensity of Aβ1-40 alone (black circles) in the presence of tramiprosate (pink circles), EGCG (blue circles) or hemin (orange circles) at molecule: Aβ1-40 molar ratios of 10:1.
(f) Negative-stain TEM images of Aβ1-40 alone (i) or incubated with 10:1 molar ratios of tramiprosate (ii), hemin (iii) or EGCG (iv) (five days, 25 °C, quiescent).
Scale bars: 100 nm.
Adapted by permission from Springer Nature Customer Service Centre GmbH: Springer Nature, Ref. [152], Copyright (2015).


-molecule biophysical techniques can help visualizing molecular intermediates, monitoring molecularscale events in real time and measuring a wide range of intermolecular interactions.
Microscopy-based methods, such as transmission electron microscopy (TEM), scanning electron microscopy (SEM), laser scanning microscopy (LSM), confocal laser scanning microscopy (CLSM) and atomic force microscopy (AFM) have been all applied to the field of drug discovery for AD; in this context, the vast majority of the recent applications of microscopy-based methods involve the in vitro investigation on tau and amyloid aggregation; based on our search criteria, electron microscopies were employed for the in vivo or ex vivo investigation of morphological alterations on cells or animal tissues in just 4 publications over the last 5 years (3 for TEM, 1 for SEM).
In most drug discovery-driven publications, microscopies have been applied conjointly to other in solution techniques, such as fluorescence-based assays and CD studies.
Table


In a limited amount of studies, TEM has been used for imaging the cellular ultrastructural changes characteristic of AD and the attenuation of these alterations upon treatment with synthetic agents or natural extracts [215-217].
In particular, Gao et al. stained and imaged ultrathin slices of the hippocampus of an Alzheimer rat model to investigate the attenuation of brain alterations upon treatment with gineposide [218], while Zaky et al. used TEM to analyze rat brain cortexes and assess the therapeutic effects of a combination of resveratrol and curcumin toward aluminum-induced neuroinflammation [219].



Figure 15 .
Figure 15.
Inhibition of tau fibril formation by methylene blue (MB) as determined by AFM.
AFM images were obtained from different areas (2 × 2 μm) of the mica surface and the number and size of tau aggregates was quantitated using a MATLAB-based image analysis program.
Reprinted from Journal of Alzheimer's Disease, vol.
68, Y. Soeda et al. [255].


Covalent/non-covalent binding.
(b) These applications are based on the analysis of a suitable number of specimen sections to make the evaluation statistically significant.



Table 1 .
Experimental conditions adopted for the reported studied based on the SPR methodology.



Table 2 .
CD studies on amyloid misfolding in AD drug discovery research (January 2014-June 2019).



Table 3 .
Main characteristics of the microscopy-based techniques used in drug discovery for AD.



Table 4 .
Summary of the main information to be gained by applying the discussed analytical techniques in AD drug discovery.