Midlife Lifestyle Activities Moderate APOE ε4 Effect on in vivo Alzheimer’s Disease Pathologies
This study aimed to investigate whether the midlife cognitive activity and physical activity moderate the relationship between apolipoprotein Eε4 (APOE4) and in vivo Alzheimer's disease (AD) pathologies.
In total, 287 non-demented older adults (mean age 72 years) from the Korean Brain Aging Study for the Early diagnosis and prediction of Alzheimer's disease cohort were included.
Participants underwent a comprehensive clinical assessment including the evaluation for midlife CA and physical activity, [ 11 C]-Pittsburgh-Compound-B-positron emission tomography (PET), [ 18 F]-fluorodeoxyglucose PET, structural magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), and APOE genotyping.
We used linear regression and regression-based mediated-moderation models for statistical analyses.
Neither midlife cognitive activity nor physical activity moderated the effect of APOE4 on β-amyloid (Aβ) retention itself.
Midlife cognitive activity significantly moderated the effect of APOE4 on hippocampal volume [B (SE) = -627.580
(252.327),
t = -2.488,
p = 0.014]: APOE4 carriers had smaller hippocampal volume than non-carriers at relatively high cognitive activity state (p = 0.004), but not at relatively low cognitive activity condition (p = 0.937).
Midlife physical activity significantly moderated the effect of Aβ

BACKGROUND
The apolipoprotein ε4 (APOE4) is the most well-evidenced risk gene for Alzheimer's disease (AD;
APOE4 has complex effects on AD pathophysiology through both Aβ-mediated pathway (i.e., indirect effect of APOE4 on hippocampal volume or AD-CM reduction via Aβ accumulation) and Aβ-independent pathways (i.e., direct effect of APOE4 on hippocampal volume or AD-CM reduction not mediated by Aβ accumulation;
While APOE4 is a non-modifiable genetic risk factor, modifiable factors such as cognitive activity and physical activity have been associated with a decreased risk of cognitive decline
However, studies on the in vivo neuropathological mechanisms underlying the association between cognitive activity or physical activity and AD-related cognitive decline have produced controversial findings
Such modifiable lifestyle activities may change the AD pathophysiological processes associated with APOE4.
However, their moderation for the influence of APOE4 on AD pathologies remains poorly understood
Some previous studies have adopted current cognitive activity or physical activity to investigate the relationship between lifestyle activities and in vivo AD pathologies
However, as AD pathology, Aβ deposition, in particular, precedes the clinical symptom onset of dementia by 10-15 years
In contrast, midlife cognitive and physical activities are less likely to be affected by AD pathology.
Moreover, many previous studies indicated that such midlife activities are related with a decreased risk of late-life cognitive decline
Therefore, we aimed to investigate whether the midlife cognitive activity and physical activity can moderate the effect of APOE4 on in vivo AD pathologies measured by neuroimaging modalities.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Participants
The present study included 287 non-demented older adults [215 cognitively normal (CN), 72 mild cognitive impairment (MCI)] between 55 and 90 years of age who participated in the Korean Brain Aging Study for the Early Diagnosis and Prediction of Alzheimer's disease (KBASE), an ongoing prospective cohort study initiated in 2014
The CN group consisted of participants with a Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR;
(3) preserved global cognitive function; (4) independance in functional activities; and (5) no dementia.
Regarding Criterion 2, the age-, education-, and sex-adjusted z-scores for at least one of four episodic memory tests were < -1.0.
The four memory tests were the Word List Memory, Word List Recall, Word List Recognition, and Constructional Recall tests, which are included in the Korean version of the Consortium to Establish a Registry for Alzheimer's Disease (CERAD-K) neuropsychological battery
All MCI individuals had a CDR score of 0.5.
The exclusion criteria were as follows: (1) presence of a major psychiatric illness, including alcohol-related disorders; (2) significant neurological or medical conditions or comorbidities that could affect mental function;
(3) contraindications for an magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan (e.g., pacemaker or claustrophobia); (4) illiteracy; (5) the presence of significant visual/hearing difficulties and/or severe communication or behavioral problems that would make clinical examinations or brain scans difficult; (6) taking an investigational drug; and (7) pregnant or breastfeeding.
All the participants received comprehensive neuropsychological and clinical evaluation including midlife cognitive activity and physical activity according to the KBASE assessment protocol
More detailed information on the KBASE study methodology including the enrollment and assessment of participants was described previously
The Institutional Review Board of Seoul National University Hospital (C-1401-027-547) and Seoul Metropolitan Government-Seoul National University Boramae Medical center

APOE Genotyping
Blood samples were obtained via venipuncture and DNA was extracted from whole blood.
APOE genotyping was performed as described in a previous study
If an individual has at least one APOE4 allele, we defined it as an APOE4 carrier.

Assessment of Midlife Cognitive and Physical Activities

Cognitive Activity
The cognitive activity of each subject was assessed using a 39 item expanded version
This questionnaire has sufficient internal consistency and temporal stability
Participants were asked to report how often they engaged in common cognitively demanding activities with few barriers to participation, such as reading newspapers, magazines, or books; visiting a museum or library; attending a concert, play or musical and writing letters or a diary, at 5 age epochs: 6, 12, 18, and 40 years and the current age.
Responses for each item were made using a 5-point frequency scale: 5, every day or almost every day; 4, several times a week; 3, several times a month; 2, several times a year; and 1, once a year or less.
Among the 39 items, nine items were for current age (i.e., late-life) cognitive activity and nine items are for midlife (40 years of age) cognitive activity.
The item scores for current age and midlife were averaged to yield current-and midlife cognitive activity value, respectively.

Physical Activity
Midlife physical activity (age 40-55 years) was assessed using the interviewer-administered Lifetime Total Physical Activity Questionnaire, a tool with demonstrated reliability
This questionnaire assesses occupational, household, and leisure activities separately throughout a respondent's lifetime.
The frequency and duration of these activities were assessed by recording the number of years, months per year, weeks per month, days per week and hours per day that each activity was performed.
The intensity of activity was estimated by the participant as sedentary, light, moderate or heavy.
A metabolic equivalent (MET) value was assigned to each activity based on the Compendium of Physical Activities
The index of midlife-and current physical activity was the average MET-hr./week
spent on leisure activity at the ages of between 40-55 years old and over the past 3 years each.
We selected leisure activities, but not occupational or household activities because we wanted to include only a modifiable factor that could be controlled.
Most previous studies about the influence of physical activity on AD or dementia risk have focused only on leisure-time physical activity

Assessment of AD Neuroimaging Biomarkers

Measurement of Cerebral Aβ Accumulation
All subjects underwent simultaneous three-dimensional (3D) PiB-PET and T1-weighted MRI using a 3.0 T Biograph mMR (PET-MR) scanner (Siemens, Washington, DC, USA) according to the manufacturer's approved guidelines.
After 40 min from intravenous administration of 555 MBq of 11C-PiB (range, 450-610 MBq), the PiB-PET image data were collected in list mode (5 min × 6 frames).
All PiB-PET images were processed with routine corrections for uniformity, UTE-based attenuation, and decay corrections, and reconstructed into a 256 × 256 image matrix using iterative methods (six iterations with 21 subsets).
T1-weighted 3D MR images were acquired in the sagittal orientation with the following parameters; repetition time = 1,670 ms, echo time = 1.89 ms, field of view 250 mm, 256 × 256 matrix with 1.0 mm slice thickness.
The image preprocessing was performed using Statistical Parametric Mapping 12 (Wellcome Department of Cognitive Neurology, London, UK
First, static PiB-PET images were co-registered to individual T1-weighted MR images and then transformation parameters for spatial normalization of individual T1-weighted MR images to a standard Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI) template were calculated.
The inverse transformation parameters were used to transform coordinates from the automatic anatomic labeling (AAL) 116 atlas
Cerebellar gray matter was used as the reference region and mean [ 11 C]-PiB uptake value was extracted from all the cerebellar lobular regions except for the vermis from a probabilistic cerebellar atlas (Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, UCL; Cognitive Neuroscience Laboratory, Royal Holloway).
The AAL algorithm
The standardized uptake value ratio (SUVR) values for each ROI were calculated by dividing the mean value for all voxels within each ROI by the mean cerebellar gray matter uptake value in the same image.
A global cortical ROI consisting of the 4 ROIs was also defined, and a global Aβ retention value was calculated by dividing the mean PiB uptake value for all voxels of the global cortical ROIs by the mean cerebellar gray matter uptake value
The global Aβ retention values had skewed distribution and were log-transformed in the analysis.

Hippocampal Volume Measurement
All T1-weighted images were acquired in the sagittal orientation using the abovementioned 3.0 T PET-MR machine.
All MR images were automatically segmented using FreeSurfer version 5.3
An adjusted hippocampal volume (HVa) was calculated as the unstandardized residual from the linear regression of total hippocampal volume (HVt) vs. the total intracranial volume (ICV) of the reference group (the young CN group of the study cohort;
HVa indicates the volume deviated from the expected HVt according to the ICV in young CN subjects.

Measurement of AD-Signature Cerebral Glucose Metabolism
All subjects also underwent FDG-PET imaging using the same PET-MR machine as described previously.
The participants fasted for at least 6 h and rested in a waiting room for 40 min prior to the scans after intravenous administration of 0.1 mCi/Kg of [ 18 F]-FDG radioligands.
The PET data collected in list mode (5 min × 4 frames) were processed for routine corrections such as uniformity, UTE-based attenuation, and decay corrections.
After inspecting the data for any significant head movements, we reconstructed them into a 20-min summed image using iterative methods (6 iterations with 21 subsets).
The following image processing steps were performed using SPM12
First, static FDG-PET images were co-registered to individual T1 structural images, and transformation parameters for the spatial normalization of individual T1 images to a standard MNI template were calculated and used to spatially normalize the PET images to the MNI template.
After smoothing the spatially normalized FDG-PET images with a 12-mm Gaussian filter, intensity normalization was performed using the pons as the reference region.
AD-signature FDG ROIs, such as the angular gyri, posterior cingulate cortex, and inferior temporal gyri, which are sensitive to the changes associated with AD
AD-CM was defined as a voxel-weighted mean SUVR extracted from the AD-signature FDG ROIs.

Statistical Analysis
First, multiple linear regression analyses were conducted to examine the simple associations between midlife cognitive activity (or physical activity) and AD biomarkers using IBM SPSS Statistics software 23 (IBM Corp., Armonk, NY, USA).
Then, we tested models including both Aβ-mediated-and Aβindependent pathways of APOE4 effects using the Process Macro program
The inference was determined by 95% bias-corrected bootstrap confidence intervals from 10,000 bootstrap samples.
An effect was considered significant if the 95% confidence interval did not

Data Availability
The datasets generated and analyzed during the present study are not publicly available, owing to ethical considerations and privacy restrictions.
Data may be obtained from the corresponding author after approval by the Institutional Review Board of the Seoul National University Hospital, South Korea has been sought.

RESULTS

Participant Characteristics
The characteristics of the subjects are shown in Table
Of the 287 study participants, 66 (23.0%) were APOE4 carriers.
There were no differences between APOE4 carriers and non-carriers regarding age, sex, education, or midlife cognitive activity or physical activity.
The proportion of MCI subjects was higher in the APOE4 carrier than in the non-carrier group.
APOE4 carriers also had higher global Aβ accumulation, smaller HVa, and lower AD-CM than those of non-carriers.

Simple Associations of APOE4, Cognitive Activity and Physical Activity With AD Biomarkers
Linear regression analyses showed that APOE4 positivity was significantly associated with increased global Aβ retention, decreased HVa, and decreased AD-CM (Table
In contrast, neither midlife cognitive activity nor physical activity was related to any of the AD neuroimaging biomarkers.

Moderation of Midlife Lifestyle Activities for the Association of APOE4 With Aβ Retention and HVa
When a model including the moderating effect of midlife cognitive and physical activity for the association between APOE4, Aβ retention, and HVa (Figure
For the purpose of demonstration, the association between APOE4 carrier status and HVa was plotted for each of the high and low midlife cognitive activity state (Figure
At relatively high cognitive activity (1SD above mean) condition, APOE4 carriers had significantly smaller HVa than non-carriers [B (SE) = -561.576
(193.159),
t = -2.907,
p = 0.004], whereas no such difference was found APOE4 carriers and non-carriers at relatively low cognitive activity (1 SD below mean) condition [B (SE) = 13.707
(173.037),
t = 0.079, p = 0.937] (Figure
In contrast, midlife cognitive activity moderated neither the APOE4 effect on Aβ retention itself nor the Aβ-mediated effect of APOE4 on HVa (Table
In contrast to midlife cognitive activity, midlife physical activity did not show any moderating effect on the influence of  APOE4 on Aβ retention and HVa (Table
Even after current cognitive and physical activity were controlled in the model as additional covariates, the results were unchanged.

Moderation of Midlife Lifestyle Activities for the Association of APOE4 With Aβ Retention and AD-CM
While midlife cognitive activity did not have any moderation effect for the association between APOE4, Aβ retention, and AD-CM, midlife physical activity significantly moderated the effect of Aβ retention on AD-CM (Table
For the purpose of demonstration, the association between global Aβ retention and AD-CM was plotted for each of the high and low midlife physical activity state (Figure
whereas no such association was observed in relatively high physical activity (1 SD above mean) condition [B (SE) = 0.023(0.089),
t = 0.264, p = 0.791] (Figure
In contrast, midlife physical activity moderated neither the effect of APOE4 on Aβ retention nor the Aβ-independent effect of APOE4 on AD-CM (Table
Even after current cognitive and physical activity were controlled in the model as additional covariates, the results were similar.

DISCUSSION
We observed that APOE4 was strongly associated with increased global Aβ accumulation and reduced HVa and AD-CM, whereas neither midlife cognitive activity nor physical activity was related to any of the AD biomarkers in bivariate association analysis.
In terms of the moderating effects of midlife lifestyle activities, midlife cognitive activity moderated the Aβindependent influence of APOE4 on HVa, and midlife physical activity moderated the Aβ-mediated influence of APOE4 on AD-CM, while neither activity moderated the APOE4 effects on Aβ accumulation.
Association Between APOE4, CA, and PA With AD Biomarkers
Consistent with previous reports
In contrast, neither midlife cognitive activity nor physical activity was related to any of the AD neuroimaging biomarkers in bivariate analysis.
Many studies investigating the association between cognitive activity or physical activity and AD biomarkers have reported inconsistent findings
Among them, only a few have focused on the effect of midlife activities
Such a null association with Aβ accumulation and AD-related neurodegeneration biomarkers appears discordant with the finding that midlife lifestyle activities are associated with a decreased risk of late-life  cognitive decline
Such a discrepancy was also observed in prior studies
A report based on the Harvard Aging Brain Study demonstrated that a history of greater cognitive activity is correlated with better cognitive performance, but not with Aβ accumulation, glucose metabolism, or hippocampal volume in CN older adults
A neuropathological study also showed that greater past cognitive activity is related to slower late-life cognitive decline, independently of AD neuropathologies
Taken together, a change in AD pathology itself is not likely to be the direct substrate underlying the effect of past lifestyle activities on cognitive benefit.

Moderation of Midlife Cognitive Activity or Physical Activity for APOE4 Effects on Aβ Deposition
In our study, neither midlife cognitive activity nor physical activity moderated the APOE4 effect on Aβ deposition itself.
However, two previous studies reported a significant interaction effect between lifestyle activities and APOE4 on Aβ accumulation
They showed a beneficial effect of cognitive activity
This discrepancy might be attributed to different study methods and sample characteristics.
We focused specifically on midlife activities to reduce the possibility of reverse causation
In addition, the educational levels of their subjects (mean educational years: 16.86
Another study

Moderation of Midlife Cognitive Activity for APOE4 Effects on HVa
Midlife cognitive activity moderated the Aβ-independent influence of APOE4 on HVa.
More specifically, the direct negative effect of APOE4 on HVa was more evident in individuals with higher midlife cognitive activity than in those with a lower midlife cognitive activity.
According to the APOE4 antagonistic pleiotropy hypothesis, APOE4 differentially impacts across different life stages.
APOE4 offers cognitive benefits during early adulthood at the expense of a more rapid decline in cognitive function with aging
Young CN individuals with APOE4 have elevated resting-state activity in the default mode network including the hippocampus compared to those without APOE4
APOE4 carriers in midlife have more strongly activated memory-related brain regions including the hippocampus to maintain the same level of performance than non-carriers, but this neural compensatory recruitment begins to decline by midlife
Such increased activity in the memory-related brain regions is also known to be related to atrophy of the medial temporal lobe including the hippocampus
Taken together, our results indicate that excessive midlife cognitive activity in APOE4 carriers may accelerate hippocampal atrophy by imposing hyperactivation of the related brain regions.

Moderation of Midlife Physical Activity for APOE4 Effects on AD-CM
While midlife physical activity did not moderate the Aβindependent influence of APOE4 on AD-CM, it moderated the indirect pathway from APOE4 to AD-CM via Aβ accumulation.
More specifically, Aβ accumulation, which is closely linked to APOE4, was associated with decreased AD-CM in individuals with a lower level of midlife physical activity, whereas such an inverse correlation between Aβ accumulation and AD-CM was not significant in those with a higher level of physical activity.
There are several possible pathways linking active physical activity and preserved AD-CM.
First, physical activity has been suggested to increase cognitive or brain reserve through angiogenesis, increased cerebral blood flow and enhanced synaptic plasticity
Individuals with a greater reserve through active physical activity can tolerate a greater burden of cerebral Aβ accumulation and do not show reduced AD-CM as shown in the inactive physical activity group.
Second, Aβ shares a consensus amino acid sequence with insulin and Aβ directly binds to the insulin receptor leading to increased insulin-resistance
Increased insulin resistance is associated with reduced AD-CM
As active physical activity decreases insulin-resistance
Finally, active physical activity also lowers chronic inflammation
Increased cerebral Aβ accumulation induces neuroinflammation which can reduce AD-CM
Consistent with our result, a 21-year longitudinal follow-up study reported that midlife physical activity is inversely associated with a late-life risk of AD dementia only among APOE4 carriers
Given the strong association between APOE4 and Aβ accumulation

Strengths and Limitations
One of the key strengths of this study is the statistical approach using models including both the Aβ-mediated pathway and the Aβ-independent pathway of APOE4 influence.
This approach made it possible to clarify the complex associations and interactions between APOE, midlife lifestyle factors, and AD biomarkers.
Our findings, based on such complex models, may explain why studies about the effects of lifestyle activities on AD biomarkers have resulted in inconsistent findings.
The relatively large sample size, particularly of the CN group, is another strong point of this study.
Nevertheless, some limitations should also be mentioned.
Because this was not a longitudinal study, we could not confirm causality for the observed associations.
To overcome such a limitation in the study design, we used midlife cognitive activity and physical activity instead of current activities.
Nevertheless, further long-term follow up studies are needed to clarify the causal aspects.
Although the cognitive activity and physical activity questionnaires used in the present study were reliable and well-validated, they are based on self-reports and might be biased due to recall problems.
To minimize such recall bias, we only included non-demented subjects.
Although MCI individuals have some memory problems, their problems are confined to recent memory, not remote memory

CONCLUSION
The current study was the first attempt to elucidate the moderating effect of modifiable midlife lifestyle factors on the influence of APOE4 on in vivo AD pathologies.
Our findings suggest that high midlife cognitive activity may accelerate hippocampal atrophy induced by APOE4.
In contrast, active midlife physical activity may delay AD-signature regional brain hypometabolism by weakening the influence of APOE4associated Aβ accumulation.
Overall, the information obtained in this study will be helpful to select preventive midlife lifestyle activities to reduce the negative influence of the genetic risk for AD.



FIGURE 1 |
FIGURE 1 | The hypothetical moderated mediation model to analyze the associations of apolipoprotein E ε4 (APOE4) with β-amyloid (Aβ) retention and (A) HVa or (B) AD-CM, and the moderation effect of cognitive and physical activity on the associations.
The sequence of Alzheimer's disease (AD) pathologies are based on hypothetical amyloid cascade model of AD pathophysiology
APOE4, APOE ε4; CA, cognitive activity; PA, physical activity; HVa, adjusted hippocampal volume; AD-CM, AD-signature region cerebral glucose metabolism.



FIGURE 2 |
FIGURE 2 | Results from moderated mediation model analyses for the associations of APOE4 with Aβ retention and (A) HVa or (B) AD-CM, and the moderation effect of midlife cognitive and physical activity for the associations.
Values are standardized regression coefficients (standard error) for the associations or moderation effect with statistical significance.
Bold lines also indicate significant association or moderation effect.
*p < 0.05, **p < 0.005.
APOE4, apolipoprotein ε4; CA, cognitive activity; PA, physical activity; HVa, adjusted hippocampal volume; AD-CM, AD-signature region cerebral glucose metabolism.



FIGURE 3 |
FIGURE 3 | Plots to demonstrate the moderation effect of (A) midlife cognitive activity on the relationship between APOE4 and HVa and (B) midlife physical activity on the relationship between Aβ retention and AD-CM.
a Coded as ln(global β-amyloid burden).
APOE4, apolipoprotein ε4; CA, cognitive activity; PA, physical activity; HVa, adjusted hippocampal volume; AD-CM, AD-signature region cerebral glucose metabolism; <1 SD, 1 standard deviation below mean value; +1 SD,: 1 SD above mean value.



TABLE 1 |
Patient characteristics in the overall sample and in the strata by apolipoprotein E ε4 (APOE4) status (N = 287).



TABLE 2 |
Association of APOE4 and midlife activities with AD biomarkers (N = 287).



TABLE 3 |
Moderation of midlife activities for the association of APOE4 with Aβ retention and HVa: results from moderated mediation analysis based on PROCESS (N = 287).


Coded as ln(global β-amyloid burden).
b Adjusted for age, sex, educational year and clinical diagnosis.
AD-CM, AD-signature region cerebral glucose metabolism; APOE4, apolipoprotein ε4; CA, cognitive activity; PA, physical activity.