Insulin deficiency promotes formation of toxic amyloid-β42 conformer co-aggregating with hyper-phosphorylated tau oligomer in an Alzheimer's disease model
model 3xTg-AD mouse Toxic amyloid β conformer Insulin deficiency

Introduction
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a major cause of devastating dementia in older people.
Two well-known pathological hallmarks are senile plaques and neurofibrillary tangles, of which amyloid β-protein (Aβ) and hyper-phosphorylated tau protein (p-tau) are the main constituents, respectively.
Aβ40 is the major species of Aβ physiologically secreted in the brain while a minor species, Aβ42, is more aggregative and readily forms toxic oligomers
In AD, mitochondrial dysfunction
Specifically, metabolic alterations such as diabetes mellitus (DM) impair the insulin signaling pathway, suppressing phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphoshate 3-kinase (PI3K)-Akt, which may affect neurons, microglia, and astrocytes, leading to cognitive dysfunction in AD brains
Thus, much attention has been paid to the findings that AD and DM share many pathophysiological characteristics including impaired insulin sensitivity, Aβ accumulation, tau hyper-phosphorylation, brain vasculopathy, inflammation, and oxidative stress
In AD brains, decreased insulin receptor mRNA and protein as well as reduced insulin receptor binding were found
In particular, inhibitory phosphorylation of insulin receptor substrate 1, a biomarker for insulin resistance, was increased in the hippocampus and associated with Aβ plaque burdens and memory impairment
In addition, intranasal insulin administration partially improved cognitive function in AD patients
Similarly, in 3xTg-AD mice, a mouse AD model harboring two familial AD-mutant APP (KM670/ 671NL) and PS1 (M146 V) genes and a mutant TAU (P301L) gene, agedependent glucose intolerance and pancreatic amyloidopathy were observed at 14 months of age
In this model, a high fat diet (HFD) exaggerated glucose intolerance, brain soluble Aβ, and memory impairment, all of which were reversed by insulin injection
Furthermore, it was also demonstrated that dietinduced insulin resistance aggravated cognitive dysfunction and Aβ deposition in Tg2576 mice
These findings collectively suggest that impaired insulin signaling in neurons may worsen cognitive disturbance and pathologies in AD patients and mouse models.
Thus, many anti-diabetic drugs have been investigated for AD, revealing some beneficial effects on cognitive function and AD pathologies
However, other reports indicated no relationship between DM and AD
Interestingly,
Furthermore, the loss-of-function of tau protein may induce brain insulin resistance
Thus, the association between AD and DM in brain and peripheral tissues remains complicated.
DM can be characterized as type 1 DM (T1DM) caused by insulin deficiency and type 2 DM (T2DM) associated with insulin resistance.
Epidemiological surveys have repeatedly shown that T2DM increases AD risk nearly 2-fold
Genes involved in T2DM were significantly altered in AD brains as well as 3xTg-AD mouse brains
However, a relationship between T2DM and AD pathology in autopsied brain samples is almost uniformly negative
In support of an association between T1DM and AD, levels of p-tau and Aβ42 in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) were higher in T1DM than in controls while elevated CSF tau levels were also associated with decreased white matter integrity in T1DM patients
T1DM in monkeys induced by streptozotocin (STZ) injection increased the inhibitory phosphorylation of insulin receptor substrate 1 (IRS1), soluble Aβ, and p-tau in the hippocampus
The induction of T1DM by STZ in 4-month-old APP transgenic (Tg) mice also decreased insulin receptor activity in the brain and increased Aβ, p-tau and glycogen synthase kinase-3β (GSK-3β) activity, which was partially prevented by insulin therapy
Therefore, insulin deficiency as well as insulin resistance may result in the attenuation of insulin signaling in cells.
Recently, a novel minor species of Aβ42 with a turn at positions 22 and 23 and a major species with a turn at positions 25 and 26 in wild type Aβ42 aggregates were reported
The novel Aβ42 with a turn at positions 22 and 23 was reported to be more aggregative and neurotoxic than the normal form of Aβ42
This species is termed "toxic Aβ42 conformer", which may be a novel therapeutic target
We demonstrated that toxic Aβ42 conformers accumulated in neurons at an early stage in 3xTg-AD mice
Furthermore, the ratio of toxic Aβ42 conformer to total Aβ42 in the CSF was significantly increased in patients with AD and those with mild cognitive impairment compared with age-matched controls
However, the mechanisms involved in how toxic Aβ42 conformers are generated and accumulated in the AD brain remain to be determined.
Particularly, it is unknown whether the formation of toxic Aβ42 conformers is influenced by insulin deficiency and resistance.
In the present study, we aimed to clarify the relationship between impaired insulin metabolism and the formation of toxic Aβ42 conformers in the brains of a mouse AD model.
We report that insulin deficiency rather than resistance in our models facilitates memory impairment and promotes the formation of toxic Aβ42 conformers in vivo, which co-aggregate with p-tau oligomers in hippocampal neurons.

Material and methods

AD model mice
3xTg-AD mice on a congenic C57BL/6 background
Mice were maintained on a 12-h light/12-h dark schedule.
We used an injection of STZ, a structural analogue of N-acetyl glucosamine, to induce insulin deficiency
The animals were divided into the following four groups: 1) STZ control group; a control diet with citrate buffer injection, 2) STZ group; a control diet with STZ injection, 3) HFuD control group; a control diet with no injection, and 4) HFuD group; HFuD with no injection.
Each group contained 6 male and 6 female mice.
To induce insulin deficiency, 6-month-old 3xTg-AD mice were treated with 50 mg/kg STZ (Wako, Osaka, Japan) for 5 consecutive days (n = 12).
STZ was quickly dissolved in citrate buffer (pH 4.5) and intraperitoneally injected.
STZ is taken up by pancreatic β-cells via GLUT2 leading to selective β-cell death by DNA fragmentation
To induce insulin resistance, mice were given free access to HFuD (Oriental Yeast, Tokyo, Japan) containing 60% carbohydrate (fructose), 5.0% fat, and 17.8% protein as well as 10% fructose water from 6 to 9 months of age (n = 12), as previously reported
Fasting plasma glucose (FPG) and immunoreactive insulin (IRI) were measured in mice before treatment at 6 months of age and after treatment at 9 months of age.
The experimental design is summarized in Supplementary Fig.
All experiments were approved by the ethical committee of Kyushu University.

Morris water maze (MWM) analysis
Short-term memory function was evaluated by the MWM test.
A circular tank (90-cm diameter) was filled with water at 24 ± 1 °C.
To evaluate spatial working memory, mice were trained to escape onto a 10-cm-diameter circular and clear platform submerged 1.5 cm beneath the surface of the water that was invisible to mice while swimming.
Mice were given four consecutive trials per day for 3 days.
The platform location was selected randomly for each mouse but was kept constant throughout training.
Mice were placed into the tank at one of four designated start points.
If a mouse failed to find the platform within 60 s it was manually guided to the platform and remained there for 10 s.
To evaluate memory retrieval, a probe test was conducted 24 h after the last acquisition trial.
In this test, the platform was removed, and mice started on the opposite side of the pool were allowed to swim for 60 s.
An overhead camera recorded the swimming paths and the track was analyzed using a DV-Track Video Tracking System (Muromachi Kikai, Tokyo, Japan) as previously reported
STZ treatment and HFuD feeding started on the day after the first probe test.
The same training and probe tests were conducted 12 weeks after treatment in each group.
The parameters measured by the probe trial were initial latency to cross the platform location (s), number of platform location crosses (n), and time spent in the quadrant containing the platform location (%).

Preparation of brain tissue
Mouse brain tissues were separated into two hemispheres.
One hemisphere was fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) and embedded in paraffin for immunofluorescent staining.
The other hemisphere was frozen in liquid nitrogen, homogenized in a 10× volume (w/v) of 50 mM Tris-HCl buffer (pH 7.6) containing 150 mM NaCl (TBS), a mixture of protease inhibitors (Complete™ Mini, Roche Diagnostics, Tokyo, Japan), and a mixture of phosphatase inhibitors (Phos STOP, Roche Diagnostics) supplemented with 0.7 μg/mL pepstatin A (Peptide Institute, Osaka, Japan) and 1 mM phenylmethyl-sulfonyl fluoride (Tokyo Chemical Industry, Tokyo, Japan).
After sonication, the homogenates were centrifuged at 186,000 ×g for 30 min at 4 °C using an Optima TLX ultracentrifuge and a TLA100.4
rotor (Beckman, Palo Alto, CA) to obtain supernatant (soluble) and pellet (insoluble) fractions.
Protein concentrations were measured using the BCA Protein Assay Reagent Kit (Pierce, Rockford, IL).

Dot blot and western blot analysis
A conformation-targeted monoclonal antibody against the toxic Aβ42 conformer (11A1) was previously described
11A1 was generated against the E22P region, which is an artificial sequence mimicking the toxic turn conformation of Aβ42.
Recently, another antibody against the same E22P conformer (24B3), which is more specific for the toxic turn conformation of Aβ42 compared with 11A1, was reported
Therefore, for the quantification of soluble toxic Aβ42 conformer and total Aβ42 levels, we performed dot blots using three anti-Aβ antibodies, 12F4, 11A1, and 24B3, because dot blots are more suitable for quantitative assay than western blotting, in which anti-Aβ42 antibodies react with multiple bands
Levels of soluble toxic Aβ42 conformer, total Aβ42, and p-tau in TBS extracts were measured by a dot blotting assay system (Bio-Dot® Microfiltration Apparatus, Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA).
Anti-E22P (11A1) and anti-E22P (24B3) antibodies (Immuno-Biological Laboratories (IBL), Gunma, Japan) against toxic Aβ42 conformers, anti-Aβ42 (12F4) antibody (BioLegend, San Diego, CA) against the Aβ42 end, anti-phosphorylated-tau (Thr231) antibody (AT180, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA), anti-phosphorylated-tau (Ser202, Thr205) antibody (AT8, Thermo Fisher Scientific) against p-tau, and anti-total tau antibody (Tau46, Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Dallas, TX) were used as primary antibodies (Supplementary Table
The procedure was performed according to the manufacturer's guidelines.
Briefly, 2.5 μg soluble protein diluted in 100 μL TBS was applied to a Zeta-Probe membrane in duplicate.
After blotting, the membrane was detached from the apparatus and blocked with 5% skim milk in TBS + 0.1% Tween 20 (TBST) for 1 h at room temperature, followed by incubation with each primary antibody
After washing in TBST, the membrane was incubated with appropriate secondary antibodies conjugated with horseradish peroxidase (Pierce) in Can Get Signal solution 2 (Toyobo) for 1 h at room temperature.
After washing in TBST, specific dots were detected using Supersignal West Dura Extended Duration Substrate (Pierce).
Intensities of the dots were measured using ImageJ software (
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD).
For western blot analysis, 10 μg of each total protein in loading buffer (20% glycerol, 4% SDS, 0.1 M Tris-HCl [pH 6.8], 12% 2-mercaptoethanol, 0.01% bromophenol blue) was electrophoresed in a 4%-15% precast polyacrylamide gel (Bio-Rad) and electrotransferred onto a PVDF membrane (Millipore, Bedford, MA).
The membrane was blocked with Blocking One or Blocking One-P (Nacalai Tesque, Inc., Kyoto, Japan) for 30 min, followed by incubation with the appropriate antibodies (24B3 [1:100]; 11A1 [1:100]; 12F4 [1:1000]; p-IRS-1 [1:1000], C-terminal APP [1:1000], pro-IL-1β and IL-1β [1:1000]) in Can Get Signal solution 1 (Toyobo) overnight at 4 °C and with anti-βactin antibody (1:5000) in TBST for 30 min at room temperature.
After washing in TBST, the membrane was incubated with the appropriate secondary antibodies in Can Get Signal solution 2 (Toyobo) or TBST for 1 h at room temperature.
Specific bands were detected using the Supersignal West Dura Extended Duration Substrate (Pierce).
The band intensities of APP, p-IRS-1, and pro-IL-1β were measured using ImageJ software (National Institutes of Health).

Blood sampling, measurement of glucose and insulin, insulin tolerance tests (ITTs), and immunohistochemical/histological staining
Mice were fixed on a retainer and blood was collected from the tail tip.
A glucometer (ACCU-CHECK Aviva®, Roche Diagnostics) commonly used in clinical practice was used to measure glucose levels.
Plasma insulin levels were measured by an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) using the Mouse Insulin ELISA Kit (Morinaga Institute of Biological Science, Yokohama, Japan) according to the manufacturer's guidelines.
For ITTs, mice were fasted 6 h before the tests, and were then administered an intraperitoneal injection of regular human insulin (Novo Nordisk, Tokyo, Japan) at 0.50 U/kg.
Blood samples were obtained from the tail blood vessels at 0, 15, 30, 45, 60, and 90 min, followed by measurement of glucose levels as described above.
The blood glucose area under the curve (AUC glu ) was calculated by the trapezoid model using decreases in plasma glucose (PG) levels at various time points according to the following formula.
PG levels before insulin injection were used as the basal level of glucose.
AUC glu represents insulin tolerance.
AUC glu = [30 × (0 min PG + 30 min PG) ÷ 2] + [30 × (30 min PG + 60 min PG) ÷ 2] + [30 × (60 min PG + 90 min PG) ÷ 2] + [30 × (90 min PG + 120 min PG) ÷ 2].
For immunohistochemical staining, 4-μm-thick pancreas sections were incubated with primary anti-mouse insulin C monoclonal antibody (Clone M-Ins 1 J-4 [1:2000], Takara Bio Inc., Shiga, Japan) overnight at 4 °C, treated with an amino acid polymer conjugated to anti-mouse IgG Fab' labeled with horseradish peroxidase (Histofine Simple Stain Mouse MAX-PO (M), Nichirei, Tokyo, Japan), which was then developed with Histofine Simple Stain DAB solution (Nichirei).
For histological staining, sections were stained with Masson's trichrome (MT) stain using standard protocols.

Immunofluorescent staining and measurement of the percentage area of immuno-positive staining
After the perfusion of mice with 4% PFA in PBS, the other brain hemisphere was immersed in 4% PFA in PBS for 48 h at 4 °C and embedded in paraffin.
Brain tissues were cut into 4-μm-thick sections.
To enhance the antigen-antibody reaction, the sections were treated with HistoVT One® (Nacalai Tesque) for 20 min at 90 °C.
After washing three times in PBS + 0.01% Triton-X, the sections were incubated in the blocking solution Block Ace® (DS Pharma Biomedical, Osaka, Japan) for 30 min at room temperature, followed by incubation with the primary antibodies diluted in 1:10 with blocking solution overnight at 4 °C.
We used anti-E22P antibody (11A1 [1:50], IBL), anti-phosphorylated tau at Thr-231 antibody (AT180 [1:500], Thermo Fisher Scientific), anti-inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS, NOS2) antibody (C-11 [1:100], Santa Cruz Biotechnology), and anti-Iba1 antibody (1:500, Wako) as the primary antibodies.
Secondary antibodies were Alexa Fluor 488conjugated goat anti-mouse IgG (green) (1:500, Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) and Alexa Fluor 594-conjugated goat anti-rabbit IgG (red) antibodies (1:500, Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA).
The Vector TrueVIEW Autofluorescence Quenching Kit® (Vector Laboratories, Burlingame, CA) was used to inhibit autofluorescence to reduce background staining.
For nuclear staining, antifade mounting medium with 4′,6diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) (Vector Laboratories) was added, followed by mounting with coverslips.
The immunostaining was observed using a BX50 Fluorescence Microscope (Olympus, Tokyo, Japan).
To measure the percentage immuno-positive area of Iba1 and NOS2, random non-overlapping regions of the cerebral cortices and hippocampus in each brain section were selected and analyzed using ImageJ software (National Institutes of Health).
Each image was converted to an 8-bit image and then processed using threshold filters to detect the stained areas only, and the percentage immuno-positive area was then measured.

Confocal laser scanning microscopy and co-localization analysis
The paraffin blocks were sliced into 4-μm-thick sections, deparaffinized with xylene, and rehydrated with decreasing concentrations of ethanol in water.
Antigen retrieval was achieved using HistoVT One® (Nacalai Tesque) for 20 min at 90 °C.
After washing three times in PBS + 0.01% Triton-X, the sections were incubated in the blocking solution Block Ace® (DS Pharma Biomedical) for 30 min at room temperature, followed by incubation with the primary antibodies diluted in 1:10 with blocking solution overnight at 4 °C.
The sections were stained with anti-E22P antibody (11A1 [1:50], IBL) and anti-tau oligomers (T22 [1:500], Merck Millipore, Darmstadt, Germany) as primary antibodies.
Secondary antibodies were the Alexa Fluor 488-conjugated goat antimouse IgG (green) (1:500, Invitrogen) and Alexa Fluor 594-conjugated goat anti-rabbit IgG (red) antibodies (1:500, Invitrogen) diluted 1:10 with blocking solution.
The sections were incubated for 2 h at room temperature.
The Vector TrueVIEW Autofluorescence Quenching Kit® (Vector Laboratories) was used to inhibit autofluorescence to reduce background staining.
For nuclear staining, antifade mounting medium with DAPI (Vector Laboratories) was added, followed by mounting with coverslips.
Images were captured using a confocal laser microscope system (Leica TCS SP8 confocal microscope; Leica, Germany).
An intensity line profile was measured using LAS X software (Leica).
Images were imported into the Fiji version (
Fiji contains several pre-installed plugins.
Pearson's coefficient was calculated using the coloc2 plugin.
Nontransgenic C57BL/6 mouse brain of a similar age was used as a negative control for T22 immunostaining.

Sandwich enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay and correlative study
Levels of toxic Aβ42 conformers in brain tissues were measured by ELISA kits (IBL) according to the manufacturer's guidelines.
Briefly, 5 μg of protein diluted in 100 μL EIA buffer was applied to microtiter plates (96 wells) coated with anti-human Aβ N-terminus (82E1) antibodies with two or more epitopes and incubated overnight at 4 °C.
After washing four times with PBS-T, each well was treated with 100 μL of horseradish peroxidase-conjugated 24B3 for 1 h at 4 °C.
ELISA signals were detected by chemiluminescence using a substrate, 3,3′,5,5′-tetramethylbenzidine (TMB), and then measured with a microplate reader
Correlation between the fasting IRI and toxic Aβ42 conformer levels were investigated by Pearson's correlative analysis.
2.9.
Time-resolved fluorescence resonance energy transfer (TR-FRET) assay Levels of Akt, p-Akt, glycogen synthase kinase-3β (GSK-3β), and p-GSK-3β were measured by a homogeneous time-resolved fluorescence assay using an HTRF® kit (Cisbio, Chiba, Japan) according to the manufacturer's instructions
Each 5-μg sample was diluted in 16 μL TBS buffer and loaded into 384-well plates, followed by the addition of 4 μL detection reagent mixture of a d2-dyeconjugated Akt (FRET acceptor) and anti-phospho AKT-Eu cryptate (FRET donor) in each well.
After incubation for 4 h at room temperature, the assay plates were measured using a plate reader in HTRF® detection mode.
The results are expressed as a ratio of the acceptor fluorescence intensity (665 nm) divided by the donor fluorescence intensity (615 nm).
The same procedure was used to measure the levels of p-Akt, GSK-3β, and p-GSK-3β.

Statistical analysis
All data were analyzed by R software version 3.4.2
for Windows (
To examine statistically significant differences between treatments and between time points in the MWM test, two-way ANOVA was used.
Because the two animal models (STZtreated and HFuD-fed mice) were induced using different methods, the MWM behavior analysis by ANOVA was performed in two parts (STZ control vs STZ, and HFuD control vs HFuD).
When significant interactions were detected, post hoc paired comparisons between before and after treatment were performed with a one sample t-test.
Differences in continuous training for acquisition in the MWM test were examined using a repeated measures ANOVA.
In biochemistry and immunostaining analyses, differences between the two groups were analyzed using an unpaired two-tailed Student's t-test, and multiple comparisons were analyzed using the Tukey-Kramer test.
Values of p < .05
were deemed to be statistically significant.

Results

Insulin secretion capacity is decreased in STZ-treated 3xTg-AD mice and insulin resistance is increased in HFuD-fed 3xTg-AD mice
As shown in Fig.
In addition, the fasting insulin levels were significantly decreased in STZ-treated mice, indicating that STZ treatment successfully induced insulin deficiency (T1DM) (Fig.
By contrast, both FPG and the fasting IRI were not significantly altered in HFuD-fed mice (Fig.
However, ITTs demonstrated that insulin reactivity was well preserved in STZ-treated mice but was significantly impaired in HFuD-fed mice (Fig.
Pathology of mouse pancreas and liver revealed that the number of pancreatic β-cells and insulin immunoreactivity were decreased in STZ-treated mice compared with HFuD-fed and control mice (Fig.
Fructose is readily absorbed and rapidly metabolized in the liver, which stimulates de novo lipogenesis; therefore, plasma triglyceride (TG) levels were increased by STZ treatment and HFuD feeding (Supplementary Fig.
Synthesized TG leads to hepatic insulin resistance and dyslipidemia
This finding indicates increased insulin resistance in HFuD-fed mice, consistent with previous reports
3.2.
Memory impairment is exacerbated in STZ-treated 3xTg-AD mice but not HFuD-fed 3xTg-AD mice 3xTg-AD mice develop memory impairment from 4 months of age, which coincides with the accumulation of Aβ in neurons
We studied the memory function of mice at 6 and 9 months of age.
Consistent with a previous report
First, in 3xTg-AD mice, we observed that acquisition was significantly worsened in STZtreated mice (p < .05,
Fig.
Next, we found a significant decrease in the percentage of time spent in the platform quadrant (p < .05,
Fig.
Fig.
Crossing counts were also decreased in STZ-treated mice, although this was not statistically significant (Fig.
In addition, when male and female mice were separately analyzed, the significant decrease in the percentage of time spent in the target platform quadrant was similar between STZ-treated male and female mice (Supplementary Fig.
Therefore, peripheral insulin deficiency promotes a more marked cognitive decline compared with peripheral insulin resistance in 3xTg-AD mice.

Aβ42 accumulation, formation of toxic Aβ42 conformers and accumulation of p-tau are enhanced in the brains of STZ-treated 3xTg-AD mice compared with HFuD-fed 3xTg-AD mice
We measured the levels of Aβ42, toxic Aβ42 conformers and p-tau using dot blot analysis of the soluble fraction.
Fig.
Measurement of the blot intensity revealed significant increases in total Aβ42 levels (12F4/β-actin) and the ratio of toxic Aβ42 conformer/total Aβ42 (24B3/12F4 and 11A1/12F4) in STZ-treated 3xTg-AD mice compared with control and HFuD-fed 3xTg-AD groups (Fig.
By contrast, the ratios of 11A1/12F4 and 24B3/12F4 in HFuD-fed 3xTg-AD mice were only slightly increased compared with control 3xTg-AD mice.
Furthermore, the p-tau levels (AT180 and AT8) were significantly increased in STZ-treated 3xTg-AD mice and, to a lesser extent, in HFuD-fed 3xTg-AD mice (Fig.
However, total tau level (Tau46) was not significantly altered (Fig.
We studied western blot analysis using these anti-Aβ antibodies.
All three antibodies recognized two bands at 12 kD and 16 kD, which may correspond to the 3-mer and 4-mer of Aβ42, respectively (Fig.
Extra-bands over 20 kD might represent Aβ oligomers.
Mild differences in the intensities of the putative 3-mer and 4-mer in each western blot may be consistent with the results of the dot blots.
Expressions of APP and its C-terminal fragment were not altered, suggesting that increases in Aβ42 levels by STZ treatment were associated with the decreased degradation, but not generation, of Aβ42 (Supplementary Fig.
In addition, immunofluorescent staining with 11A1 showed a greater accumulation of toxic Aβ42 conformers in the cortical and hippocampal neurons of STZ-treated 3xTg-AD mice compared with HFuD-fed and control 3xTg-AD mice (Fig.
Immunofluorescent staining with AT180 showed the highest accumulation of p-tau in the cortical and hippocampal neurons of STZ-treated 3xTg-AD mice, and a slightly lower accumulation in HFuD-fed 3xTg-AD mice compared with control 3xTg-AD mice (Fig.
Immunofluorescent staining with AT8 also showed similar patterns, although the staining was weaker than that of AT180 because of its higher sensitivity to phosphatase activity (Supplementary Fig.
Quantitative analyses revealed significantly increased immunostaining-positive areas (%) by 11A1 and AT180 in the cortices and hippocampus of STZ-treated and HFuD-fed 3xTg-AD mice compared with control (STZ) 3xTg-AD mice (Fig.
These data are consistent with the results of the dot blot analysis mentioned above.
We next performed immunofluorescent staining with 11A1 and antitau oligomer antibody (T22)
Fig.
Immunostaining of 11A1 (green) merged with T22 (red) demonstrated their co-localization (yellow) while T22 did not stain STZ-treated non-transgenic C57BL/6 mouse brain tissues (Supplementary Fig.
Dot-like features and relative intensity of fluorescence shown by the red arrow indicates the coaggregation of these two proteins in neurons (Fig.
Pearson's correlation coefficient (R = 0.62) indicated a reasonably strong correlation between toxic Aβ42 conformers and p-tau.
Although such pathology would be unique for 3xTg-AD mice, which harbor human P301L mutant MAPT genes, formation of the toxic Aβ42 conformer may contribute to the formation of p-tau oligomers in hippocampal neurons.

Toxic Aβ42 conformer levels in brain tissues are inversely correlated with peripheral insulin levels
To study the correlation between peripheral insulin/glucose metabolism and toxic Aβ42 conformer levels, we measured toxic Aβ42 conformer levels using a sandwich ELISA with 24B3 and 82E1 antibodies.
82E1 recognizes the N-terminus of human Aβ specifically.
estimated the pancreatic insulin secretion levels as fasting IRI.
Although no significant correlation between toxic Aβ42 conformer levels and fasting IRI was observed in each control group (Fig.
p = .04441)
(Fig.
These data suggest that a decrease in serum insulin levels correlates with toxic Aβ42 conformer formation.
However, no significant correlation was found between them in the HFuD-fed 3xTg-AD mouse group (Fig.
Thus, peripheral insulin resistance may not be strongly associated with toxic Aβ42 conformer formation.

Insulin signaling is impaired in the brain tissues of STZ-treated and HFuD-fed 3xTg-AD mice
Next, we studied whether insulin signaling was impaired by decreased peripheral insulin levels and increased insulin resistance.
The stimulation of insulin receptors involves the phosphoinositide 3-kinase/ Akt pathway and ultimately GSK-3β.
Akt is activated by the phosphorylation of threonine 308 (Thr308) and serine 473 (Ser473) in the C-terminal hydrophobic motif
Stimulation of the Fig.
A: Representative dot blot of each antibody.
B: Amounts of toxic Aβ42 conformers (24B3 and 11A1) relative to total Aβ42 (12F4) (upper panels), total Aβ42 (12F4) relative to β-actin (middle left panel), p-tau (AT-180 and AT8) relative to total tau protein (Tau46) (middle right and lower left panels, respectively), and total tau protein (Tau46) relative to β-actin (lower right).
C: Western blot analysis of 24B3, 11A1, and 12F4.
Arrows on the left side indicate the putative 3-mer and 4-mer of Aβ42.
Relative amounts of total Aβ42 (12F4/β-actin) were increased in STZ-treated 3xTg-AD mice, and relative amounts of toxic Aβ42 conformer relative to total Aβ42 (24B3/12F4 and 11A1/12F4) were markedly increased in STZ-treated 3xTg-AD mice, indicating that the accumulation of Aβ42 and formation of toxic conformers were accelerated by STZ treatment.
Relative amounts of p-tau (AT180/total tau protein and AT8/total tau protein) were also markedly increased in STZ-treated 3xTg-AD mice and HFuD-fed 3xTg-AD mice, suggesting that the accumulation of p-tau was accelerated by HFuD feeding independent of Aβ42 accumulation.
24B3, 11A1, and 12F4 recognized a similar pattern of the 3-mer, 4-mer, and oligomer bands, which suggests that the majority of Aβ42 detected was toxic conformers.
Values are the mean ± SEM. *p < .05,
***p < .001,
ns: not significant, n = 12/group.
insulin receptor inactivates GSK-3β via the phosphorylation of serine 9 (Ser9)
Therefore, we measured Ser473phosphorylated Akt (p-Akt) and Ser9-phosphorylated GSK-3β (p-GSK-3β) in brain tissues using an HTRF® assay
As shown in Fig.
However, total Akt and total GSK-3β levels were not altered by STZ treatment or HFuD feeding (Fig.
Furthermore, decreased levels of p-Akt and p-GSK-3β were significantly lower in STZ-treated 3xTg-AD mice than in HFuD-fed 3xTg-AD mice (Fig.
These data indicate that the inhibition of insulin signaling in brain tissues is more prominent in mice with insulin deficiency (STZ treatment) than with insulin resistance (HFuD feeding), consistent with the data of memory impairment (Fig.
In addition, to confirm the impaired insulin signaling in these mice, we performed western blotting of Serine 307phoshorylated IRS1 (pS 307 -IRS1), a specific marker of insulin resistance
The pS 307 -IRS1 levels were significantly elevated in both STZ-treated (p < .05)
and HFuD-fed (p < .01)
3xTg-AD mice compared with each control 3xTg-AD mouse group, and were higher in HFuD-fed mice compared with STZ-treated mice (p < .05)
(Fig.
3.6.
Microglia are activated in brain tissues of STZ-treated and HFuD-fed 3xTg-AD mice Finally, we immunostained microglial cells in the brain tissues of 3xTg-AD mice.
Immunostaining with anti-Iba1 antibody revealed an increase in the number of microglial cells in STZ-treated and HFuD-fed 3xTg-AD mice (Fig.
The mean Iba1-positive area in the cortex and hippocampus was significantly increased in STZ-treated 3xTg-AD mice, and to a lesser extent in HFuD-fed 3xTg-AD mice, compared with control 3xTg-AD mice (Fig.
Moreover, immunostaining with anti-NOS2 antibody showed an increase in the number of NOS2-positive cells in STZ-treated and HFuD-fed 3xTg-AD mice compared with control 3xTg-AD mice (Fig.
The mean NOS2-positive area was significantly greater in STZ-treated and HFuD-fed 3xTg-AD mice compared with control 3xTg-AD mice (Fig.
In addition, we measured pro-IL-1β in mouse brains by western blot because mature IL-1β, which is rapidly secreted from cells following the caspase-1-dependent processing of pro-IL-1β (
We found that pro-IL-1β levels were significantly increased in STZ-treated, but not HFuD-fed, 3xTg-AD mouse brains, compared with control mouse brains (Supplementary Fig.
Double immunostaining of Iba1 and the purinergic receptor P2Y12 (P2RY12), a specific marker for central nervous system (CNS) resident microglia
Correlative analysis between fasting IRI and levels of toxic Aβ42 conformer.
A: STZ control 3xTg-AD mice.
B: STZ-treated 3xTg-AD mice.
C: HFuD control 3xTg-AD mice.
D: HFuD-fed 3xTg-AD mice.
Toxic Aβ42 conformer levels were measured by ELISAs using 24B3.
A significant inverse correlation between fasting IRI and toxic Aβ42 conformer levels was observed only in STZ-treated 3xTg-AD mice (p = .04441),
but not in the other mouse groups, suggesting that severity of insulin deficiency specifically correlates with an increase in toxic Aβ42 conformer levels.
microglia (Supplementary Fig.
Because microglia were reported to be activated by Aβ

Discussion
In the present study, we successfully induced insulin deficiency by STZ injection and insulin resistance by HFuD feeding; we found that insulin deficiency by STZ caused memory impairment and facilitated the formation of toxic Aβ42 conformers and p-tau oligomers concurrent with the activation of microglia.
Our results are consistent with STZ-T1DM in monkeys
However, our results partly conflict with a previous study reporting that STZ-T1DM in 12-month-old 3xTg-AD mice increased amyloid plaques but did not affect memory deficit or p-tau accumulation
This difference might be explained by the timing of STZ treatment: we applied STZ at 6 months of age.
The induction of STZ-T1DM at a younger age may have more pronounced effects on the clinical manifestations and pathologies of AD, which is also supported by the worsening of memory impairment and p-tau accumulation by STZ-T1DM in 4-month-old APP transgenic mice
In this study, we used two antibodies, 11A1 and 24B3, against the toxic Aβ42 conformer.
24B3 is the more specific of the two antibodies because 11A1 recognizes wild type Aβ42 in addition to E22P-Aβ42 with toxic turn conformation
Indeed, 24B3 was reported to be more specific for the toxic turn conformation of Aβ42 than 11A1
The results of dot blots and western blots using 11A1 were similar to those using 24B3 (Fig.
These findings suggest that the majority of accumulated Aβ42 is the toxic conformer, although future studies should discriminatively assay for the toxic and non-toxic Aβ42 conformers.
Importantly, the formations of toxic Aβ42 conformers and p-tau were more pronounced in STZ-treated mice than in HFuD-fed mice.
Because the perturbation of insulin signaling and impaired glucose metabolism were more pronounced in STZ-treated mice than in HFuDfed mice, the difference between STZ and HFuD treatments may be partly explained by the difference in inhibitory effects on insulin signaling between the two treatments.
However, the amount of toxic Aβ42 conformer had a significant negative correlation with pancreatic insulin secretion capacity as shown by fasting IRI levels in STZ-treated 3xTg-AD mice but not HFuD-fed 3xTg-AD mice in our study.
This suggested that insulin deficiency induced by STZ treatment was more critical for toxic Aβ conformer formation than insulin resistance induced by HFuD treatment, although severely impaired glucose metabolism in STZtreated mice might also be contributory.
Although the mechanism of toxic Aβ42 conformer formation remains to be established, we present a hypothesis in Supplementary Fig.
The greater attenuation of neuronal insulin signaling in STZ-treated mice compared with HFuD-fed mice downregulated insulin-degrading enzyme
Increased Aβ42 may contribute to the formation of toxic Aβ42 conformers in STZ-treated mice.
Toxic Aβ42 conformers were previously detected in neurons rather than the extracellular space in AD brains
Thus, decreased neuronal insulin signaling is likely to induce neuronal toxic Aβ conformers through decreased insulin-degrading enzyme.
It was recently reported that the assembly of E: pS 307 -IRS1.
The HTRF ratio represents the acceptor (655 nm)/donor (620 nm) ratio.
Levels of p-Akt and p-GSK-3β proteins were decreased in STZ-treated and HFuD-fed 3xTg-AD mice, while levels of total Akt and GSK-3β were not altered in these mice, suggesting insulin signaling was inhibited in STZ-treated and HFuD-fed 3xTg-AD mice.
pS 307 -IRS1 levels were significantly elevated in both STZ-treated and HFuD-fed mice compared with each control mouse group.
*p < .05,
**p < .01,
***p < .001,
ns: not significant, n = 12/group (A-E).
Aβ42 rather than Aβ40 was more sensitive to chiral substitutions, which affected monomer folding and assembly
Furthermore, heterotypic interactions of Aβ peptides were shown to promote the generation of amyloid fibrils
Collectively, these findings suggest that Aβ42 folding leading to the formation of Aβ42 conformers is critical in amyloid fibril assembly, and that intermolecular interactions with various kinds of Aβ conformers may accelerate amyloidogenesis.
In addition, reduced insulin signaling upregulates dephosphorylated GSK-3β, which promotes p-tau formation (Supplementary Fig.
In corroboration, Ser9 phosphorylation of GSK-3β is regulated by PI3K/ Akt such as in the insulin signaling pathway
Therefore, it is also possible that tau pathology is in part promoted by reduction of insulin signaling independent of Aβ.
Furthermore, the co-localization of toxic Aβ42 conformers and p-tau oligomers in relatively large structures, as seen in our study, might represent the co-aggregation of these proteins.
Although the precise mechanism of interaction between Aβ and p-tau is unclear, three hypotheses are proposed: i) direct interaction within neurons, ii) indirect mechanisms via the induction of inflammation by glial cells, and iii) cross-seeding between misfolded protein species
The third theory suggests that Aβ may act as a seed that transforms "mild tau strains" to "tau aggregates".
Recent studies demonstrated that following the injection of human AD brain-derived pathological tau into mutated APP NFL knock-in mouse brains that do not overexpress tau, Aβ plaques facilitated neuritic tau aggregates
The co-localization of toxic Aβ conformers and tau oligomers in our study suggests that toxic Aβ42 conformers and p-tau oligomers may interact with each other via direct molecular contact, as implicated in previous reports
Furthermore, increased p-tau oligomers by dephosphorylated GSK-3β may in turn foster toxic Aβ42 conformer formation.
Such co-aggregation of toxic Aβ42 conformers and p-tau oligomers is likely to accelerate neuronal death, resulting in memory impairment in the mouse AD model induced by STZ treatment.
T2DM is characterized by insulin resistance, hyperinsulinemia, and impaired insulin signaling as well as vasculopathy and systemic inflammation.
HFD feeding has been used to induce T2DM in AD mouse models in many previous reports.
For example, a previous study reported that T2DM induced by HFD in 6-month-old 3xTg-AD mice induced glucose intolerance and memory impairment, and increased brain soluble Aβ
Other studies reported that HFD-T2DM at 8 weeks of age induced significant memory impairment and neuronal oxidative stress and apoptosis without alterations in Aβ and ptau
HFD-T2DM in APPswe/PS1 mice accelerated memory impairment and systemic inflammation
The effects of HFD vary according to which mouse AD model is used and the timing of the introduction of HFD.
In the present study, we used HFuD instead of HFD to induce peripheral insulin resistance in 3xTg-AD mice.
HFuD-fed mice showed increased peripheral insulin resistance; however, the elevation of FPG levels was minimal and did not reach the overt diabetic range.
Nonetheless, HFuD induced mild insulin resistance in the brain and mild but significant increases in toxic Aβ conformers.
In the case of HFuD, total Aβ42 did not increase while p-tau was markedly increased.
This suggested that HFuD might facilitate toxic Aβ conformer production via the cross-seeding by p-tau oligomers.
However, HFuD did not induce a significant exacerbation of cognitive dysfunction and AD-associated pathology compared with STZ treatment.
One possible explanation is that fructose also contributes to the energy supply that activates neurons in specific brain regions such as the hippocampus
In addition, fructose-1,6-bisphosphate, an intermediate product of fructose metabolism, inhibits NOS2 expression
Thus, the deleterious effects of HFuD feeding on p-tau production may be counteracted by the above-mentioned beneficial effects of fructose.
Brain glucose transporter (GLUT) levels are also altered in AD brains.
GLUT1 and 3 levels were decreased whereas GLUT2 levels were increased in AD brains
GLUT1 and 3 are expressed in neurons whereas GLUT2 is expressed in astrocytes
Interestingly, the intracerebroventricular injection of STZ induced astrocytic activation and co-expression of GLUT2 and insulin receptor
Therefore, peripheral STZ treatment might enhance neuroinflammation similar to that in AD brains.
Thus, GLUT2 expression is worth investigating in our 3xTg-AD mice treated with STZ or HFuD in the future.
There were several limitations in this study.
First, 3xTg-AD mice harbor the mutant human TAU gene; therefore, tau protein may aggregate more readily than in non-Tg mice and sporadic AD patients.
To confirm the validity of the present findings, we are further investigating other types of AD mouse models and brain tissues from AD patients.
Second, STZ-treated and HFuD-fed mice may not be exact models of human T1DM and T2DM, respectively.
In particular, HFuD feeding may induce various metabolic changes other than insulin resistance
Nevertheless, because we confirmed the occurrence of insulin deficiency and resistance in STZ-treated and HFuD-fed mice, respectively, we think that the differential effects of insulin deficiency and resistance on toxin Aβ conformer formation reported in the present study will aid future studies investigating the relationship between AD and T1/T2DM.
Third, although we demonstrated a correlation between formation of toxic Aβ42 conformers and insulin signaling, various pathogenic mechanisms, such as insulin signaling, inflammation, and oxidative stress, may be related to each other.
The effects of these complicated mechanisms on toxic Aβ42 conformers should be carefully investigated in future studies.
Fourth, we did not examine gender effects on glucose metabolism.
However, because we used the same number of male and female mice in each group throughout the present experiments, we believe that gender effects on group comparisons should not severely distort the present results.
Fifth, in the present study, we analyzed toxic Aβ42 conformers and p-tau in soluble fractions, but not in insoluble fractions.
11A1 and 24B3 antibodies recognize 3-mer or 4-mer of Aβ42, which are soluble.
Because 11A1 and 24B3 antibodies recognize the specific turn conformation but not the primary structure of the peptide, toxic turn Aβ conformer may not be accurately measured by these turn conformation-specific antibodies in the insoluble fraction.
Instead, we performed a quantitative immunofluorescent analysis of toxic Aβ42 conformers (11A1) and p-tau, which revealed a substantial increase in toxic Aβ42 conformers and p-tau, suggesting that co-aggregating structures of these proteins may exist as insoluble aggregates.
We consider that analyzing specific Aβ conformer and p-tau in insoluble fractions is necessary in the future.
Finally, according to the present study, impaired insulin signaling in AD neurons might be a promising therapeutic target to improve dementia.
The stimulation of insulin signaling in neurons might inhibit the formation and co-aggregation of toxic Aβ42 conformers and p-tau oligomers.
We previously reported that apomorphine treatment improved memory function and AD pathology in 3xTg-AD mice
Therefore, therapies improving impaired insulin signaling in AD are worth investigating in future clinical trials.



Fig. 1 .
Fig. 1.
Levels of glucose and insulin, ITTs, and histological changes of the pancreas and liver in STZ-injected, citrate buffer-injected (STZ control), HFuD-fed, and control diet-fed (HFuD control) 3xTg-AD mice.
A: Changes in fasting plasma glucose (FPG).
FPG was increased while the fasting IRI was decreased in STZ-treated 3xTg-AD mice.
B: Changes in the fasting IRI.
The fasting IRI was decreased in STZ-treated 3xTg-AD mice and increased in HFuD-fed 3xTg-AD mice, consistent with insulin deficiency and increased insulin resistance, respectively.
C: ITTs.
Response to insulin was preserved in STZ-treated 3xTg-AD mice.
By contrast, the response was decreased in HFuD-fed 3xTg-AD mice, consistent with increased insulin resistance.
Open circle: before treatment.
Open square: after treatment.
D: Masson's trichrome staining of pancreas islets and liver, and immunostaining with anti-mouse insulin C peptide antibody.
Control indicates the STZ control.
The number of insulin-generating β cells was decreased in STZ-treated 3xTg-AD mice and fatty livers were observed in HFuD-fed 3xTg-AD mice, consistent with insulin deficiency and increased insulin resistance, respectively.
Black bars = 100 μm.
White bars = 200 μm.
*p < .05,
***p < .001,
n = 12/group.



Fig. 2 .
Fig. 2. Analysis of the Morris water maze (MWM) test.
A: Acquisition and swimming speed of STZ-treated (two left panels) or HFuD-fed (two right panels) 3xTg-AD mice with 3 days of training.
Acquisition was significantly worsened by STZ treatment but not HFuD feeding in 3xTg-AD mice.
Swimming speed was not changed by either treatment.
B: Time spent in the quadrant of the platform location (%).
C: Latency to the platform location (s).
D: Number of crossings on the platform location (n).
Time spent in the quadrant of the platform location was decreased, and latency to platform location was increased in 3xTg-AD mice after treatment with STZ, indicating worsening memory impairment in these mice.
The crossing count tended to decrease, but did not reach statistical significance (p = .064).
Values are the mean ± SEM. *p < .05,
ns: not significant, n = 12/group.



Fig. 4 .Fig. 5 .
Fig. 4. Immunofluorescent staining of toxic Aβ42 conformers and p-tau in 3xTg-AD mouse brain.
Immunofluorescent staining of toxic Aβ42 conformers (11A1, green, A) and p-tau (AT180, green, C) in cortices (upper panels) and hippocampus (lower panels) in 3xTg-AD mice, and immunostaining-positive areas (%) of 11A1 (B) and AT180 (D).
Immunostaining-positive areas were significantly increased in STZ-treated and HFuD-fed 3xTg-AD mice compared with control (STZ) 3xTg-AD mice, suggesting the accumulation of toxic Aβ42 conformer and p-tau by STZ treatment and HFuD feeding.
This accumulation was more prominent in STZ-treated 3xTg-AD mice than in HFuD-fed 3xTg-AD mice.
*p < .05,
**p < .01,
***p < .001,
n = 12/group.
DAPI was used to stain nuclei (blue).
Scale bars = 50 μm.
(For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)



Fig. 7 .
Fig. 7. Quantification of p-Akt and p-GSK-3β by TR-FRET assay and quantification of pS 307 -IRS1 by western blot.
A: p-Akt.
B: Total Akt.
C: p-GSK3β.
D: Total GSK3β.E: pS 307 -IRS1.
The HTRF ratio represents the acceptor (655 nm)/donor (620 nm) ratio.
Levels of p-Akt and p-GSK-3β proteins were decreased in STZ-treated and HFuD-fed 3xTg-AD mice, while levels of total Akt and GSK-3β were not altered in these mice, suggesting insulin signaling was inhibited in STZ-treated and HFuD-fed 3xTg-AD mice.
pS 307 -IRS1 levels were significantly elevated in both STZ-treated and HFuD-fed mice compared with each control mouse group.
*p < .05,
**p < .01,
***p < .001,
ns: not significant, n = 12/group (A-E).



Fig. 8 .
Fig. 8. Immunofluorescent staining of microglia in STZ-treated and HFuD-fed 3xTg-AD mouse brains.
Immunofluorescent staining of microglia using antibodies against Iba1 (A) and NOS2 (C) in mice at 9 months of age.
Scale bars = 50 μm.
Immunostaining-positive areas (%) of Iba1 (B) and NOS2 (D) were significantly increased in STZ-treated and HFuD-fed 3xTg-AD mice compared with control (STZ) 3xTg-AD mice, suggesting the proliferation and proinflammatory activation of microglia in STZ-treated and HFuD-fed 3xTg-AD mice.
This activation was more prominent in STZ-treated 3xTg-AD mice than in HFuD-fed 3xTg-AD mice.
*p < .05,
**p < .01,
***p < .001,
n = 12/group.