Aβ-ganglioside interactions in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease
It is widely accepted that the abnormal self-association of amyloid β-protein (Aβ) is central to the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease, the most common form of dementia.
Accumulating evidence, both in vivo and in vitro, suggests that the binding of Aβ to gangliosides, especially monosialoganglioside GM1, plays an important role in the aggregation of Aβ.
This review summarizes the molecular details of the binding of Aβ to ganglioside-containing membranes and subsequent structural changes, as revealed by liposomal and cellular studies.
Furthermore, mechanisms of cytotoxicity by aggregated Aβ are also discussed.

Introduction
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the most common form of dementia and more than 50 million people worldwide suffer with the disease.
AD is classified into the early onset, familial (hereditary) type and the late onset, sporadic type, the major form.
It is widely accepted that amyloid β-protein (Aβ), typically composed of 39-43 amino acids residues but most commonly 40 or 42, is central to the pathogenesis of AD (Fig.
First, a pathological hallmark of AD is the cerebral cortical deposition of senile plaques, with a major component being fibrillar Aβ.
Second, mutations in familial AD were found either within the Aβ sequence or close to the cleavage sites of single membrane-spanning amyloid precursor protein (APP), from which Aβ is generated by β-and γ-secretases (Fig.
Third, aggregated forms of Aβ rich in β-sheet structures (oligomers and fibrils) impair neuronal cells
Thus, it is of marked importance to elucidate mechanisms whereby soluble Aβ self-assembles into aggregates.
Accumulating evidence has suggested that the binding of Aβ to membranes plays an important role in the aggregation of Aβ
Aβ has been suggested to mainly originate from the neuronal cell surface APP, which is subsequently processed in recycling endosomes
Human brains are rich in gangliosides (sugar lipids), the major species of which are GM1, GD1a, GD1b, and GT1b (Fig.
Yanagisawa et al. identified a specific form of Aβ bound to GM1 in brains exhibiting the early pathological changes associated with AD, and also suggested that the GM1-bound form of Aβ (GAβ) may serve as a seed for the formation of Aβ aggregates
Gangliosides are considered to be localized in detergent-resistant membrane microdomains or lipid rafts with SM, cholesterol, and other lipids with saturated acyl chains
Thus, the GAβ-dependent fibrillization is also affected by these raft lipids.
The production
Substantial amounts of detergent-insoluble Aβ were detected in lipid rafts in mature rat brains
The ganglioside theory can explain both risk factors of AD and region-specific deposition of amyloids in brains.
The two major risk factors are aging and the apoE4 allele, with the latter being related to cholesterol metabolism.
The GM1 level in synaptosomes increased in old mouse brains
Both GM1 and sphingomyelin were accumulated in synaptosomes of mouse brains in an age-dependent fashion.
Synaptosomes from aged mouse brains facilitated fibril formation by Aβ-(1-40), which was attenuated by cholesterol-removing methyl-β-cyclodextrin treatment
Amyloids are deposited region-selectively in brains.
The precuneus and calcarine cortex are two of the most vulnerable and resistant regions to amyloid deposition, respectively.
Lipids extracted from synaptic plasma membranes isolated from the amyloid-bearing precuneus accelerated aggregation of Aβ- , whereas this did not happen in the case of the amyloid-free precuneus or calcarine cortex.
The enhanced amyloidogenesis was due to an increase in the C20:0 to C18:0 fatty acid ratio of GD1b
The assembly of the Dutch-(E22Q) and Italian-(E22K) variants of Aβ-  was accelerated by GM3, which is expressed in the cerebral vessel wall, the site of their deposition in vivo.
On the other hand, the fibrillization by the Flemish-variant (A21G) was facilitated by GD3, which is upregulated in the co-culture of endothelial cells and astrocytes forming the cerebrovascular basement membrane, the site of Flemish-variant deposition
The Arctic-mutant (E22G) as well as wild-type, but not the Dutch-variant, rapidly formed fibrils in the presence of GM1, suggesting that GM1 plays a critical role in amyloid deposition in the brain parenchyma
In addition to these observations, various in vivo and cellular studies supported the GAβ hypothesis in more straightforward fashions, as summarized below.
Also, refer to other reviews for the pathological roles of ganglioside metabolism in AD
The involvement of gangliosides in amyloidogenesis has been suggested also for other proteins, such as α-synuclein

Involvement of GAβ in the pathogenesis of AD

In vivo studies
Several in vivo studies support the GAβ hypothesis.
The antibody 4396C specific for GAβ stained brains with AD and Aβ-overexpressing Down's syndrome
In addition, the administration of an Fab fragment of 4396C chemically linked to a cell-penetrating peptide significantly reduced plaque formation in AD model mice
GAβ accumulation exclusively occurred in early, late, and recycling endosomes before the deposition of senile plaques in an age-dependent fashion in cerebral cortices of cynomolgus monkeys
High levels of GM1-bound Aβ-(1-42) were recovered from brain membrane fractions of human APP transgenic mice.
GAβ was also detected in human CSF
Furthermore, a recent imaging mass spectroscopy study revealed that GM1 was present in the core region of plaques in transgenic mice (tgAPP ArcSwe )
A good correlation was found between the amounts of Aβ-(1-40) Arc and GM1
A significant increase in GM1 and cholesterol was reported in Aβ-positive nerve terminals from the AD cortex
GM1 and GM2 levels in detergent-resistant membrane microdomains from frontal and temporal cortices of AD brains were increased compared with age-matched controls
It should be noted that decreases in the amounts of gangliosides per tissue weight for AD brains were the result of a marked loss of nerve endings

Cellular studies
Cellular studies also revealed the importance of GM1 in the amyloidogenesis by Aβ.
Time-dependent accumulation of fluorescein-labeled Aβ-(1-40) on rat pheochromocytoma PC12 cells and resultant cell death were visualized by confocal microscopy.
The protein was colocalized with GM1, more precisely fucosyl GM1 in this cell line
Cholesterol depletion inhibited the deposition of the protein
Amyloid formation by unlabeled Aβ-(1-42) on nerve growth factor-differentiated PC12 was detected by the amyloid-specific dye Congo red.
Amyloids were selectively formed in GM1-rich, cholesterol-rich regions on cell membranes in a time-dependent fashion, and induced cytotoxicity.
Inhibition of cholesterol synthesis rescued cells from amyloid formation and cytotoxicity.
Interestingly, contents of not only cholesterol but also GM1 were reduced by this treatment, suggesting a link between the biosynthesis of the two lipids
GM1-mediated amyloid formation and neurotoxicity were also observed in neurons.
Aβ-(1-40) formed amyloids on primary neurons as well as NGF-treated PC12 cells, inducing shrinkage and retraction of neuritis.
The initial deposition occurred at synaptophysin-positive presynaptic sites and the junction between cell bodies and neuritis, respectively.
The amyloidogenesis was inhibited by GM1-binding CTXB, anti-GAβ antibody 4396C, or ganglioside synthesis inhibitor treatment
Endocytic pathway abnormalities precede the deposition of Aβ in sporadic AD
Treatment of PC12 cells with chloroquine, which perturbs membrane trafficking from endosomes to lysosomes, induced the accumulation of GM1 in early endosomes and on the cell surface, inducing amyloid formation
Blocking the late endocytic pathway by Rab7 supression, which increased levels of SM as well as GM1
Extracellular amyloid formation can be induced by GM1 associated with exosomes
Species differences in susceptibility to AD also support the hypothesis that GM1-containing membranes are major platforms for amyloidogenesis
Aged

Molecular details of Aβ-ganglioside interactions
This section focuses on Aβ-ganglioside interactions.
For more general Aβ-lipid interactions, refer to previous reviews

Early studies
The interaction of Aβ with various ganglioside micelles was initially investigated.

McLaurin and Chakrabartty reported that Aβ-(1-40) and Aβ-(1-42) bind to GM1
micelles, forming mixed α-helix/β-sheet structures and the sialic acid (SA) or N-acetylneuraminic acid group is essential for this interaction.
[57].
Surewicz's group revealed that Aβ-(1-40) but not Aβ-(1-28) binds to GM1 micelles as well as the pentasaccharide moiety of GM1
They also reported that the dissociation constants (K d ) of F10W-Aβ-  were in the order GD1a = GT1b < GM1 < GM2
(Table
The value for GM1 was several-fold lower than that for the pentasaccharide moiety of GM1

Subsequent

Ganglioside cluster as a binding site of Aβ
We systematically investigated Aβ-ganglioside interactions using carefully does not affect the binding behavior (Table
GM1 micelles exhibited a similar binding behavior to GM1-containing bilayers
Interestingly, DAC-Aβ-(1-40) binds to membranes composed of GM1/SM/cholesterol (2:4:4) but not GM1/PC (2:8) in spite of the same GM1 contents (Fig.
Similarly, fibril formation by unlabeled Aβ-(1-40) occurs in the presence of the GM1/SM/cholesterol mixture, not the GM1/PC liposomes (Fig.
The former composition resembles that of the lipid raft.
Molecular dynamic (MD) simulations
The formation of the GM1 cluster is cholesterol-dependent
Differential scanning calorimetry experiments revealed that in ternary GM1/SM/cholesterol mixtures, GM1and cholesterol-enriched phases are formed
MD simulations suggested that cholesterol forms many hydrogen bonds with SM and more frequently with GM1, and plays important roles in promoting the assembly of other lipids
This cholesterol dependence is in accordance with the above-mentioned observations that cholesterol depletion attenuates the self-assembly of Aβ
Apparently contrary to the fibrillization-catalyzing activity of GM1 clusters mentioned above, Amaro et al. reported that GM1 inhibits Aβ oligomerization induced by SM
This study using giant unilamellar vesicles was carried out at a low ionic strength and 26°C.
First, electrostatic repulsion between negatively charged Aβ and anionic GM1 are much stronger than that at a physiological ionic strength, inhibiting
Aβ-GM1 interaction.
Second, sphingolipids are in the gel state at this temperature.
Aβ is known to interact with PC in the gel state, but not in the liquid-crystalline state

Mechanism of Aβ binding to ganglioside clusters
It is not fully understood why Aβ specifically binds to anionic ganglioside clusters, even though the protein is also negatively charged at a neutral pH
The hydrophobic interaction between the C-terminal hydrophobic residues and hydrocarbon core of the bilayer is minimal, as exemplified by the observations that : 1) Aβ only weakly interacts with zwitterionic lipids
An MD simulation study suggested that a cluster of SA holds the Lys 28 side chain of Aβ-(1-42), making its C-terminal region exposed to water in GM1/cholesterol/SM (1:2:2)
Raman spectroscopy suggested that Aβ is first bound to the SA group of GM1
Several studies pointed out that His 13 and Lys 28   are important for the binding.
Chemical shift changes were observed in the His 13 -Leu 17 region of Aβ-(1-40) upon binding to GM1 micelles in the presence of a physiological concentration of salt
MD simulations revealed that the His 13 -Gln 15   segment of the protein recognized the artificial GM1-glycan cluster by non-specific stacking interaction between side chains of His and rings of sugar residues.
The binding of Lys 28 to SA triggered the helix formation at the C-terminus
The His 13 , Ser 8 , and C-terminal hydrophobic residues (Leu 34 , Val 40 , and Ala 42 ) of Aβ-  formed H-bonds with the SA and GalNAc residues of GM1 in GM1/cholesterol/POPC
(1/8/23) bilayers
The hydrophobic interaction between the sugar CH groups and N-terminal part of Aβ may be important for binding.
The binding affinity increases with the number of sugar residues in sugar lipids, suggesting the involvement of Aβ-sugar interactions
The results of MD simulations suggested the importance of a CH-π interaction between the aromatic side chains of Aβ and sugar carbohydrate moieties
However, the substitution of Phe residues with non-aromatic cyclohexylananine (Cha) groups only marginally reduced binding, suggesting that aromaticity is not crucial for binding

Structural changes of Aβ after binding to GM1 clusters
The structures of Aβ-  in the presence of lyso-GM1 and GM1 micelles were studied using NMR by the group of Kato.
The His 14 -Val 21 and Ile 31 -Val 36 segments form helical structures in lyso-GM1 micelles (helicity 53%)
A recent study, however, indicated that the former helix is destabilized in GM1 micelles and a monomeric hairpin structure is also formed by a helix-to-β-sheet transition
At a Aβ-to-GM1 ratio of 0.067, the two C-terminal residues exhibit two distinct conformational states that are reactive with the amyloid-specific dye thioflavin T

Both Aβ-(1-40) and Aβ-(1-42) eventually form amyloid fibrils on GM1
cluster-containing membranes via α-helix-rich structures and meta-stable β-sheet-rich oligomers (Fig.
The former conformations are adopted at low Aβ-to-GM1 ratios below ~0.01
The helicity of membrane-bound Aβ-(1-40) was ~50%
An increase in the Aβ-to-GM1 ratio leads to the formation of the latter structure.
A detailed analysis of ratio-dependent changes of CD spectra led to an estimation that the oligomer is composed of ~15 Aβ molecules.
The pre-amyloid aggregate was stable for at least 8 days at 37°C
The coexistence of α-helix and β-sheet structures was also observed by Raman spectroscopy
A further increase in the Aβ-to-GM1 ratio above ~0.04
leads to the formation of amyloid fibrils (membrane fibrils)
The structures of water fibrils have been extensively investigated mainly by solid state NMR (ssNMR), and they are essentially composed of in-register parallel β-sheets with the disordered N-terminal segment for both Aβ-(1-40)
Fourier-transform infrared (FTIR) spectra supported this conclusion.
Water fibrils exhibited an intense band typical of β-sheets at 1631.1 cm -1 without a higher wavenumber weak band, a hallmark of antiparallel β-sheets (Fig.
In contrast, FTIR spectra of membrane fibrils featured antiparallel β-sheets with a minor band at around 1695 cm -1 in addition to a major β-sheet band at 1626.0 cm -1 (Fig.
Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) revealed that membrane fibrils (~12 nm, Fig.
The height of water fibrils as measured by atomic force microscopy (AFM) was ~7 nm (Fig.
In contrast, membrane fibrils had flat, tape-like structures composed of a single β-sheet layer, as judged by their extremely short height (~0.6 nm, Fig.
We analyzed the structures of membrane fibrils by 13 C-edited FTIR spectra.
The carbonyl group of Phe 4 , Val 12 , Phe 19 , Phe 20 , Val 24 , or Val 36 of Aβ-(1-40) was labeled with 13 C and fibrils were prepared using unlabeled or labeled Aβ.
FTIR difference spectra ( 13 C -12 C) clearly suggested that membrane fibrils possess β-sheet structures almost along the entire sequence, at least from Phe 4 to Val 36 .
This conclusion may explain the thickness of the fibrils (~12 nm) because the translation per residue value for β-sheets is ~0.33 nm
Having confirmed that membrane fibrils were a single-layer β-sheet containing an antiparallel orientation, the next question was the inter-strand structure.
We hypothesized that 2-residue-shifted antiparallel β-sheets were the most probable structures because they could be better stabilized by multiple salt bridges and hydrophobic/π-π interactions, the former being augmented in a less polar membrane environment.
(Fig.
To confirm this model, chemical cross-linking experiments were carried out using G9C and A30C-Aβ- .
The two Cys residues are expected to be in close proximity when the 2-residue-shifted antiparallel β-sheets are formed.
Water fibrils produced mainly G9C-and A30C-Aβ homodimers as cross-linked products, in accordance with the in-resister parallel β-sheet structure model
In contrast, in the case of membrane fibrils, not only the homodimers, but also significant amounts of the heterodimer, were detected, suggesting the coexistence of in-resister parallel and 2-residue-shifted antiparallel β-sheets.
This conclusion was confirmed by non-perturbing ssNMR experiments using
structures

Mechanisms of cytotoxicity

Monitoring self-assembly of Aβ on neuronal cells
The aggregational processes of Aβ on living cells and cytotoxic events were simultaneously monitored to elucidate the 'culprit' of cytotoxicity.
Fluorescence correlation spectroscopy (FCS) can determine the size (diffusion coefficient) of a diffusing particle, which is an aggregate of fluorescently labeled Aβ in this case.
The aggregation of Aβ-(1-42) doped with the HL647-labeled protein was monitored under fibril-forming conditions, i.e., 5 µM.
The aggregate size increased to ~10 mers on average during 6-10.5-h
incubation (Fig.
Similar results were observed for Aβ-(1-40), although a ten-times higher concentration was needed (Fig.
Caspase-3, an effector caspase for apoptosis, was activated only when amyloids were detected for both Aβ-(1-42) (Fig.
(Fig.
In accordance with this, membrane fibrils formed in the presence of GM1 liposomes are also cytotoxic whereas water fibrils are not (Fig.

Signaling cascades involved in apoptosis
Although toxic soluble Aβ-(1-40) assemblies (200-300 kDa) are generated by incubation with limited concentrations of GM1 in raft-like liposomes
Model membrane studies suggested that Aβ-(1-40) induced fibril-dependent fragmentation of membranes through a detergent-like mechanism in the presence of total ganglioside extract from the porcine brain
However, cellular studies indicated that the mechanisms of cytotoxicity involve complex signaling cascades
Inhibitor experiments suggested that the Toll-like receptor (TLR) 4/TLR 6-NFκB signaling pathway and Nod-like receptor family, pyrin domain-containing (NLPP) 3 inflammasomes were activated.
Upon amyloid formation, NFκB was translocated into the nucleus.
An increase in the intracellular Ca 2+ concentration as well as the generation of reactive oxygen species were also observed, suggesting mitochondrial damage.
These did not occur when Aβ was in the oligomeric state.
Knockout cell studies indicated that apoptosis was induced via a caspase 8 --> caspase 9 --> caspase 3 route.
It should be noted that water fibrils did not evoke apoptosis at the same protein concentration.

Conclusion


-phenyl-2-decanoylamino-3-morpholino-1-propanol reduced the accumulation of fluorescently labeled Aβ-(1-42) onto hippocampal neurons.
Synaptotoxicity by Aβ was ameliorated by CTXB [50].
Treatment with the sphingomyelinase inhibitor GW4869 significantly enhanced SM expression on the PC12 cell surface and facilitated fibrillization by Aβ-(1-40), although the effects of the compound on the expression level of GM1 were not examined [51].


rodents rarely develop cerebral Aβ amyloid deposition.
Rodent Aβ-(1-40) has only the three mutations R5G, Y10F, and H13R.
It forms similar water fibrils to the human counterpart.
In contrast, on neuronal membranes and GM1-containing raft-like membranes, human Aβ forms toxic amyloid fibrils, whereas rodent Aβ produces less toxic protofibrils that are not stained by the amyloid-specific dye Congo red.


prepared monomeric Aβ, because the initial states of Aβ in solution, i.e., completely monomeric or already partially aggregated, may significantly affect the protein-membrane interactions and different initial states may be a reason why the findings obtained by various research groups often show large discrepancies.
For binding experiments we used DAC-Aβ, in which the N-terminus of Aβ was labeled with the diethylaminocoumarin dye.
A change in polarity upon membrane-binding induces a significant blue shift and an enhancement in intensity.
None of the major membrane lipids including zwitterionic PC, sphingomyelin (SM), anionic phosphatidylserine (PS), and phosphatidylglycerol exhibited detectable binding to Aβ-(1-40) or Aβ-(1-42) at a physiological pH.
In contrast, Aβ bound to negatively charged gangliosides, including GM1 [64-67].
The K d values of DAC-Aβ-(1-40) for various GM1-containing raft-like membranes at 37°C were 0.12-0.15
µM, which are almost identical to the value for unlabeled Aβ-(1-40), suggesting that the DAC moiety



Figure 7 summarizes
Figure 7 summarizes Aβ-GM1 interactions.
When GM1 molecules do not form



Fig. 1
Fig. 1 Aβs and gangliosides.
(A) The amino acid sequences of APP around Aβ.



Fig. 2
Fig. 2 Differences in Aβ interaction between GM1-containing raft and non-raft



Fig. 3
Fig. 3 Conformations of Aβs in the presence of GM1/SM/cholesterol (4:3:3)



Fig. 4 Fig. 5 Fig. 6
Fig. 4 Characterization of water-and membrane-fibrils by Aβ-(1-40).
FTIR spectra



Fig. 7 BFig. 1
Fig. 7 Summary of Aβ-GM1 interactions.
Apoptosis-inducing 'toxic amyloid tapes'


Fig. 2 Matsuzaki


Fig. 3 Matsuzaki



Fig
Fig. 4 Matsuzaki


Fig. 6 Matsuzaki