Cerebrospinal fluid irisin correlates with amyloid‐β, BDNF, and cognition in Alzheimer's disease
Introduction: Irisin is a novel hormone originally identified for its role as a regulator of peripheral metabolism and recently found to protect synapses and rescue memory in mouse models of Alzheimer's disease (AD).
However, whether and how cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) irisin varies in relation to canonical AD biomarkers and cognition in humans remains unknown.
Methods: We determined CSF levels of irisin and brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) and examined their correlations with CSF amyloid beta (A) 42 , total tau, and Mini-Mental State Exam (MMSE) scores in a cohort comprising AD patients (n = 14) and non-demented controls (NDC; n = 25).
Results: CSF irisin correlated positively with BDNF, A 42 , and MMSE scores, but not with CSF total tau.
Discussion: Results indicate that CSF irisin and BDNF are directly correlated with A pathology and cognition in AD.

INTRODUCTION
Mounting evidence indicates that peripheral and brain metabolic dysfunction are intimately connected and play relevant roles in the pathophysiology of brain disorders, including Alzheimer's disease (AD).
Subsequent work revealed that irisin is expressed in the brain and induces expression of brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) in the mouse hippocampus.
We recently demonstrated that boosting brain levels of irisin protected synapses and memory in mouse models of AD.
However, whether central irisin correlates with AD biomarkers and cognition in humans is unknown.
To address this question, we investigated CSF levels of irisin and its correlations with AD-linked biomarkers, BDNF, and cognition in AD and control individuals.

METHODS

Study approval and ethics
Experimental procedures involving human cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)
were approved by the Committee for Research Ethics of Copa D'Or Hospital (protocol no.
47163715.0.0000.5249).
Donors gave written informed consent for use of CSF.
Samples were anonymized prior to analyses and measurements were performed in a blinded fashion by trained investigators.
All studies have been performed according to international ethical regulations and standards.

Study population
From a total of 225 subjects initially recruited at a memory clinic at

Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays
Amyloid beta (A) 40 , A 42 , and t-tau concentrations were measured using Euroimmun (Lübeck, Germany) enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) kits.
Kits for irisin detection were from Phoenix Pharmaceuticals (EK-067-29).
BDNF kits were from Abcam (ab99978).
ApoE4 kits were from MBL Biosciences (7635).

Statistics
Statistical analysis was performed using GraphPad Prism 6 (GraphPad Software Inc., La Jolla, CA, USA).
Data were initially checked for normal distribution using the D'Agostino & Pearson Omnibus normality test.
Statistical significances of differences between patient groups were assessed using two-tailed Student's t-test, except as indicated.
Only cases with corresponding complete data were included for correlation analyses.
Correlations were established by Pearson's linear regression.

RESULTS

Population characteristics
Demographics and results from biomarker measurements are pre-

Correlations among CSF irisin, cognitive performance, and AD biomarkers
We initially asked whether CSF irisin, which we previously found to be reduced in AD,
Interestingly, CSF irisin showed significant positive correlations with MMSE scores (Figure
No correlation was found between irisin and total tau (a marker of neurodegeneration) in the CSF (Figure
These results indicate that the reduction in CSF irisin parallels brain A deposition, rather than reflecting neurodegeneration in AD.

Correlations among CSF BDNF, cognitive performance, and AD biomarkers
Irisin has been reported to promote BDNF expression in the mouse hippocampus.
We thus evaluated whether CSF BDNF correlated with irisin, AD biomarkers, and cognition in humans.
Results showed a positive correlation between CSF irisin and BDNF (Figure
In line with previous evidence,
Moreover, BDNF correlated significantly with cognition (Fig-
Our findings thus support a correlation among CSF irisin, BDNF, and the extent of memory impairment and AD-related neuropathology in humans.

DISCUSSION
Despite considerable evidence supporting a role of defective brain hormonal signaling in neurodegenerative disorders, notably in AD,
Here, we focused on investigating CSF levels of irisin, an exercise-induced hormone that is expressed in the brain and was found to promote hippocampal BDNF expression in mice.
F irisin was significantly associated with cognitive performance, A 42 , and BDNF.
Importantly, neither irisin nor BDNF correlated with total tau levels in the CSF.
This suggests that the decreases in CSF irisin and BDNF in AD are more related to brain amyloid deposition rather than reflecting widespread neurodegeneration, indicated by increased CSF tau.
Irisin and BDNF are two molecular targets previously implicated in AD,
Because exercise is increasingly proposed as part of a multimodal strategy to reduce the risk of AD,
Our current finding that CSF irisin directly correlates with BDNF in humans provides clinical relevance to the previous report that irisin promotes hippocampal BDNF expression in mice.
The direct correlations among irisin, investigation of cognitive trajectories in patients.
In addition, the mean age of the AD group was higher than the control group.
We note, however, that neither CSF irisin, BDNF, nor A 42 levels significantly correlated with age (not shown), suggesting that the difference in age between groups had a small impact on our findings.
A recent study identified a CSF signature of phosphorylated tau (CSF p-tau) that associates with metabolic, structural, and cognitive changes in dominantly inherited AD.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first report showing that irisin correlates with CSF BDNF and A 42 and with cognitive status in patients.
Irisin is released by muscle tissue upon physical activity and has been shown to regulate metabolism in adipose and other tissues.
Irisin recently attracted considerable interest due to its beneficial protective actions in synapses and memory in AD models.
monstration that CSF irisin directly correlates with amyloid pathology and cognitive impairment in AD should encourage future studies in larger and diverse cohorts to replicate and extend the current findings, and to explore potential associations with additional markers of AD progression, including markers of synapse damage, CSF p-tau, and imaging data.



2 . 3 .
Interpretation: Results indicate positive correlations between cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) irisin and brainderived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), amyloid beta (A) 42 , and cognitive performance.
Future directions: Future studies should replicate the current findings in additional cohorts and investigate potential associations with markers of synapse damage, CSF ptau, and neuroimaging data, as well as longitudinal assessments along disease progression.
Determination of specificity of CSF irisin changes for AD versus other neurological disorders appears warranted.



F I G U R E 2
BDNF, A 42 , and cognitive status here demonstrated further suggest that CSF irisin and BDNF may be useful biomarkers in pharmacological or non-pharmacological interventions in AD.
Limitations of the current study include the reduced size of the study cohort, which may have contributed to the relatively low, albeit statistically significant R 2 values observed in Pearson correlation analyses, and the cross-sectional approach, which precludes F I G U R E 1 Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) irisin correlates with Mini-Mental State Exam (MMSE) scores and amyloid beta (A) 42 .
Correlations between CSF irisin and MMSE scores (A), CSF A 42 (B), or CSF tau (C) in non-demented controls (NDC; blue symbols) and Alzheimer's disease (AD) patients (red symbols).
Lines represent Pearson linear regressions (R 2 and P-values as indicated) Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) correlates with irisin, memory, and amyloid beta (A) 42 .
Correlations between CSF BDNF and irisin (A), Mini-Mental State Exam (MMSE) scores (B), CSF A 42 (C), or CSF total tau (D) in non-demented controls (NDC; blue symbols) and Alzheimer's disease patients (red symbols).
Lines represent Pearson linear regressions, (R2 and P-values as indicated)


Demographic, clinical, and biomarker characteristics of CSF donor subjects