Multimodal hippocampal and amygdala subfield volumetry in polygenic risk for Alzheimer's disease
Preclinical models of Alzheimer's disease (AD) suggest that volumetric reductions in medial temporal lobe (MTL) structures manifest before clinical onset.
AD polygenic risk scores (PRSs) are further linked to reduced MTL volumes (the hippocampus/amygdala); however, the relationship between the PRS and specific subregions remains unclear.
We determine the relationship between the AD-PRSs and MTL subregions in a large sample of young participants (N ¼ 730, aged 22e35 years) using a multimodal (T1w/T2w) approach.
We first demonstrate that the PRSs for the hippocampus/amygdala predict their respective volumes and specific hippocampal subregions (pFDR < 0.05).
We further observe negative relationships between the AD-PRSs and whole hippocampal/amygdala volumes.
Critically, we demonstrate novel associations between the AD-PRSs and specific hippocampal subfields such as CA1 (b ¼ À0.096, pFDR ¼ 0.045) and the fissure (b ¼ À0.101, pFDR ¼ 0.041).
We provide evidence that the AD-PRS is linked to specific MTL subfields decades before AD onset.
This may help inform preclinical models of AD risk, providing additional specificity for intervention and further insight into mechanisms by which common AD variants confer susceptibility.

Introduction
Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) demonstrate that Alzheimer's disease (AD) is substantially heritable (58%e78%), where a substantial proportion of this variance can be explained by cumulative polygenic effects
Polygenic risk scores (PRS) are a powerful approach for detecting AD risk decades before the onset of disease by combining the cumulative effect of individual single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs)
Several preliminary studies have explored the influence of individual SNPs identified via AD GWAS such as loci within APOE, CLU, BIN1, or PICALM on brain structure and function, broadly suggesting that common variation within these genes are associated with AD and may influence brain structure and function decades before disease onset
However, these variants have a modest effect in predicting AD and related pathophysiology.
The PRS based on the most recent GWAS have considerably more predictive utility for AD risk
Although AD-PRSs hold promise for understanding how to predict AD, the mechanisms by which the combined effects of the AD SNPs confer susceptibility is relatively unknown.
Imaging genetics is one such approach, which may help reveal the neurobiological mechanisms by which genetic loci confer risk for AD.
Neuroimaging studies have consistently observed both global and local atrophic changes during early stages of AD in the medial temporal lobe (MTL) structures, including the amygdala, hippocampus, entorhinal cortex (ERC), and parahippocampal gyrus
Both the hippocampus and amygdala are key subcortical nodes affected in AD-linked neurodegeneration
Specific hippocampal subfields may be more susceptible to atrophy in those with AD compared with healthy controls; such as the ERC, subiculum, CA1, CA3, dentate gyrus, and CA4
Combining AD-PRS and neuroimaging data may help improve AD detection strategies
Furthermore, recent GWAS studies show that hippocampal and amygdala volumes are also heritable
These regions have also provided utility in anticipating mild cognitive impairment to AD
One preliminary study linked AD-PRS to an increased rate of volume decline in the ERC and the subiculum
In the present study, we determine the association between AD GWAS loci and specific MTL subfields and subnuclei in a large, asymptomatic sample (N ¼ 1109, ages 22À35 years).
We anticipate that AD-PRS will be negatively correlated with these subfield/subnuclei volumes based on prior studies of whole MTL volume
We further aim to determine that polygenic contributions to the amygdala and hippocampus are reliably measured using recent hippocampus and amygdala GWAS as training data

Methods

Magnetic resonance imaging data acquisition
Data were drawn from the March 2017 public data release from the Young Human Connectome Project (YA-HCP) database.
The WU-Minn HCP 1200 Subjects Release (S1200) includes 1109 healthy young adult participants' T1 and T2 structural MR scans, available to download at
Participants were aged 22e35 years for all inclusion/ exclusion criteria
We restricted the HCP to participants who self-reported Caucasian descent to minimize ethnicity differences between the training GWAS and the MRI data samples (see Table
Protocol used a customized Siemens 3T "Connectome Skyra" that increases the maximum gradient strength from 40 mT/m to 100 mT/m with a 32channel head coil and Siemens product (MPRAGE and SPACE) sequences.
To acquire T1-weighed images, the protocol included slice thickness 5.0 mm, TR 2.4 ms, TE 2.14 ms, TI 1000 ms, BW 210 Hz/Px, and flip angle 8 .
T2-weighed image acquisition protocol included TR 3.2 ms, TE 565 ms, BW 744 Hz/Px, and variable flip angles.
Both protocols used 224 Â 224 mm field of view and 0.7 mm isotropic voxel size.
Scan protocol and information on the HCP pedigree/ kinship structure can be found at

Structural MRI preprocessing
The reconstructions of the subcortical volumes were carried out using T1/T2-weighted images in FreeSurfer v6.0 software (
The standard "recon-all-all" processing pipeline in FreeSurfer performed reliable automatic subcortical segmentation
Subsequently, the segmentation of subcortical structures was examined by a nonlinear warping atlas (31), and the volumetric estimates (32) of the following hippocampal subfields for each participant were obtained (see Fig.
The ENIGMA Consortium Quality Control procedure for GWAS Meta-Analysis of Subcortical Volumes (available at
Preprocessed images were repurposed, and a FreeSurfer crosssectional pipeline was used (
The ENIGMA QC procedure excluded 10 participants from statistical analysis due to rank violations.

Genetic quality control and PRS
All YA-HCP data are publicly available, including genome-wide genotype data distributed through the database of Genotypes and Phenotypes.
SNPs were excluded where the minor allele frequency was less than 1% if the call rate was less than 98% or if the c2 test for Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium had a p > 1 Â 10 À4 .
Individuals were excluded for ambiguous sex (genotypic sex and phenotypic sex not aligning) or genotyping completeness less than 97%.
A total of 1,137,480 variants and 1119 individuals were considered for PRS creation.
Participants that did not match the ethnicity of our discovery sample GWAS were excluded from the analysis.
PRS were created using discovery data from 3 GWAS for hippocampal volume
For these GWAS, all SNPs with a low minor allele frequency (<0.01) were excluded.
PRS were created as previously described
Briefly, PRS were calculated using the "score" command in PLINK 2, which averages the number of risk alleles for each index SNP weighted by the beta coefficient for each of the 3 GWAS summary statistic files.
Clumping was applied to ensure that all index SNPs were independent (500 kb, r ¼ 0.1).
SNPs within the entire APOE locus (chromosome 19: 44.4e46.5 Mb) were excluded to minimize association because of variance in APOE.
Due to the complexity of the MHC region between 26 and 33 Mb on chromosome 6, SNPs in this region were also removed.
For each of the 3 models, nine PRS were generated across a broad and comprehensive range of p value thresholds (Escott-
The p thresholds ranged from a conservative (including only GWAS significant SNPs (p < 1 Â 10 À8 ) to all independent SNPs (p ¼ 1.0) at logarithmic increments (p < 1 Â 10 À8 ; p < 1 Â 10 À7 ; p < 1 Â 10 À6 ; p < 1 Â 10 À5 ; p < 1 Â 10 À4 ; p < 1 Â 10 À3 ; p < 1 Â 10 À2 ; p < 1 Â 10 À1 ).
A wide p threshold range was chosen, as AD-PRS have been linked to case-control status and related biomarkers using a range of conservative
Although liberal p thresholds offer more predictive power in predicting case/control differences (Escott-
The number of SNPs in each PRS model can be found in Supplementary Table

Power analysis
Post-hoc analysis was performed using R v3.5.2 with the "pwr.r.test" function
The 2-sided approximate correlation power calculation with the complete imaging sample size (N ¼ 730) at 0.05 a level and power of 80% to identify associations explaining more than 1.07%
variance.
Based on our prior observations between AD-PRS (excluding effects of APOE) and hippocampal volume in young adults and the lowest reported effect size (R 2 ¼ 1.6% Table 1 in a study by

Statistical analysis
All analyses were performed in R v3.6.1.
Linear mixed-effects regression models were used to assess the influence of the PRS models on individual subfields.
As related individuals were included in the sample (excluding half-siblings), a sparse kinship matrix was created to control for the familial structure.
The kinship matrix was included in the LME models using the "lme4qt" package
The AD-PRS and APOE e4 status were included as fixed effects in addition to covariates, including age, sex, years of education (SSAGA_Edu), estimated total intracranial volume (eTIV: sum of the gray matter, white matter, and CSF volumes) and the top 20 principal components derived from the LD pruned data (R 2 ¼ 0.1; 500 kb) to correct for population stratification
After removing participants that did not match the original GWAS sample ethnicity (N ¼ 878), we further removed participants with (1) missing data or (2) were identified as statistical outliers using an outlier labeling rule (see below) for final sample of 730.
Each MRI volumetric measure was further pruned based on an outlier detection protocol using the interquartile range outlier labeling rule (1.5 Â interquartile range [Q3ÀQ1]).
False discovery rate (FDR) was used to control for type I error across the whole experiment across all 414 observations, including all subregions, PRS models, and p thresholds.

Results

Hippocampus and amygdala PRS effects
After FDR correction across all observations, we identified several positive associations between hippocampus PRS and whole hippocampus (p T < 1 Â 10 À7 , b ¼ 0.109, p FDR ¼ 0.014) and specific hippocampal subregions (including CA1, CA4, GC.ML.DG, molecular layer, subiculum).
Furthermore, we identified FDR-corrected positive associations between amygdala PRS and corticoamygdaloid transition zone, anterior amygdaloid area and the lateral nucleus.
Amygdala PRS was positively related to whole amygdala but was not significant after FDR correction (p T < 1 Â 10 À6 ; b ¼ 0.077, p FDR ¼ 0.059).
See Fig.

AD PRS effects
We first provide further evidence for a negative association between AD-PRS and whole hippocampal/amygdala volume.
However, these were not significant after FDR correction (hippocampus: p T < 1 Â 10 À4 ; b ¼ À0.072, p FDR ¼ 0.090, amygdala: p T < 1 Â 10 À5 ; b ¼ À0.073, p FDR ¼ 0.069).
Critically, we observe novel, FDR-corrected associations between AD-PRS and specific hippocampal subfields such as CA1 (p T < 1 Â 10 À4 ; b ¼ À0.096, p FDR ¼ 0.045) and the fissure (p T < 1 Â 10 À5 : b ¼ À0.101, p FDR ¼ 0.041; Fig.
See Table

APOE ε4 effects
A post-hoc analysis of APOE ε4 absence/presence and volume of the 23 regions of interest demonstrated no associations (p > 0.05, in all cases).
A comprehensive analysis (b, standard error of the b and p values, for all subregions) is documented in Supplementary Table

Discussion
We aimed to ascertain the combined role of GWAS-identified SNPs on MTL subvolumes, specifically within the subfields and subnuclei of the hippocampus and amygdala, respectively.
Our first objective was to provide a positive control by establishing reproducible associations between hippocampus and amygdala volumes and their respective PRS.
Our observations show that hippocampus and amygdala PRS are associated with gross volume of these structures in an independent sample.
Furthermore, we provide novel evidence that PRS for both the hippocampus and amygdala may be disproportionally influenced by specific regions within the hippocampal (CA1, CA4, GC.ML.DG, molecular layer , subiculum) and amygdala subregions (corticoamygdaloid transition zone, anterior amygdaloid area and the lateral nucleus).
These observations show that the PRS models hold critical predictive capacity in our experimental sample, suggesting the sample had power to detect the combined effects of GWAS-identified alleles.
However, we observed that different p thresholds yielded mixed predictive capacity, which could be explained by underpowered discovery GWAS, training discovery sample, or methodological differences.
We further observed negative associations between AD-PRS and both whole hippocampal and amygdala volumes at more conservative p thresholds.
This is consistent with prior observations   demonstrating optimal negative associations between AD-PRS (at the p < 0.0001 threshold) in younger
This p threshold could reflect an optimal combination of causal SNPs (less false positives) and power (from polygenic effects).
The association between AD-PRS and the amygdala is also consistent with a recent GWAS of hippocampus and amygdala, showing negative genetic correlations with
More broadly, several studies have linked AD-PRS to variation in brain structure at different points across the lifespan
Our second objective was to quantify the relationship between AD-PRS and hippocampal/amygdala subfields.
Hippocampal atrophy in subregions, such as CA1 and the subiculum, may be indicative markers of future AD-linked decline beyond whole hippocampal volume
After correcting for FDR, we observed the strongest negative associations between AD-PRS and hippocampal subregions were in CA1 and the fissure.
Both CA1 and the fissure have also recently been implicated as AD-vulnerable MTL subregions
Atrophy within CA1 has further been linked to reduced neuronal count
The present study must be interpreted with the following considerations.
First, the spatial resolution provided by the 3T MRI data.
Precise subfield boundary separation is difficult at the resolution achievable within a reasonable scan time at this field strength.
Although each segmentation was statistically and visually checked for segmentation errors, small volume subfields (e.g., the hippocampal amygdala transition area and parasubiculum) or thin regions (e.g., the ML.CG.DL) may be more difficult to resolve/error prone.
We further note that the predictive performance of the positive control PRS (hippocampus/amygdala) was broadly superior in larger subregions.
As the hippocampal/amygdala PRS are derived from whole hippocampal/amygdala volumes, sample variance may be disproportionally accounted for by the larger subregions.
An alternative explanation is that the large subregions are more stable/ less susceptible to artifacts in the segmentation procedure.
We suggest that disproportionate measurement error across subregions could be a technical confound for all MTL segmentation studies and inference regarding smaller subregions should be interpreted with caution.
Second, despite minimizing population effects by excluding non-Caucasian participants and including 20 principal components as covariates, we cannot fully exclude population stratification effects or any residual kinship structure that may influence our results.
We also note that these inferences are restricted to Caucasian populations to match the discovery GWAS used as training data.
We suggest that future transethnic GWAS will be necessary to broaden the generalizability of the inferences and take full advantage of ethnically mixed MRI cohorts, such as HCP.
Third, it is difficult to determine the longitudinal impact of AD-PRS because of the cross-sectional design of this study.
Future studies that assess development/aging will help to understand the impact of AD-PRS on MTL volumetry across the lifespan
However, as our sample is of young adults (aged 22e35 years), we would suggest that accumulated environmental factors linked to reduced MTL structure (e.g., smoking, diabetes
Finally, we also note that pleotropic variants/ shared genetic architecture between AD and cognition may also influence brain volumes such as the hippocampus and amygdala
To conclude, our observations may help to establish processes by which polygenic variation may influence specific nuclei in ADvulnerable MTL volumes.
Future studies investigating biologically informed pathways may further help us to understand how AD biomarkers are influenced by genetic risk
Furthermore, advanced multivariate GWAS may help to establish specific, shared risk loci and biological mechanisms between AD and MTL volumes
Refining AD-PRS and MRI strategies for MTL subregions may help refine preclinical imaging biomarkers for AD risk detection and treatment strategies.

Disclosure statement
The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.



Fig. 1 .
Fig.1.
Sagittal (upper row), coronal (middle row), and axial (lower row) images of the hippocampus and the amygdala subregions performed using FreeSurfer version 6.0 subcortical reconstruction.
AAA, anterior amygdaloid area; GC.ML.DG, granule and molecular cell layer of dentate gyrus; HATA, hippocampal amygdala transition area.



Fig. 2 .
Fig. 2. Positive control results: standardized b coefficients (Y-axis) for (A) hippocampus and (B) amygdala PRS (controlling for demographic and genetic confounds) across a range of p thresholds (X-axis).
*Nominal significance (p UNCORRECTED < 0.05), **Survival for FDR (p FDR < 0.05).



Fig. 3 .
Fig. 3. Standardized b coefficients (Y-axis) for Alzheimer's disease PRS (controlling for demographic and genetic confounds) across a range of p thresholds (X-axis) for (A) hippocampal and (B) amygdala subregions.
*Nominal significance (p UNCORRECTED < 0.05), **Survival for FDR (p FDR < 0.05).


CRediT authorship contribution statement Amy N. Murray: Investigation, Visualization, Writing -review & editing.
Hannah L. Chandler: Writing -original draft, Writingreview & editing, Supervision.
Thomas M. Lancaster: Conceptualization, Methodology, Writing -review & editing, Supervision.



Table 2
Linear mixed model regression results for PRS on hippocampal and amygdala subfields/subnuclei volumes, corrected for genetic and demographic confounds BETA, standardized beta coefficient; FDR, p value corrected for false discovery rate; PRS, polygenic risk score; PT, p threshold; SE, standard error of beta coefficient.