From obesity to Alzheimer's disease through insulin resistance
Alzheimer's disease is one of the most frequent forms of dementia.
It is a progressive neurodegenerative disease, characterized by presence of amyloid plaques and neurofibrillary tangles in the brain.
Obesity is regarded as abnormal fat accumulation with deleterious impact on human health.
There is full scientific evidence that obesity and the metabolic comorbidities (e.g., insulin resistance, hyperglycaemia, and type 2 diabetes) are related to Alzheimer's disease and likely in the causative pathway.
Numerous studies have identified several overlapping neurodegenerative mechanisms, including oxidative stress, mitochondrial dysfunction, and inflammation.
In this review, we present how obesity and the associated lipotoxicity as well as chronic inflammation initiate a state of insulin resistance that in turn, may have a role in causing the characteristic cerebral alterations of AD.
In particular, we focus on the molecular mechanisms linking the obesity-induced impairment in insulin signalling to the upregulation of Aβ aggregation, tau hyper-phosphorylation, inflammation, oxidative stress and mitochondrial dysfunction.

Introduction
Obesity is a multifactorial disorder of the energy balance and it is one of the most important risk factors for the development of various metabolic diseases, such as type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2D), cardiovascular diseases and neurodegenerative disorders.
2]
besity-induced insulin resistance is also linked to a wide cluster of impairments, such as dyslipidemia, non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD), hypertension coronary heart disease, stroke and neurodegeneration.
7]
ndeed, individuals with inadequately controlled T2D show higher rates of cognitive impairment
oreover, various forms of metabolic disorders including pre-diabetes,
So far, the detailed mechanisms linking obesity to AD remain unclear.
Although various factors have been suggested,
ndeed, insulin plays an important role in maintaining cognitive functions, as suggested by its high levels in brain and by high expression of its receptors in brain regions involved in memory and learning.
Alterations in the concentration of insulin and insulin receptors in the brain have been reported in AD, leading to consider AD as brain diabetes or "Type 3 diabetes".
1] Anyway, the progression from T2D to AD is inadequately understood, although there are various hypotheses about the cause and link between the two diseases.
he present review aims to provide a broad summary of the common factors relating to obesity, T2D and AD, focusing on how insulin resistance may have a role in causing the characteristic cerebral alterations of AD.
To this purpose we have focused our attention on the studies that using C57BL/6 J mice, an animal model widespread to analyze metabolic dysfunctions occurring in diet-induced obesity, and so considered a potential model of sporadic Alzheimer's disease.
Furthermore, studies using various transgenic mouse model of AD, in which an impaired insulin signalling was induced by HFD, were also paid attention.

Hallmarks in AD
AD is a neurodegenerative disease and the most common form of dementia accounting for about 80% of all dementias.
The neurodegenerative diseases are generally characterized by cellular accumulation of misfolded proteins, production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) due to mitochondrial dysfunction, and disruption of the autophagy machinery in neuronal cells.
Conventional mechanisms of neurodegeneration in patients with AD include β-amyloid (Aβ) plaque accumulation and tau protein neurofibrillary tangle formation in the brain.
In AD, irreversible neurodegeneration causes severe damage to the cerebral tissue and reduction in the size of the brain, leading to dementia and other behavioural problems.
The formation of hydrophobic Aβ peptide in the extracellular space results from a double proteolytic cleavage of the amyloid precursor protein (APP), an integral protein of synaptic membrane in the central neurons.
Multiple alternative pathways exist for APP proteolysis, some of which lead to generation of the Aβ peptide.
Crucial steps in APP processing occur at the cell surface and in the trans-Golgi network (TGN).
APP is a trans-membrane protein, that may be degraded in the cellular surface by α-secretase and then by γ-secretase, failing to generate Aβ.
Alternatively, APP may be internalized into an endosomal compartment, where β-secretase (BACE1) and γ-secretase produce Aβ, which may be further degraded or reversed into the extracellular compartment.
Physiological concentrations of the Aβ soluble form have a crucial role in the neuronal growth and survival.
Anyway, an imbalance in production and/or degradation of insoluble Aβ peptides, with 40-42 amino acids in length and 4.2 kDa in size, leads to its accumulation and polymerization, creating plaques that are detrimental to the cell.
nother conventional mechanism for neuronal damage in AD is the formation of neurofibrillary tangles, due to the aggregation of tau protein in the cytoplasm caused by its misfolding after hyperphosphorylation. Tau protein is involved mainly in the maintaining the microtubule assembly in axons of the central nervous system.
In dendrites, it is engaged in signalling functions.
In pathological conditions, tau protein is redistributed from neuronal processes to the soma, producing toxic oligomers or accumulation of hyperphosphorylated tau.
Dysfunction of tau protein may lead to failure in intraneuronal signalling with impairment of synaptic transmission.
In patients with AD, aggregates of tau protein do not undergo degradation by autophagy, leading to continuous accumulation of this protein.
The deposition of tau protein may cause oxidative stress and production of ROS by the mitochondria resulting in the activation of apoptotic signals that in turn leads to an enhancement of neuronal cell death.
Degeneration of neurons induces loss of synaptic connections, which can be crucial for memory retention.
Consequently, the most common symptoms of AD patients are confusion, inability to speak, write, read and think.
Numerous scientific evidences have clarified that in the pathogenesis of AD, in addition to a genetic predisposition, are involved external factors including overweight, obesity, diabetes and insulin resistance.
Hence, AD has been recapturing the attention of neuroscientists as a possible complication of defective glucose metabolism.

Insulin in the brain
Insulin is a vital hormone because insulin absence or excess is lethal in humans.
Insulin reduces blood glucose by inducing glucose uptake in insulin-sensitive tissues (adipose tissue, skeletal muscle) and by inhibiting glucose production in liver.
Its introduction into clinical usage in the early 1920s was designed to replace the insulin lacking in type 1 diabetes, but its use soon revealed confounding paradoxes that engage the field to this day.
For example, already in 1927 Sweeney and collaborators found that human subjects fed high-fat diets became extraordinarily glucose intolerant.
Subsequently, in 1940, Himsworth et al. found that insulin was ineffective in disposing a glucose load in obese subjects and they classified diabetes as two types: "insulin sensitive" vs "insulin insensitive".
This insight explained a related paradox, discovered in the 1960s via radioimmunoassay, that circulating insulin was sometimes elevated rather than decreased in obese subjects with mild diabetes.
At this stage, pancreatic islets are not yet damaged and respond to blood glucose elevated levels by insulin over-secretion, resulting in their hypertrophy and necrosis.
Therefore, the peripheral tissue resistance to the actions of insulin may be caused by over nutrition and obesity.
The impairment in the glucose-lowering response to insulin in human and rodent obesity reflects decreased insulin sensitivity in different organs and tissues: liver, muscular, adipose tissue and brain.
In the liver, insulin loses its full ability to inhibit glucose output through the glycogenolysis and the gluconeogenesis, while in muscle and adipose tissue the insulin-stimulated glucose uptake and utilization are impaired.
lucose represents the main energy source in the cerebral neurons; however, its uptake into the cell is not dependent on insulin, because of the presence of GLUT3, an insulin-independent glucose transporter.
evertheless, insulin is a crucial player in neurons, particularly in the synapsis, where insulin receptors are highly expressed in presynaptic terminals as well in postsynaptic elements.
Briefly, insulin increases axon outgrowth, it modulates the trafficking of ligand-gated ion channels; it regulates the expression and localization of multiple receptors and catecholamine release and uptake.
Interestingly, insulin is involved in the synaptic plasticity (long-term potentiation and long-term depression) via phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) and protein kinase B (PKB, known as AKT) signalling.
Furthermore, insulin plays a key role in the excitatory synapses, by promoting dendritic spine formation.
Moreover, insulin supports neuronal survival by inhibiting apoptosis.
Insulin concentration in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) is related to the plasma levels, suggesting that insulin in the brain originates from pancreatic insulin.
Indeed, some studies provided evidence for a de novo insulin synthesis in the brain.
Insulin mRNA transcripts have been found in human hippocampus and hypothalamus.
CSF insulin concentration is reduced in conditions of peripheral insulin resistance.
evertheless, insulin can cross the blood-brain barrier (BBB) via a carrier-mediated transport.
Different factors, including obesity, circulating triglycerides, inflammation, hyperglycemia, and diabetes mellitus, can be responsible for a molecular reorganization of the insulin transport system at the BBB, affecting thus the insulin transport.
herefore, the insulin brain synthesis and sensitivity suggests that the hormone plays an important role also in the cerebral functions, and consequently, the absence of insulin can cause a significant impact on the brain activity.
Therefore, the reduced insulin sensitivity causes damage also to neuronal homeostasis.

From obesity to insulin resistance
At least three distinct mechanisms have been proposed to link obesity to systemic and central insulin resistance: 1) ectopic fat deposition, particularly in the liver, skeletal muscle, heart and brain; 2) increased production of adipokines/cytokines; and 3) mitochondrial dysfunction.
Although there is no theory for a unifying mechanism, most of these factors are typically and concomitantly associated with obesity.

Adipose tissue and ectopic fat deposition
In physiological conditions, adipocytes are responsive to insulin, that stimulates glucose uptake and transcription of mRNAs involved in de novo lipogenesis.
On the contrary, the lipolytic activity is inhibited by insulin.
These combined effects induce lipid accumulation in large lipid droplets.
In obesity conditions, the adipose tissue becomes hypertrophic, with enlarged size of mature adipocytes and it undergoes hyperplasia with increase in the number of cells, until the ability of adipose tissue to buffer excess triglycerides becomes limited.
As result, the fatty acids are stored elsewhere, in particular in muscles, liver and brain, inducing insulin resistance in those tissues.
This ectopic deposition of fat is also commonly defined as "lipotoxicity" because it induces synthesis of complex lipids such as ceramides and cholesterol esters, that when released into the circulation at high concentration became toxic circulating fatty acids and cause endoplasmic reticulum stress, inflammation as well as cardiomyopathy, nephropathy, retinopathy, atherosclerosis, endothelial dysfunction, and neuropathy.
n obese people with dysfunctional adipose tissue, the liver would be directly exposed to high levels of toxic free fatty acids and inflammatory factors released from visceral adipose tissue into the portal circulation (portal hypothesis).
Lipids accumulate in the cytoplasm of hepatocytes altering hepatic multiple metabolic pathways (e.g., de novo lipogenesis, fatty acid uptake, fatty acid oxidation, and triacylglycerol export).
he relative imbalance between the metabolic pathways lead to intermediate toxic lipid synthesis (e.g., DAG and ceramides) and hepatic insulin resistance.
In particular, DAG is a key mediator of lipid-induced hepatic insulin resistance.
Increased DAG content in human liver is strongly correlated with hepatic insulin resistance.
DAG activates protein kinase C ε (PKCε), which phosphorylates and inhibits the insulin receptor, resulting in reduced insulin receptor substrate 2 tyrosine phosphorylation and in the inability of insulin of activating hepatic glycogen synthesis and of suppressing hepatic glucose production.
Similarly, to the liver, the accumulation of intracellular fatty acids in muscular tissue is correlated positively with the decrease in muscular tissue sensitivity to insulin.
Increased levels of muscular ceramides have been reported in obese individuals in association with skeletal muscle insulin resistance.
Diacylglycerols and ceramides can activate PKCε in lipid over-supply conditions.
PKCε phosphorylates IRS1 on serine residues impairing activation of PI3K and insulin signalling in skeletal muscle.
The myocardium, that usually maintains a balance between glucose and lipids as nutrient source, in obesity conditions, shifts the substrate utilization from glucose to lipids with consequent ATP production almost exclusively by fatty acid oxidation.
The increased fatty acid oxidation leads to myocardial insulin resistance and subsequent damage to heart.
The transmembrane transport of circulating fat acid into cardiomyocytes is a key step in lipotoxicity damage to the myocardium.
Notably, at the level of cardiomyocytes, there is abundance of CD36, the predominant sarcolemma lipid transporter.
In the healthy heart, CD36 stimulates long chain fatty acid uptake via reversible translocation from the endosomes to the sarcolemma.
Upon longterm overexposure of the heart to lipids, CD36 chronically translocates to the sarcolemma, initiating a vicious cycle of increased lipid uptake and lipid-induced insulin resistance, leading to cardiac dysfunction.
n addition, the central nervous system is adversely affected by elevated levels of circulating free fatty acids and by dyslipidaemia.
lasma fatty acids can cross the BBB and infiltrate into the CSF.
enerally, CSF fatty acids depend on plasma fatty acid levels.
Studies using positron emission tomography found that patients with metabolic syndrome have increased brain fat acid uptake when compared with healthy subjects.
However, fatty acids are not used as metabolic substrate but they accumulate as long chain-acyl CoA esters DAG and ceramides, causing central lipotoxicity.
Central lipotoxicity has been shown to be deleterious for the hypothalamic control of glucose homeostasis.
Pocai et al. showed that the restoration of central hypothalamic fat acid metabolism normalizes energy and glucose homeostasis in overfed rats.
In lean animals, the intracerebroventricular infusion of palmitate causes both inflammation (as verified by IKKβ activation) and insulin resistance (as verified by reduced PI3K signalling) in the hypothalamus.
Moreover, the levels of DAG resulted elevated in the hypothalamus of HFD mice suggesting a possible role in the etiology of central nervous system insulin resistance.
In an in vitro study, hypothalamic GT1-7 neuronal cells treated with palmitate showed impaired insulin signalling because the palmitate activates several enzymes of the de novo ceramide synthesis.
On the contrary, in obese Zucker rats, the hypothalamic insulin-sensitivity is improved by infusion of myriocin, that attenuates the increase in levels of hypothalamic ceramides.
herefore, the hypothalamic de novo ceramide synthesis plays a key role in central insulin resistance development and glucose homeostasis dysregulation associated with obesity.

Increased production of inflammatory adipokines and cytokines
The hypertrophy characterizing the adipose tissue in obesity condition induces rupturing of adipocytes, increased infiltration of inflammatory cells, such as macrophages and T lymphocytes, and alteration in the adipokine production.
Indeed, there is a strong correlation between adipocyte size and death.
When the adipocytes die, proinflammatory macrophages surround dead cells in order remove debris from the damaged area.
In obesity, macrophages change in number, location and phenotype.
While in the normal weight subjects, the macrophages show anti-inflammatory properties, in obese adipose tissue macrophages shifts to a pro-inflammatory phenotype, producing inflammatory cytokines.
Increased production of cytokines induces adipose tissue inflammation; then, cytokines pass to the circulation inducing systemic inflammatory status that becomes chronic and leads to impairment of adipocyte insulin signalling.
he first evidence of an association between inflammation and insulin resistance has been provided when an improvement in glucose homeostasis has been observed in T2D patients, in response to administration of anti-inflammatory agents.
Subsequently, Hotamisligil et al.
the secretion of monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1) and macrophage migration inhibitory factor (MIF), and cytokines, such as interleukin (IL)-6, TNF-α, and IL-1β, draw immune cells into adipose tissue, leading to the activation of several protein kinases, including c-Jun N-terminal kinases (JNK) and IκB kinase (IKK).
These kinases inhibit insulin action through the phosphorylation of serine residues of the insulin signalling, including insulin receptor substrate-1 (IRS-1).
In addition to metabolic derangement in peripheral organs, obesityrelated inflammatory changes perturb brain homeostasis.
Proinflammatory cytokines have been shown to cross BBB and dietinduced obesity causes activation of inflammatory pathways in the hypothalamus.
Central inflammation is also likely exacerbated by damage to the BBB, followed by the entry of immune cells into the brain.
Moreover, fatty acids can bind to Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) and activate the IKKβ/nuclear factor kappa-light-chain-enhancer of activated B cells (NF-κB) pathway, and enhance the expression of TNFα, IL-1β, and IL-6 in the hypothalamus.
Indeed, over the last years, brain inflammation has emerged as a contributor to obesity-associated central insulin resistance.
Zhang et al. showed that brain-specific activation of IKKβ results in increase in the food intake and in the body weight due to impairment of central insulin and leptin signalling.
Furthermore, activation of NF-κB induces expression of suppressor of cytokine signalling 3 (SOCS3), which subsequently inhibits neuronal insulin signalling.
Moreover, conditional JNK1 knockout specifically in the brain, but not in other tissues, leads to protection against insulin resistance, hyperinsulinemia, and glucose intolerance.
Collectively, multiple inflammatory pathways are rapidly activated during HFD-feeding and promote the development of neuronal insulin resistance.

Mitochondrial dysfunction
The term "mitochondrial dysfunction" refers to any abnormality in the physiology of mitochondria, including ATP generation, formation and detoxification of ROS, apoptosis, calcium regulation, synthesis and catabolism of metabolites, displacement of the organelles themselves.
Usually, mitochondrial dysfunction is assessed by changes in mitochondrial number, size, and shape, altered substrate oxidation and ROS production.
ROS, in turn, may damage various mitochondrial and cellular components, potentially resulting in the removal of mitochondria (mitophagy).
itochondrial dysfunction is emerged as a key event in the alterations that follow nutrient overload.
A reduction in number and function of mitochondria has been documented in obese patients and animals compared to lean subjects.
In fact, the excessive intake of nutrients overloads the mitochondria with fatty acids and glucose, leading to an increase in the production of acetyl-CoA and consequently of NADH.
NADH promotes an increase in electron formation and subsequently in ROS, leading to cell oxidative stress.
nother possible cause of obesity-related mitochondrial dysfunction could be represented by alteration of the sites of physical communication between endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and mitochondria, that is defined as mitochondria associated ER membranes (MAMs).
MAMs are important for mitochondrial dynamics.
Obesity induces an abnormal increase in MAM formation, with consequent increased calcium flux from the ER to mitochondria.
The mitochondrial calcium overload, in turn, is accompanied by increased mitochondrial ROS production and impairment of metabolic homeostasis.
Numerous studies have established the association between mitochondrial dysfunction and insulin resistance in various tissues, such as skeletal muscle and adipose tissue.
1]
Metabolic disorders accompanying obesity induce mitochondria dysfunction also in the central neurons.
In fact, in obese rats there is an increase in the size of brain mitochondria and ROS production.
Ma and collaborators
The induction of oxidative stress and ROS production could be due to an increase in the levels of brain ceramides, that intensify the activity of caspase-3 and caspase-8 via reduced insulin signalling and increased inflammation.
bese Zucker rats with impaired glucose sensing in the hypothalamus show an abnormal redox signalling that originates from the mitochondrial function.
In primary cortical neurons, the mitochondrial dysfunction, induced by hyperglycaemia condition, impairs the AMPK-AKT pathway, contributing to insulin resistance.
Moreover, some studies have shown that the improvement of mitochondrial dysfunction, by pharmacological treatment, ameliorates also central insulin resistance.
Specifically, ZiBu PiYin Recipe (ZBPYR), a promising therapeutic Chinese medicine that can affects the mitochondrial function, prevents the mitochondrial ultra-structural and numeric alterations, it strengthens insulin signalling, and it inhibits GSK3β over-expression in prefrontal cortex and hippocampus of diabetic rats.
The coadministration of dipeptidyl peptidase-4 inhibitor and sodium-glucose co-transporter 2 inhibitor improves obese rat brain function via attenuating central mitochondrial dysfunction and insulin resistance.
ifferent studies have focused on mechanisms linking mitochondrial dysfunction with impaired central glucose metabolism.
Selective deletion of Mitofusins 1 (Mfn1), outer membrane protein involved in the mitochondrial fusion, in arcuate pro-opiomelanocortin (POMC) neurons, leads to mitochondrial morpho-functional alterations and abnormal glucose homeostasis.
Moreover, the Mfn1 deletion in POMC neurons causes defective pancreatic insulin release.
Other results suggest that damage to mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) may be an important trigger for insulin resistance.
Mitochondrial DNA is highly specialized and it encodes for key proteins for energy metabolism.
Indeed, depletion of mtDNA, under conditions of increased oxidative stress, impairs glucose utilization and it induces insulin resistance in skeletal muscle.
Consistent with this hypothesis, obese T2D patients have significantly increased mtDNA damage in skeletal muscle.
owever, mitochondrial oxidants can affect insulin action through protein oxidation.
Mitochondrial oxidants have been shown to inhibit insulin-stimulated GLUT4 translocation and glucose uptake in adipocytes and myocytes both in vitro and in vivo, without affecting the canonical insulin signalling, suggesting a protein oxidation of GLUT4 trafficking machinery.

From insulin resistance to AD
AD is characterized by progressive memory loss, cognitive decline and behavioural symptoms, such as agitation, depression and anxiety.
The dementia in AD is associated with neurodegeneration, characterized by initial synaptic injury followed by neuronal loss.
Firstly, AD affects brain medial temporal and orbitofrontal regions, including the hippocampus, involved in learning and memory.
Over time, neurodegeneration worsens, with progressive damage in other cerebral regions.
Neurodegeneration induces atrophy of cortical and medial temporal structures consisting in loss of neurons and synaptic terminals.
It is characterized by neuro-inflammation, astrocytosis, microvascular impairment, cytoskeletal lesions due to hyper-phosphorylated tau protein, formation of Aβ plaques and increased ubiquitin immunoreactivity.
Numerous studies have suggested that insulin resistance is also developed in the brains of AD patients, supporting the hypothesis that insulin resistance is involved in the physiopathological mechanism of AD.
Intranasal administration of insulin improves memory and cognitive functions in healthy elderly individuals and in patients with T2D, mild cognitive impairment and AD.
0]
A PET neuroimaging study demonstrated the association between insulin resistance and Aβ accumulation in the brains of middleaged adults.
owever, molecular mechanisms of "brain insulin resistance" have long remained unclear.
They could either be due to an impairment in the neuronal response to extracellular insulin or defective transport of blood insulin into the brain.
Anyway, hypothesis has been advanced that with age, decrease in insulin receptors and increased requirement of metabolic energy put areas like hippocampus at risk for insulin resistance that is quintessential to AD.
Induction of insulin resistance and related T2D by feeding a HFD increases Aβ production and plaque deposition in the brains of transgenic Tg2576 mice 106 and in the parieto-temporal cortex homogenates from triple transgenic (3xTg-AD) mice.
Furthermore, absence of insulin receptors in the brain of animal model enhances tau hyperphosphorylation.
o far, an open question concerns the consequences of reduced insulin signalling on AD pathophysiology.
Indeed, insulin resistance could influence the casual mechanisms of AD in different manners (Table
A) Insulin resistance causes reduced activation of AKT, a protein involved in various cellular processes, including GSK3β inhibition, an enzyme that phosphorylates tau.
Therefore, in conditions of insulin resistance, the GSK3β activation is increased leading to hyperphosphorylation of tau protein
The interaction of AGEs with the receptor, named Receptor for Advanced Glycation Endproducts (RAGE), elicits the ROS formation, retained an early event in AD pathology.
Specifically, pentosidine and glyceraldehydes-derived pyridinium (GLAP) are accumulated in the diabetic brain and they upregulate the expression of β-site APP cleaving enzyme 1 (BACE1), enzyme responsible for the generation of Aβ, via RAGE binding and consequent activation of NF-κB.
AGEs upregulate also the expression of RAGE, which is also a putative receptor for Aβ.
he RAGE expression increases in several cell types in the AD brain, including microglia 114 and astroglia.
Overexpression of RAGE in transgenic AD mice enhances the proinflammatory cytokine and it accelerates the cognitive decline 116 ; D) Protein misfolding, oxidative stress, and inflammation are some sharing mechanisms, detected in the brain of AD patients and diabetic subjects.
In fact, a reduction of insulin cascade causes a decrease in glucose cellular uptake; thus, the neuronal cell is more susceptible to stress.
Moreover, glucolipotoxicity is known to cause oxidative stress and mitochondrial injury 119 ; E) Mitochondrial dysfunction is another common mechanism among obesity, diabetes, and neurodegeneration.
Oxidative stress and mitochondrial dysfunction have been extensively reported in AD, diabetes, and obesity both in patients and animal models.
Mitochondrial injury triggers formation of inflammasome, 120 a multi-protein cytosolic complex, produced by cellular damage, infection, and metabolic deregulation, leading to activation of caspase-1 and secretion of the cytokines IL-1β and IL-18, and then apoptotic and pyroptotic cell death.
The formation of sterile inflammasome in response to cellular stress induces neuronal injury 122 ; F) One of the AD brain abnormalities, recently studied, that can be linked to insulin resistance, is the down-regulation of peroxisome proliferator activator receptor (PPAR)-γ.
PPAR-γ mediates insulin actions in the brain, as demonstrated by the neuroprotective responses observed in humans with AD, 124 and in Tg2576 and 3xTg-AD genetic mouse models of AD.
Consequently, PPARγ could represent a key therapeutic target in AD, as supported by experimental evidence.
Insulin sensitizer, PPARγ agonist's thiazolidinediones (TZDs), is a key player in AD patients with associated insulin deregulation.
In AD animal model, an extract of malva parviflora ameliorated the HFD harmful effects on the cognitive performance by restoring the microglia function via a PPAR-γ-dependent mechanism.
A dual targeting of PPAR-δ and PPAR-γ increased indices of neuronal and myelin maturation, mitochondrial proliferation and function, and decreased neuroinflammation, AβPP-Aβ, neurotoxicity, ubiquitin, and nitrosative stress in frontal lobe cultures from an intracerebral Streptozotocin rat model of AD.
As well as Magnolol, a natural PPAR-γ agonist with potent binding affinities, alleviates Alzheimer's disease-like pathology in transgenic C. elegans by promoting microglia phagocytosis and the degradation of beta-amyloid 131 ; G) Another interesting link between brain hampered glucose metabolism and AD pathology is represented by the post-translational modification O-linked β-N-acetylglucosaminylation (O-GlcNAcylation).
Clinical and experimental evidence point out a downregulation of O-GlcNAcylation during the pathological course of AD, in part due to impairment in brain glucose metabolism.
Importantly, hypo-O-GlcNAcylation is associated with the development of AD phenotype being correlated with abnormal Aβ generation and tau hyperphosphorylation.
Decreased O-GlcNAcylation of APP and Tau in turn is associated to an increase in the phosphorylation responsible for Aβ plaque formation and Tau aggregation.

Conclusions
Traditionally, obesity, T2D and AD were thought to be independent disorders.
However, different clinical and pre-clinical studies have shown that obesity, T2D and AD share common pathological mechanisms.
Both obesity and T2D are able to act as cofactors in AD development.
Adipose tissue remodelling and lipotoxicity, inflammation and altered mitochondrial functions emerge in all these diseases.
Interestingly, a common key factor in these pathological conditions is the impairment in insulin signalling, that can be responsible for significant upregulation of Aβ aggregation, tau hyperphosphorylation, inflammation, oxidative stress and mitochondrial dysfunction.
Indeed, nearly all pathological hallmarks in AD, including β amyloid plaques and phosphotau tangles, loss of neuronal plasticity, neuronal degeneration and atrophy as well neuro-inflammation and cellular stress, can be ascribed to insulin signalling impairment.
However, more detailed knowledge on the chronic neurodegenerative pathological mechanisms associated with obesity and diabetes might be helpful for the development of diagnostic and therapeutic agents able to delay cognitive decline and to improve the quality of life.



Fig. 1 .
Fig. 1.
Overview of different mechanisms linking obesity, central insulin resistance and AD.
The deregulation of insulin signalling caused by lipotoxicity and inflammatory cytokines from visceral adipose tissue increases GSK-3β phosphorylation resulting in neurofibrillary tangle formation and neuronal death and increases Aβ production.
Hyperglycaemia results in brain AGE accumulation and consequent oxidative stress, mitochondrial dysfunction and inflammation.
PPAR-γ downregulation in absence of insulin signalling leads to reduction in the expression of various neuroprotective genes.
Downregulation of O-GlcNAcylation due to impairment in brain glucose metabolism results in Aβ generation and tau hyperphosphorylation.



Table 1
Different mechanisms by which insulin resistance (IR) influences AD pathophysiology.