In-vitro and in-vivo characterization of CRANAD-2 for multi-spectral optoacoustic tomography and fluorescence imaging of amyloid-beta deposits in Alzheimer mice
The abnormal deposition of fibrillar beta-amyloid (Aβ) deposits in the brain is one of the major histopathological hallmarks of Alzheimer's disease (AD).
Here, we characterized curcumin-derivative CRANAD-2 for multi-spectral optoacoustic tomography and fluorescence imaging of brain Aβ deposits in the arcAβ mouse model of AD cerebral amyloidosis.
CRANAD-2 showed a specific and quantitative detection of Aβ fibrils in vitro, even in complex mixtures, and it is capable of distinguishing between monomeric and fibrillar forms of Aβ.
In vivo epifluorescence microscopy and optoacoustic tomography after intravenous CRANAD-2 administration demonstrated higher cortical retention in arcAβ compared to non-transgenic littermate mice.
Immunohistochemistry showed co-localization of CRANAD-2 and Aβ deposits in arcAβ mouse brain sections, thus verifying the specificity of the probe.
In conclusion, we demonstrate suitability of CRANAD-2 for optical detection of Aβ deposits in animal models of AD pathology, which facilitates mechanistic studies and the monitoring of putative treatments targeting Aβ deposits.

Introduction
The abnormal acculumation and the spread of amyloid-beta (Aβ) deposits play a central role in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease (AD) and leads to downstream pathophysiological events
Positron emission tomography (PET) imaging of aberrant Aβ deposits has been established as a diagnostic pathological biomarker for AD under clinical setting and been included in the new diagnostic criteria
Three amyloid imaging probes have been approved for clinical usage including 18 F-florbetapir
Higher PET imaging of cortical Aβ loads were reported in the brains from patients with AD and mild cognitive impairment compared to healthy controls
While PET imaging in small rodents has been used for studying Aβ-related disease mechanisms and for developing therapeutic strategies
Optical imaging techniques such as near-infrared fluorescence (NIRF) imaging and multi-spectral optoacoustic tomography (MSOT) imaging have emerged, enabling the in vivo imaging of physiological, metabolic and molecular function
This is mainly due to the fact that optical techniques are cost-effective, do not require an extensive infrastructure and use stable labels that allow validation of imaging findings with histology.
Progress is made not only in the development of optical instrumentation and reconstruction algorithms, but also in the design and synthesis of novel Aβ imaging probes
For example, several probes have been reported for NIRF imaging including NIAD-4
NIRF imaging of Aβ deposits has been shown using a variety of AD mouse models
Despite its advantages, the diffuse nature of light propagation in highly scattering tissue prevents the accurate determination of probe distribution and concentration from NIRF measurements.
As an inherent hybrid method, MSOT imaging capitalizes on absorption of light as a source of contrast, while emitted non-radioactive decay broadband ultrasound is used for image formation, thus combining the high sensitivity of optical imaging with the high spatial resolution of ultrasound imaging.
Recently, volumetric multispectral optoacoustic tomography (vMSOT) has been introduced with added multiplexing and real-time 3D imaging capabilities, thus enabling a wide range of new biomedical applications
Previously, intravital optoacoustic imaging of Aβ deposits with intrathecal injection of Congo Red
In the present study, we show that CRANAD-2, previously used for NIRF imaging
Capitalizing on the fluorescent properties we characterized binding of the probe to Aβ fibrils in vitro using a fluorescence binding assays, in situ with tissue sections and immunohistochemistry and by cross-validation between MSOT and hybrid fluorescence imaging
Our results demonstrate suitability of CRANAD-2 for NIRF and MSOT imaging of Aβ deposits.

Materials and methods

Animal model
Seven transgenic arcAβ mice overexpressing the human APP695 transgene containing the Swedish (K670N/M671L) and Arctic (E693G) mutations under the control of prion protein promoter and five agematched non-transgenic littermates of both sexes were used (18-24 months-of-age)
ArcAβ mice are characterized by a pronounced amyloid deposition, cerebral amyloid angiopathy and vascular dysfunction
Animals were housed in ventilated cages inside a temperature-controlled room, under a 12 -h dark/light cycle.
Pelleted food (3437PXL15, CARGILL) and water were provided ad-libitum.
Paper tissue and red Tecniplast mouse house® (Tecniplast, Milan, Italy) shelters were placed in cages as environmental enrichments.
All experiments were performed in accordance with the Swiss Federal Act on Animal Protection and were approved by the Cantonal Veterinary Office Zurich (permit number: ZH082/18).
The emission spectrum and excitation spectrum were measured by using F-4500 FL Spectrophotometer using CRANAD-2 25 μM in phosphate buffered saline (PBS, pH 7.4).
For the measurement of emission spectrum, the excitation is set at 640 nm, emission wavelengths were recorded between 680-900 nm.
For the measurement of excitation spectrum, the emission is set at 820 nm, excitation wavelengths were measured between 500-750 nm.
Recombinant Aβ 1-42 peptides were expressed in E.coli as described previously
Aβ 1-42 fibrils were formed by incubating a solution of freshly purified 2 μM Aβ 1-42 monomers in phosphate buffer (20 mM sodium phosphate, 0.2 mM ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid, pH 8.0).
The aggregation process was monitored by a quantitative fluorescence assay based on the Thioflavin T (ThT) dye
CRANAD-2 stock was dissolved in dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO, Sigma-Aldrich AG).
The in vitro binding between CRANAD-2 (0.1 μM) or ThT (20 μM) with Aβ 1-42 fibrils (0-0.2 μM) was measured on a spectrofluorometer (Fluoromax-4, HORIBA Jobin Yvon Technologies, Japan) by recording the emission spectra in the range from 660 nm to 800 nm after excitation at 640 nm, or in the range from 450 nm to 650 nm respectively after the excitation at 440 nm.
The lower concentration of CRANAD-2 was selected to avoid precipitation.
To investigate whether CRANAD-2 binds selectively Aβ 1-42 fibrils, we assessed the binding of CRANAD-2 (0.1 μM) and ThT (20 μM) to other targets that are rich in β-sheet structures including bovine serum albumin, monoclonal antibody, and amyloids formed by lysozyme, α-synuclein and insulin, all at 0.2 μM.
Moreover, we assessed whether CRANAD-2 can distinguish between different conformations of Aβ by measuring binding also to Aβ 1-42 monomers.
Finally, the specificity of CRANAD-2 for Aβ 1-42 fibrils was further evaluated by measuring the binding between the probe and Aβ 1-42 fibrils (0-0.2 μM) spiked in a cell lysate obtained from E.coli with a total protein concentration of 7 μM.

In vitro binding between amyloid probes and recombinant Aβ 1-42 fibrils measured by spectrofluorometer

MSOT
Cross-sectional MSOT imaging was performed with a commercial inVision 128 small animal scanner (iThera Medical, Germany) as described
Briefly, a tunable (680-980 nm) optical parametric oscillator pumped by an Nd:YAG laser provides 9 ns excitation pulses at a framerate of 10 Hz with a wavelength tuning speed of 10 ms and a peak pulse energy of 100 mJ at 730 nm.
Ten arms, each containing an optical fiber bundle, provide even illumination of a ring-shaped light strip with a width of approx.
8 mm.
For ultrasound detection, 128 cylindrically focused ultrasound transducers with a center frequency of 5 MHz (60 % bandwidth), organized in a concave array of 270 • angular coverage and a curvature radius of 4 cm, were used.
Phantom and in vivo MSOT images were acquired at 10 wavelengths, i.e. 680, 685, 690, 695, 700, 715, 730, 760, 800 and 850 nm, coronal section, averages = 10, field-of-view = 20 mm × 20 mm, resolution = 100 μm × 100 μm, a step size = 0.3 mm moving along the axial direction.
For in vivo MSOT, five arcAβ mice and four non-transgenic littermates were imaged with MSOT in vivo.
Mice underwent also magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) for co-registration with MSOT data and to facilitate volume-of-interest (VOI) analysis.
Mice were anesthetized with an initial dose of 4 % isoflurane (Abbott, Cham, Switzerland) in oxygen/ air (200/800 mL/min) mixture and were maintained at 1.5 % isoflurane in oxygen/air (100/400 mL/min).
The fur over the head was depilated.
The mouse was placed in a mouse holder in prone position.
The holder was inserted in an imaging chamber filled with water to keep body temperature within 36.5 ± 0.5 • C. Mice were injected intravenously with CRANAD-2 (2.0 mg/kg, 15 % DMSO + 70 % PBS pH 7.4 + 15 % Kolliphor EL, Sigma-Aldrich AG) through the tail vein.
Datasets were recorded before, 20, 40, 60, 90, and 120 min after the injection.
MSOT images were reconstructed using a model-based algorithm, size 20 mm, resolution 100 μm, and filter range from 50 kHz to 7 MHz.
The model-based reconstruction incorporates a detailed model of detection geometry that allows for more quantifiable images.

Hybrid vMSOT-fluorescence imaging
A hybrid vMSOT-fluorescence imaging system
The MSOT system acquired 2D planar images (with 0.3 mm gap between each scan), with the acquisition window (20 mm × 20 mm) moving along the rostral to caudal axis of the mouse brain.
VMSOT obtained 3D volumetric images with fixed positioning of the mice.
A short-pulsed (<10 ns) laser was used to provide an approximately uniform illumination profile on the mouse brain surface with optical fluence < 20 mJ/cm 2 .
The excited OA responses were collected with a custom-made spherical array (Imasonic SaS, Voray, France) of 512 ultrasound detection elements with 7 MHz central frequency and > 80 % bandwidth.
A custom-made optical fiber bundle (Ceramoptec GmbH, Bonn, Germany) with 4 outputs was used for guiding the laser beam from multiple angles through the lateral apertures of the array.
The detected signals were digitized at 40 megasamples per second with a custom-made data acquisition system (DAQ, Falkenstein Mikrosysteme GmbH, Taufkirchen, Germany) triggered with the Q-switch output of the laser.
The pulse repetition frequency of the laser was set to 100 Hz and the laser wavelength tuned between 660 and 850 nm (10 nm step) on a per pulse basis.
For the concurrent 2D epi-fluorescence imaging
The generated fluorescence field was collected by a fiberscopic imaging fiber bundle comprised of 100,000 fibers and then projected onto an EMCCD camera (Andor Luca R, Oxford Instruments, UK).
The fiberscope was inserted into the central aperture of the spherical array detector.
The system has an overall field-of-view of 15 mm × 15 mm × 15 mm and resolution in the 110 μm range for vMSOT and 44 μm for epi-fluorescence measurements
The optoacoustic signals were recorded before injection, 20, 40, 60, 90 and 120 min after injection of CRANAD-2; fluorescence signals were recorded before injection, 22, 42, 62, 92 and 120 min after injection of CRANAD-2.
To examine the influence of scalp on the absorbance intensity, the scalp of the mouse was then removed.
The mouse head was imaged afterwards using the same setting.
To assess the fluorescence and OA signals of CRANAD-2 binding to recombinant Aβ 42 , the vMSOT-fluorescence imaging system was used.
The spherical array was positioned pointing upwards and filled with agar gel (1.5 %) to guarantee acoustic coupling, which served as a solid platform to place the tubing.
One transparent bore polythene tubing (0.28 mm inner diameter, 0.61 mm outer diameter, Smiths Medical) of 15 cm length were fixed on the solid agar gel circular platform (diameter 5 cm) as described earlier
This is to ensure using same condition during measurement for each sample.
Uniform illumination of the tubing was achieved by inserting three arms of the fiber bundle in the lateral apertures of the array and a fourth one providing light delivery from the top.
The pulse repetition frequency of the laser was set to 100 Hz and the laser wavelength tuned between 550 and 680 nm (5 nm step) on a per pulse basis.
Beam from the pulsed OPO laser was similarly used for excitation.
The tubing was sequentially filled (using syringe) with CRANAD-2 (1, 3 μM) without and with the presence of Aβ (1, 2 μM).
We chose 1-2 μM concentration of Aβ to mimic the accumulation in brain of arcAβ mouse brain based on results from previous MSD and biochemical assays
Tubing was flushed with dd water twice between samples.
The measurement was repeated three times.
All recorded OA signals were normalized with the calibrated wavelength-dependent energy of the laser pulse.
Images were rendered in real-time during the acquisition via fast back-projection-based image reconstruction implemented on a graphics processing unit
A 3D model-based iterative algorithm was used off-line for more accurate reconstruction
Prior to reconstruction, the collected signals were band-pass filtered with cut-off frequencies of 0.1 and 9 MHz.
However, acoustic distortions associated to speed of sound heterogeneities, acoustic scattering and attenuation as well as the response of the ultrasound sensing elements of the array are known to additionally play a role in the quality of the images rendered

MRI
MRI scans were performed on a 7 T small animal MR Pharmascan (Bruker Biospin GmbH, Ettlingen, Germany) with a bore diameter of 16 cm and equipped with an actively shielded gradient capable of switching 760 mT m with an 80 μs rise time and operated by a ParaVision 6.0 software platform (Bruker Biospin GmbH, Ettlingen, Germany).
A circular polarized volume resonator was used for signal transmission, and an actively decoupled mouse brain quadrature surface coil with integrated combiner and preamplifier was used for signal receiving.
Mice were anesthetized with an initial dose of 4% isoflurane (Abbott, Cham, Switzerland) in oxygen/air (200 800 mL min) mixture and were maintained at 1.5 % isoflurane in oxygen/air (100 400 mL min).
Mice were next placed in prone position on a water-heated support to keep body temperature within 36.5 • C ± 0.5 • C, monitored with a rectal temperature probe.
In vivo T 2 -weighted MR images of mouse brain/head were obtained using a 2D spin echo sequence (Turbo rapid acquisition with refocused echoes) with imaging parameters: RARE factor 8, echo time 36 ms, repetition time 2628 ms, 6 averages, slice thickness 0.7 mm, no slice gap, field of view 20 mm × 20 mm, matrix 512 × 512, giving an in-plane spatial resolution 39 μm × 39 μm, out-of-plane resolution 0.7 mm (slice thickness), within a scan time 12 min 36 s.

Co-registration with MRI and VOI analysis of MSOT data
Registration between MSOT data and mouse brain MR images can provide a better anatomical reference for regional analysis.
The crosssectional MSOT images were co-registered with T 2 -weighted MRI data as described
For dynamic data, time course of regional absorbance (a.u.) at 680 nm were plotted and the area-under-curves were calculated.
The retention of probe was calculated by averaging values from 60-120 min post-injection.

Immunohistochemistry and confocal imaging
For immunohistochemistry and confocal microscopy, mice were perfused with 1 × PBS (pH 7.4), under ketamine/xylazine/acepromazine maleate anesthesia (75/10/2 mg/kg body weight, bolus injection) and decapitated.
Brains were removed from the skull afterwards, fixed in 4 % paraformaldehyde in 1 × PBS (pH 7.4).
Brain tissue were cut horizontally at 5 μm and stained with CRANAD-2, anti-Aβ 1-16 antibody 6E10 (Signet Lab, SIG-39320, 1:5000), fibrillar conformation antiamyloid antibody OC (Merck, AB2286, 1:200), Donkey-anti-Rat Alexa 488 (Jackson, AB-2340686, 1:400), Goat-anti-Rabbit Alexa488 (Invitrogen, A11034, 1:200) and counter-stained using 4 ′ ,6-diamidino-2phenylindole (DAPI) for nuclei (Sigma, D9542-10MG, 1:1000).
Confocal images of the cortex of non-transgenic littermates and arcAβ mice were obtained using a Leica SP8 confocal microscope (Leica Microsystems GmbH, Germany) at ScopeM ETH Zurich Hönggerberg core facility.
Sequential images were obtained by using 458 nm, 640 nm lines of the laser respectively.
Identical settings were used and images were obtained for the non-transgenic littermates and arcAβ mice at ×20 and ×60 magnification, resolution with Z stack and maximum intensity projection.

Statistics
Unpaired two-tail student t test with Welch's correction was used (Graphpad Prism 8.2, Graphpad Software Inc, USA) for comparing values between arcAβ mice and non-transgenic littermates.
All data are present as mean ± standard deviation.
Significance was set at * p < 0.05.

Results

In vitro characterization of probes on recombinant Aβ 1-42 fibrils
We performed a fluorescence assay to assess the binding of CRANAD-2 to pre-formed Aβ 1-42 fibrils (Fig.
As expected, ThT binding to Aβ 1-42 fibrils (0-0.2 μM), resulted in a dose-dependent increase in fluorescence intensities at 484 nm (Figs.
Upon binding to Aβ 1-42 fibrils, CRANAD-2 showed a similar dose-dependent increase in fluorescence intensity at 681 nm (Figs.
Linear relations between fluorescence intensity and concentration of 0-0.2 μM and 0-0.012 μM Aβ 1-42 fibrils were observed both with CRANAD-2 (Fig.
In a second set of experiments, we assessed the binding of CRANAD-2 and ThT to other proteins, including monomeric proteins rich in β-sheet structures, amyloid fibrils composed of other proteins and monomeric Aβ 1-42 peptide.
ThT showed high intensity upon binding to Aβ 1-42 fibrils and a lower intensity when incubated with α-synuclein, and insulin (Fig.
CRANAD-2 showed higher intensity signal upon binding to Aβ 1-42 fibrils compared to fibrils composed of α-synuclein, insulin, lysosome, and to the Aβ 1-42 monomer, while a non-negligible signal was observed in the presence of bovine serum albumin (Fig.
Compared to CRANAD-2, the signal intensity of ThT upon binding to fibrils of α-synuclein and insulin was higher (Fig.
We further investigated the specificity of CRANAD-2 (0.1 μM) for Aβ 1-42 fibrils (0-0.2 μM) by performing the same assay in a complex sample represented by a cell lysate with estimated total protein concentration of 7 μM.
Notably, a linear relationship between Aβ 1-42 fibrils and CRANAD-2 fluorescence intensity was observed, even when fibrils were spiked in a cell lysate containing a much higher concentration of a variety of proteins (Fig.
Overall, these results demonstrate that CRANAD-2 can bind Aβ 1-42 fibrils with high affinity and specificity, even in complex mixtures.
Importantly, the probe can distinguish between monomeric and fibrillar forms of the peptide.

In vitro binding of CRANAD-2 to Aβ fibrils increases fluorescence but not OA signal
CRANAD-2 was incubated with Aβ fibrils and measured using an agar phantom with vMSOT and epifluorescence imaging (Fig.
1).
We have extracted the absorbance of CRANAD-2 from the vMSOT measurement and show its absorption spectrum along with the absorbance spectrum of Hb and HbO
In addition, we obtained the fluorescence excitation and emission spectrum of CRANAD-2 with a spectrofluorometer (Fig.
Analysis of vMSOT images of the phantom did not show a difference in OA signal when CRANAD-2 was co-incubated with Aβ fibrils compared to CRANAD-2 alone (Fig.
In contrast, co-incubation of CRANAD-2 with Aβ fibrils did result in a 50 % increase in fluorescence intensity compared to CRANAD-2 alone (Fig.

In vivo hybrid vMSOT and epi-fluorescence imaging in arcAβ mouse brain
CRANAD-2 has been shown to cross the blood-brain-barrier and reach the brain parenchyma
We explored the ability of OA imaging to detect Aβ deposits in vivo in mouse brain.
We used a hybrid system to assess simultaneous 3D vMSOT and planar epi-fluorescence imaging for CRANAD-2 distribution in arcAβ mouse brain.
Two arcAβ mouse was scanned in vivo using the hybrid system with intact scalp till 120 min after CRANAD-2 probe injection.
A volumetric image is obtained with vMSOT is shown (Figs.
We did not attain actual unmixing of CRANAD-2 and deoxy/oxyhemoglobin (Hb/HbO) signal probably due to the low concentration of probe in the tissue compared to the other two absorbers.
We consider endogenous Hb and HbO represent the OA signal intensity at preinjection (Fig.
Signal was mainly observed in cortical structures.
We observed minor difference between 660 and 680 nm, which fits with the absorbance spectrum of CRANAD-2 with rather flat decline in the absorbance intensity with increase of wavelength.

MSOT detects Aβ deposits in vivo
Based on the results in section 3.3., we next set out to explore the ability of 3D whole brain Aβ mapping with a commercial MSOT system with 2D image acquisition and 0.3 mm gap between slides.
This system cover the spectrum range of 680-850 nm.
To allow for accurate regional analysis, we register the MSOT data with MRI data which provides better soft tissue contrast (Fig.
2).
We monitored CRANAD-2 uptake in arcAβ mice and non-transgenic littermates for 90 min post-injection (n = 3-4 each) (Figs.
The delta images in relation to the pre-injection images shows high probe uptake in the brain of arcAβ mice, mainly in the cortex (Fig.
Analysis of the dynamics of cortical CRANAD-2 uptake allowed to discriminate arcAβ mice from nontransgenic littermates (Fig.
The signal plateaued around 90 min.
Higher AUC was observed in the cortical region of arcAβ mice compared to non-transgenic littermates (Fig.

Ex vivo staining on mouse brain sections
To validate the specificity of CRANDA-2 binding to Aβ deposits in mouse brain, horizontal brain tissue sections from arcAβ mice and nontransgenic littermates were stained with CRANAD-2 in addition to anti-Aβ antibodies 6E10, which binds any type of Aβ, and OC, which recognizes mature fibrils
No signal was observed in the cortex from non-transgenic littermates (Figs.
CRANAD-2 clearly co-stained with OC or 6E10 stained parenchymal and vessel-associated Aβ deposits in the arcAβ mouse brain (Fig.
This suggests specific binding of CRANAD-2 to Aβ deposits.
We also observed auto-fluorescence (blue) of Aβ plaques in the cortical region of arcAβ mouse brain tissue slice (Fig.

Discussion
Developing tools for non-invasive detection of Aβ deposits at highresolution in animal models of AD is critical for investigating disease mechanism and translational development of Aβ-targeted therapies.
Most probes for Aβ including NIAD-4
Nevertheless, Aβ binding fluorescent probes with suitable absorbance spectrum can be employed for OA imaging.
We took advantage of the fluorescent property of CRANAD-2 to characterize the suitable of the probe to map cerebral Aβ deposits with NIRF and OA imaging.
The detection sensitivity is higher in PET compared to optical and optoacoustic imaging.
Depending on the probe affinity, detection of nanomolar concentration of probes have been reported
Whereas in optoacoustic imaging, higher concentrations of probe are needed to achieve detectable signal.
The resolution of PET for small animal is usually 0.7-1.5 mm which is almost 10 times lower than that of optoacoustic imaging.
In microPET the partial volume effect influence the accuracy of the quantification due to the size of the mouse brain.
CRANAD-2 has an affinity to Aβ aggregates of 0.0387 μM
The in vitro binding assay demonstrated a linear relationship between fluorescence intensity and concentration of aggregated Aβ 1-42 fibrils for CRANAD-2.
This properties has been reported for many Aβ binding probes such as AOI-987, THK-265, DANIR and croconium dye
However, when applying such probes for MSOT imaging, the increase in fluorescence quantum yield upon Aβ binding is expected to lead to a decrease in MSOT signal.
Despite this feature, two previous studies in a transgenic mouse model of amyloidosis have reported Aβ imaging with other optoacoustic imaging systems using Congo Red
We were also able to clearly detect optoacoustic signals from CRANAD-2 bound to Aβ fibrils in the phantom and in arcAβ mice in vivo.
Moreover, there were no differences in OA signal between CRANAD-2 to recombinant Aβ fibrils and CRANAD-2 alone measured in the phantom with MSOT.
In addition to an increase in fluorescence intensity, we observed a slight red-shift by 75 nm in fluorescence spectrum upon binding to aggregated Aβ 1-42 fibrils as describes in previous reports
Importantly, the probe exhibits little binding to other proteins involved with Aβ plaque formation such as lysozyme
Though, we observed a percentage of binding to bovine serum albumin that is a plasma protein in the circulation and found in Aβ plaques.
This is a common phenomenon of Aβ binding probes such as BTA-1, PIB, florbetaben, florbetapir etc
Co-staining of CRANAD-2 to brain sections from arcAβ mice with 6E10/OC antibodies of Aβ deposition clearly showed close resemblance in both vascular and parenchymal Aβ deposits.
CRANAD-2 is well-characterized since the development in 2009
In our study (Fig.
There is minor binding to albumin which is common for most of the Aβ probes such as PIB, florbetaben etc.
Moreover, we demonstrated in Fig.
Given the specificity of CRANAD-2 for Aβ deposits and the fact that the probe generates a detectable MSOT signal upon Aβ fibril binding, we explored the capability of in vivo MSOT cerebral Aβ mapping.
Probes for MSOT imaging ideally have an absorbance and emission peak at NIR or even NIR II range to allow for sufficient penetration depth and separation from deoxygenated and oxygenated hemoglobin which are abundant in biological tissue, but which have lower absorption in the NIR region of light
This has been considered in the design of most Aβ probes, apart from NIAD-4 and Congo Red which have absorption peaks in the red part of the spectrum and which require invasive imaging approaches
Moreover, some probes, e.g.
BODIPY
CRANAD-2 has a suitable spectrum (excitation maximum 640 nm, emission maximum 685 nm)
In previous reports it was shown that CRANAD-2 passes the blood-brain barrier
This has motivated us to inject the probe in arcAβ mice, which shows parenchymal plaque and cerebral amyloid angiopathy accumulation concomitantly with cognitive impairments from 6 months-of-age, where Aβ plaque load increases with age
The optical absorption and fluorescence contrast provided by CRANAD-2 allowed for cross-validation by simultaneous real-time recording of hybrid 3D vMSOT and 2D epi-fluorescence data
We observed uptake and wash-out of probe with MSOT and epi-fluorescence imaging, though the degree of changes in MSOT signal was lower.
The differences may be explained by the fact that epi-fluorescence lacks the depth resolving capacity.
Thus effectively signals originating from different cranial compartments (skull and scalp over the head) adds up to provide a surface-weighted signal
In contrast, tomographic MSOT imaging allows to map the probe uptake in the brain more accurately in 3D.
Thus, epi-fluorescence imaging merely reflects a mixture of wash-out kinetics from different tissues, while MSOT closer represents the actual cerebral kinetics.
We did not attain actual unmixing of CRANAD-2 (probably due to the low concentration of probe in the brain).
In addition, using more wavelengths could also potentially help during the data acquisition.
To harness the full potential of volumetric imaging, we performed serial MSOT imaging in arcAβ and non-transgenic littermates.
Coregistration of MSOT data with a T 2 -weighted structural MRI dataset
We observed a clear difference in brain accumulation of CRANAD-2.
In our study, the cortical signals detected by using epi-fluorescence imaging and vMSOT in arcAβ mice in this study was in accordance with the known Aβ distribution, which is highest in dorsal areas like the cortex and decreases ventrally
Further application of regional based fluence correction and non-negative correction in the reconstruction and unmixing steps will enable more accurate quantification
In conclusion, we demonstrated the suitability of CRANAD-2 for detecting Aβ deposits in a mouse model of AD amyloidosis with epifluorescence and MSOT imaging.
The approach offers further longitudinal monitoring of therapeutics effect targeting at Aβ and for unveiling the disease mechanism in animal models.



Fig. 1 .
Fig. 1.
In vitro characterization of CRANAD-2 binding to recombinant Aβ 1-42 fibrils.
(a-f) Fluorescence intensity spectrum (counts per seconds, CPS) of recombinant Aβ 1-42 fibrils (0-0.2 μM) in the presence of 20 μM ThT (a) and 0.1 μM CRANAD-2 (d); (b-c) Linear relation between signal at emission peak of ThT (484 nm) and Aβ 1-42 fibrils concentration in the range of 0-0.2 μM (b) and 0-0.012 μM (c); (e-f) Linear relation between emission peak of CRANAD-2 (681 nm) and Aβ 1-42 fibrils concentration in the range of 0-0.2 μM (e) and 0-0.012 μM (f); (g-i) Comparison of ThT (g) and CRANAD-2 (h) binding to different proteins.
(i) Linear relation of the fluorescence intensity of CRANAD-2 as function of Aβ 1-42 fibrils spiked in a cell lysate; In panels b, c, e, f, g, h, and i, error bars represent standard deviations corresponding to 3 independent measurements.
BSA: bovine serum albumin; mAb: monoclonal antibody; Data are shown as mean ± standard deviation.
Statistical test; p < 0.05.



Fig. 2 .
Fig. 2. In vitro hybrid 3D vMSOT and epifluorescence imaging of CRANAD-2 and Aβ fibrils.
One tubing was fixed on agar support platform was filled with samples containing CRANAD-2 (1 μM) with and without Aβ (1 μM), and measured by using 3D hybrid vMSOT epifluorescence microscopy system; (a) Absorbance of CRANAD-2 unmixed from measurement shown along with the absorbance spectrum of deoxyhemoglobin (Hb), and oxyhemoglobin (HbO) [64]; (b) Fluorescence emission spectrum of CRANAD-2 (25 μM in PBS, pH7.4) measured using a spectrofluorometer; (c) vMSOT measured signal at multiple wavelengths (640-680 nm) and (d) fluorescence signal from the tubing; (e) Quantification of optoacoustic signal intensity at different wavelengths in shown in the VOI shown in the white box in (a); (f) Quantification of fluorescence signal shown in the VOI shown in the white box in (b).
Data is shown as mean ± SD; CR: CRANAD-2.



Fig. 3 .
Fig. 3.
In vivo 3D vMSOT imaging of CRANAD-2 in an arcAβ mouse.
(a) vMSOT 3D volumetric images at 660, 680, 750, 800 nm (horizontal, sagittal and coronal views) are shown respectively; at 20 and 40 min post-injection of CRANAD-2; (b) Illustration of VOI analysis of cortical region; (c) 3D volumetric images of hemoglobin (HbO) and deoxyhemoblin (Hb) at preinjection; (d) Optoacoustic (OA) signal intensity at 660, 680, 750, and 800 nm at different time points.



Fig. 4 .
Fig. 4. In vivo hybrid 3D vMSOT and epifluorescence imaging of CRANAD-2 in an arcAβ mouse.
(a) vMSOT 3D volumetric images at 660 nm (horizontal, sagittal and coronal views) are shown respectively; at pre-injection, 20 to 120 min post-injection of CRANAD-2; (b) Epi-fluorescence (horizontal view) (c) Optoacoustic (OA) signal intensity at 660 nm and (d) Fluorescence signal as a function of time in the right and left cortex and compared to cerebellum of an arcAβ mouse.



Fig. 5 .
Fig. 5.
In vivo planar MSOT imaging of CRANAD-2 in mouse models.
(a, b) Coronal view of optoacoustic images of a non-transgenic littermate and an arcAβ mouse; (c) a T 2weighted structural MR image and optoacoustic images of arcAβ mice overlaid with structural MR image at 680 nm at 10, 40 and 90 min after i.v.
tail vein injection of CRANAD-2; The MSOT system acquire 2D images (with 0.3 mm gap between each scan, the holder moving along the axis from anterior to posterior position); (d) Time course of MOST intensity at 680 nm in the cortex of NTL (non-transgenic littermates) and arcAβ mice over 120 min; (e) Quantification of area-under-curve (AUC) in NTL and arcAβ mice.
Data are shown as mean ± standard deviation; ***p < 0.05.



Fig. 6 .
Fig. 6.
Co-staining of CRANAD-2 with Aβ deposition in non-transgenic littermate and arcAβ mouse brain tissue sections.
Sections were stained with CRANAD-2 (red) and fibrillar conformation antibody OC (green) and anti-Aβ 1-16 antibody 6E10 (green), and DAPI (blue) in the cortex of non-transgenic littermates (NTL) (a, f) and arcAβ mice (b, g); (c-e, h-j) zoom-in illustrating co-localization of the signal in (b, g); (k-n) Vessel associated cerebral amyloid angiopathy (arrowhead) and parenchymal plaque (arrow); (o) Autofluorescnce of Aβ plaques in the cortex of arcAβ mouse in the absence of stainings; Scale bars = 50 μm (a, b, f, g), 20 μm (c-e, h-o) (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article).