Pyroglutamate Aβ cascade as drug target in Alzheimer’s disease
One of the central aims in Alzheimer's disease (AD) research is the identification of clinically relevant drug targets.
A plethora of potential molecular targets work very well in preclinical model systems both in vitro and in vivo in AD mouse models.
However, the lack of translation into clinical settings in the AD field is a challenging endeavor.
Although it is long known that N-terminally truncated and pyroglutamate-modified Abeta (Aβ pE3 ) peptides are abundantly present in the brain of AD patients, form stable and soluble low-molecular weight oligomers, and induce neurodegeneration in AD mouse models, their potential as drug target has not been generally accepted in the past.
This situation has dramatically changed with the report that passive immunization with donanemab, an Aβ pE3 -specific antibody, cleared aymloid plaques and stabilized cognitive deficits in a group of patients with mild AD in a phase II trial.
This review summarizes the current knowledge on the molecular mechanisms of generation of Aβ pE , its biochemical properties, and the intervention points as a drug target in AD.

INTRODUCTION
For more than three decades, the amyloid cascade hypothesis
Since the first report on the peptide sequence of Aβ 1-24 of the N-terminus isolated from cerebrovascular amyloid preparations from Alzheimer's disease (AD) and Down syndrome brain
Later, Mori et al.
Saido et al.
Russo et al.
Using matrix-assisted laser-desorption-timeof-flight mass spectrometry a variety of N-truncated Aβ peptides, including Aβ pE3-X in amyloid plaques very identified
Wildburger et al.
Portelius et al.
The major variants were Aβ 1-42 , Aβ pE3-42 , Aβ 4-42 followed by Aβ 1-40 in both sporadic and familial AD cases.
Moreover, Upadhaya et al.
Besides Aβ pE-X and a phosphorylated Aβ variant found in plaques, they were also observed as soluble aggregates in a disease-specific manner.
The authors concluded that the level of different Aβ variants occur in a hierarchical sequence allowing the distinction of three biochemical amyloid-β stages, with stage 1 and its characteristic marker Aβ 1-X , followed by stage 2 with Aβ pE3-x and stage 3 with a phosphorylated Aβ
In good agreement, Moro et al.
In AD mouse models, similar observations were observed.
In APP23 mouse brain, Aβ pE-X deposits appear during ageing as a maturation process of amyloid plaques starting with Aβ 1-X first followed by Aβ pE3-X deposits
In APP/PS1KI mice, Aβ pE3-X positive plaques increased with age, on the expense of Aβ 1-X
Transgenic mice expressing mutant Aβ Q3-42 elicit partial conversion of N-terminal Gln-3 into pyroglutamate Glu-3 in a cell-type dependent manner depending on the different mouse line likely due to specific genomic integration of the transgene.
Besides abundant loss of Purkinje cells and ataxia

GENERATION OF PYROGLUTAMATE Aβ
Figure
In the last years, considerable progress was achieved in elucidating the different molecular steps for generation of pyroglutamate-modified Aβ. β-site APP cleaving enzyme 1 (BACE1) is the first and rate-limiting step in the production of full-length Aβ
BACE1 cleaves between Met (position -1 of Aβ peptide) and Asp-1 (position +1 of Aβ peptide).
This cleavage can also be carried out by meprin-β (reviewed in
Another cleavage site of meprin-β is between Asp-1 and Ala-2 (liberating Aβ 2-X ).
Besides meprin-β, aminopeptidase A (APA) can trigger the initial first amino acid (Asp-1) cleavage of Aβ
Valverde et al.
Of note, Aβ pE3-X in plaques was correlated with APA activity and early Braak stages in brains of patients with sporadic AD.
Therefore, APA represents a key enzyme as a potential drug target involved in N-terminal truncation of Aβ peptides independent from dipeptidyl peptidase 4 (DPP4) activity
The enzymatic cleavage between Ala-2 and Glu-3 (liberating Aβ 3-X ) is carried out by meprin-β or DPP4
DPP4 is known to participate for example in cleaving neuropeptide Y
Antonyan et al.
Valverde et al.
(ii) Lentiviral expression of mutant APP cDNA in wildtype mouse brain and pharmacological blocking of DPP4 activity in brain in situ rescued dendritic spine morphology.
(iii) This was further supported by studies using the 3xTg-AD mouse model.
Amyloid-plaque load was reduced and memory deficits were normalized in this model by pharmacological and shRNA-driven inhibition of DPP4 activity.
(iv) In addition, DPP4 activity seemed to be transiently elevated during AD pathogenesis.
Hence, DPP4 may be a potential drug target against AD
DPP4 is long known for treating diabetes as it metabolizes glucagon-like peptide-1
There is considerable evidence that QC is the rate-limiting enzyme in the final step the conversion of N-truncated Aβ 3-X into pyroglutamate Aβ pE3-X
Besides, the normal function of QC to stabilize hormones, peptides, and proteins it may also contribute to neurodegenerative disorders, systemic inflammatory diseases and certain types of oncological conditions (reviewed recently
In the 5XFAD mouse model for AD, overexpression of human QC and knock-out of murine QC clearly demonstrated that memory function correlated well with the formation of Aβ pE3-X
Although complete loss of QC activity in homozygous QC knock-out mice did not eliminate Aβ pE3-X levels completely suggesting that there is a resting QC-like activity by other enzyme(s).
Such an activity has been added by Cynis et al.
Moreover, pharmacological inhibition of QC/isoQC-activity reduced the pathology in a mouse model for atherosclerosis.
The function of QC/isoQC activity in the etiology of AD addresses directly the generation of toxic Ab pE3-X peptides, but equally important may modulate microglia function via recruitment of monocytes from the periphery.
Of note, the dual function of microglia cells in AD pathology should be taken into account.
They participate in both beneficial amyloid-β clearance, but also in destructive inflammation in AD brain (reviewed in detail

PROPERTIES OF PYROGLUTAMATE Aβ
Saido et al.
Another twist in the complex story was published by Nussbaum et al.
Cross-seeding activities of Aβ pE3-X peptides with wild-type Aβ 1-X were also reported by Hu et al.
In addition, Aβ pE3-42 and Aβ 4-42 when expressed together elicited neurological deficits, which were significantly stronger as compared to expression of Aβ pE3-42 or Aβ 4-42 alone
Neuronal expression of Aβ pE3-42 triggered amyloid-plaque load and memory deficits when crossed to amyloid-plaque AD mouse models
The secondary structure of Aβ pE3-42 , Aβ 4-42 and Aβ 1-42 peptides was analyzed by far-UV circular dichroism (CD) spectroscopy demonstrating that the CD spectra of monomers were characteristic of a disordered conformation
The aggregation propensities of the Aβ variants analyzed by liquid-state nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy suggested that the temporal loss of signal intensities was due to conversion of NMR-visible monomers and small aggregates into larger aggregates.
The highest loss in signal intensity was found for N-truncated Aβ.
Hence, it was reported that Aβ pE3-42 and Aβ 4-42 rapidly formed aggregates with a high aggregation propensity in terms of monomer consumption and oligomer formation
Acute treatment of primary cortical neurons indicated that Aβ pE3-42 and Aβ 4-42 are equally toxic as Aβ 1-42 .
This was further corroborated by induction of working memory deficits after intraventricular injection of Aβ pE3-42 , Aβ 4-42 or Aβ 1-42 in wild-type mice
In aqueous solution and in 10% sodium dodecyl sulfate micelles Aβ pE3-40 peptides showed increased β-sheet formation using CD spectroscopy and aggregation behavior by sedimentation analysis when compared with Aβ 1-40
The relative toxicity and abundance of N-truncated and full-length Aβ variants both in vitro and in vivo in AD mouse models was reviewed and discussed previously
[84] and of QC
Created with BioRender.com.

DRUG TARGET PYROGLUTAMATE Aβ
The different steps therapeutic intervention against the pyroglutamate amyloid-β cascade in the etiology of AD are shown in Fig.
In addition, meprin-β can cut between Met-1 and Asp+2 independent from BACE1
DPP4 is responsible for the cleavage of the first two N-terminal amino acids of full-length Aβ 1-X generating Aβ 3-X
There is one clinical study published that investigated the influence of DPP4 inhibition in patients with dementia
In this retrospective clinical study the effect of vildagliptin, a DPP4 inhibitor, was investigated on cognitive dysfunction in 60 elderly patients with diabetes with additional diagnosis of mild cognitive impairment (MCI).
Fifty percent of the patients were treated with metformin as standard medication control; the other 50% received metformin plus vildagliptin.
A significant beneficial effect on stabilizing cognitive scores was observed in the DPP4 inhibitor group
This pilot study did not include however, the assessment of AD biomarkers commonly employed in clinical trials with MCI patients.
In addition, it is not clear whether pharmacological inhibition of DPP4 activity is clinically meaningful in nondiabetic MCI and AD patients.
Alternatively, and independent from DPP4 activity, a sequential cleavage of full-length Aβ between Asp at position +1 and Ala at position +2 may also occur by aminopeptidase A activity thereby influencing formation of Aβ pE3-X
The next step in the cascade is the conversion of N-terminal Glu-3 of Aβ into Aβ pE3-X by QC.
In preclinical experiments, pharmacological QC inhibition had significant beneficial effects on Aβ pE3 levels, plaque load, gliosis and memory function
PQ912, a competitive inhibitor of QC, was analyzed in clinical trials in order to assess the safety, pharmacokinetics, and pharmacodynamics in healthy individuals
QC-dependent blood biomarker levels were significantly altered by treatment with PQ912.
The conformation of the structure of amyloid-β fibrils is well established eliciting a cross-β structure identified by x-ray diffraction analysis
The individual β-strands of amyloid fibrils are oriented perpendicular to the fibril axis
NMR spectroscopy revealed that the N-terminus of full-length Aβ 1-42 is unstructured
Ahmed et al.
Of note, these oligomers are composed of loosely aggregated strands and do not have the β-sheet structure characteristic of fibrillar amyloid-β.
Therefore, it is of upmost interest that the N-terminus of Aβ pE3-X monomers adopt a unique pseudo β-hairpin structure, which is recognized by the TAPAS family antibodies (murine and humanized variants)
A stabilized cyclic form of Aβ 1-14 (Ntruncated amyloid peptide antibodies, the "TAPAS" vaccine) was engineered and shown that the vaccine adopted the same conformation as the native sequence when bound to TAPAS antibodies.
Active immunization of two AD mouse models with the TAPAS vaccine led to a significant reduction in amyloid-plaque load, a rescue of brain glucose metabolism, rescue of neuron loss, and rescue of memory deficits.
Both, active immunization with the TAPAS vaccine and passive immunization with the humanized TAPAS version of the murine precursor antibody
Of note the TAPAS binding motif is not found in amyloid plaques
The monoclonal antibody 9D5 reacted with low molecular weight oligomers (4-10 mers) of Aβ pE3-X and not with amyloid plaques in AD brain tissue
Passive immunization of 5XFAD mice reduced amyloid plaques and rescued behavioral deficits.
Other antibodies preferentially react with amyloid plaques from AD patients, like the monoclonal antibody 3B8, which is specific for both conformational epitopes present on N-terminal truncated Aβ pE3-42 and its unmodified counterpart Aβ 3-42
Another report supports the concept that pan-Aβ pE-X antibodies preferentially bind to amyloid plaques in brain tissue of sporadic and familial AD cases
The Aβ pE3-X specific antibody 07/01 detected diffuse and senile plaques and cerebral amyloid angiopathy in the brain of human specimen and in nonhuman primates, as well as in a subset of focal and vascular deposits in transgenic mouse models for AD
BAMB31 is another pan-Aβ pE monoclonal antibody designed to target plaques.
Passive immunization elicited therapeutic effects in an acute application design using the APPPS1 mice
Chronic cotreatment with a BACE1 inhibitor cleared preexisting plaques in APP Lon and PDAPP mouse models of AD.
The authors report that the plaque lowering effect was not accompanied by microhemorrhages.
Passive immunization with the monoclonal antibody 07/01 reduced plaque load and normalized behavioral deficits in the APPswe/PS1DeltaE9 model for AD
The 07/01 antibody was compared with other Aβ pE3-X antibodies using structural and functional assays.
The authors reported that only 07/01 prevented in vitro toxicity of Aβ pE3-42 oligomers
Furthermore, surface plasmon resonance revealed that all Aβ pE3-X antibodies preferentially reacted with amyloid fibrils.
Enhanced phagocytosis of amyloid plaques could be achieved without inducing neuroinflammation using in vivo PET imaging in the APPSLxhQC model for AD
The humanized antibody, PBD-C06, retained the binding properties, including mixed aggregates of full-length Aβ and Aβ pE3-X peptides
Considerable attention in the AD field was raised by the publication of the results of the TRAILBLAZER-ALZ trial.
The phase 2 trial evaluated safety, tolerability and efficacy of passive immunization with donanemab a plaque-specific antibody against Aβ pE3-X
The study design was unique, as the screening of early symptomatic AD patients was based on a tau threshold screening by brain imaging with flortaucipir PET scanning to assess tangle deposition in vivo.
Only patients with intermediate levels of tangle formation were subsequently enrolled in the study.
The primary outcome measures were tests to assess cognitive function.
The secondary outcome measures assessed in addition amyloid-plaque load and tangle deposition by appropriate PET scans.
Donanemab significantly slowed the disease process, slowed cognitive and functional decline on all secondary clinical endpoints, and reduced plaque load, and tau accumulation in a subgroup of patients.
Of note, patients with the lowest tau accumulation demonstrated the highest benefit, while patients with the highest tau accumulation did not benefit at all.
The safety profile was similar to findings of the phase 1 trial
Although the major endpoints of the phase II donanemab trial were reached and are generally promising, the outcome on the neuropathological level is not entirely clear.
For example, neurodegeneration and tau pathology progression were slowed down, but not reversed.
Therefore, it is not entirely proven whether Aβ pE3-X directly triggers tau pathology.
One needs to bear in mind, that many neuropathological studies have demonstrated that tau pathology precedes plaque pathology (for example
Of note, the sensitivity of biomarkers used in clinical studies is still lower in comparison with that of post-mortem neuropathological evaluations
The meaning of the data of the TRAILBLAZER-ALZ is a matter of ongoing scientific debates as aggregated fibrillar amyloid is generally thought to be pathologically inert as discussed above
Ackley et al.
The authors reported on a meta-analysis of randomized controlled clinical trials of drugs for the prevention or treatment of AD targeting amyloid mechanism.
They concluded that amyloidplaque reduction strategies did not substantially improve cognition.
In conclusion, there is ample evidence that pyroglutamate Aβ is involved in the etiology of AD.
The pyroglutamate amyloid-β cascade provides several attractive therapeutic intervention points.
DPP4 or QC inhibitors can modulate the stepwise formation of pyroglutamate Aβ enzymatically.
Pyroglutamate Aβ induced toxicity can be neutralized by antibodies specific for the TAPAS epitope formed by the N-terminus of monomers or by antibodies against amyloid aggregates formed by oligomers, protofibrils and other high-molecular weight structures.



Fig. 1
Fig. 1 Generation of pyroglutamated (pE) peptides involved in Alzheimer's disease.
① The N-terminus of full-length Aβ is generated by BACE1 or meprin-β and secreted by neurons.
② Next, N-terminal amino acids are cleaved off by aminopeptidase A (APA), meprin-β or dipeptidyl peptidase 4 (DPP4).
③ Glutamate at position three of the N-terminus of Aβ is subsequently post-translationally modified into N-terminal pyroglutamate (pE) by dehydration catalyzed by glutaminyl cyclase (QC) activity.
④ The isoenzyme of QC, isoQC, predominantly converts the N-terminus of chemokine ligand 2 (CCL2) into pE-CCL2 ⑤ triggering monocyte recruitment into the central nervous system (CNS).
The surface structure of DPP4 [84] and of QC [85] was taken from the Protein Data Bank (PDB).
Created with BioRender.com.



Fig. 2
Fig. 2 Pyroglutamate Aβ as a potential drug target against Alzheimer's disease.
① Inhibition of DPP4 prevents N-terminal truncation of the first two amino acid residues of the full-length Aβ monomers (Aβ 1-x ).
② Inhibition of QC activity prevents the conversion of Aβ 3-x into Aβ pE3-x monomers.
③-⑤ Neutralizing antibodies react with different conformational and structural variants of Aβ pE3-X .
③ Once Aβ pE3-x monomers are generated, they adopt a pseudo β-hairpin structure at the N-terminus, which is specifically recognized by the TAPAS family of antibodies.
The pseudo β-hairpin epitope is neutralized by the TAPAS vaccine and by TAPAS monoclonal antibodies.
④ Pan-Aβ pE-X antibodies react with a range of conformations: soluble oligomers, protofibrils and fibrillar forms found in different plaque types.
⑤ Donanemab, a plaquespecific monoclonal antibody, reacts with Aβ pE3-X aggregates found in the amyloid-plaque cores.
The surface structure of DPP4 [84] and of QC [85] was taken from the Protein Data Bank (PDB).
Created with BioRender.com.