HDL from an Alzheimer's disease perspective

INTRODUCTION
Alzheimer's disease is the leading cause of senile dementia with over 44 million affected persons and an economic burden of over $600 billion
Beyond the beta-amyloid (Ab) plaques and neurofibrillary tangles that define Alzheimer's disease, 60-90% of Alzheimer's disease brains have evidence of cerebral vessel disease
No effective disease-modifying drugs for Alzheimer's disease exist despite decades of promising research
This may be due, in part, to the complex interplay of amyloid and tau disorders, neuroinflammation and cerebrovascular compromise, and significant challenges in defining and staging Alzheimer's disease.
Studies in humans, animals, and in-vitro models support the hypothesis that circulating HDL, which have established vasoprotective properties, may also provide resilience to cerebrovascular dysfunction in Alzheimer's disease.
In this review, we synthesize these data toward a rationale to develop HDL functional assays as potential biomarkers of cerebrovascular health and to consider clinical trials that evaluate HDL-based therapies for Alzheimer's disease.

THE CEREBROVASCULATURE AND ITS RELATIONSHIP WITH ALZHEIMER'S DISEASE
Despite constituting only 2% of total body mass, the brain consumes approximately 20% of total cardiac output
The brain's high metabolic activity and lack of glucose stores requires extensive vascularization to enable oxygen and glucose influx, maintain ion balance, and remove neurotoxic waste products ].
Others have found that dementia risk is higher in subjects with reduced CBF measured with transcranial Doppler
Greater arterial stiffness measured by pulse wave velocity associates with greater Ab burden on PET imaging, lower brain volume in certain brain regions, and more white matter hyperintensities (WMH) on MRI
Dynamic contrast-enhanced MRI shows that hippocampal blood-brain barrier (BBB) breakdown is age-dependent, worsens in mild cognitive impairment (MCI)
MRI sequences evaluating disrupted CBF and cerebral small vessel disease were proposed as vascular biomarkers for the new amyloid, tau, and neurodegeneration (ATN) research framework developed by the National Institute on Aging and Alzheimer's Association (NIA-AA) to provide a biological definition of Alzheimer's disease
The cerebrovasculature plays a pivotal role in removing Ab from the brain through active transport across brain endothelial cells in a process involving various receptors including LDL receptor-related protein (LRP1), p-glycoprotein, and LDLR.
Ab is also cleared from the brain via perivascular drainage in mid-sized and large-sized arteries along smooth muscle cell basement membranes
Disruption of Ab clearance via cerebrovascular pathways may contribute to CAA

Vascular comorbidities in Alzheimer's disease
The importance of the vasculature in Alzheimer's disease is further supported by associations between cardiovascular diseases (CVD) and Alzheimer's disease risk
Genetic variations in human apolipoprotein E (apoE) increase Alzheimer's disease risk and reduce age of Alzheimer's disease onset with APOE-e4 being detrimental, APOE-e3 neutral and APOE-e2 protective
In addition to accelerating amyloidogenesis
Alzheimer's disease and CVD also share many cardiometabolic risk factors including age, sex, smoking, blood pressure, physical activity, blood lipids, and type II diabetes mellitus (T2DM) [31  & ,32,33].
Several of these factors have been combined into the Cardiovascular Risk Factors Aging and Dementia risk score, which correlates with executive function, visual perception, and construction, WMH and CSF Ab and tau in healthy adults
Furthermore, the population-based Rotterdam Study found that an MRI-based cerebral small vessel disease score was associated with greater dementia risk

HDL AND VASCULAR RESILIENCE
Circulating HDL is best known for its pivotal role in reverse cholesterol transport
Only one-third of the identified 95 proteins on HDL

KEY POINTS
Cerebrovascular dysfunction is commonly observed in Alzheimer's disease patients.
Higher plasma HDL levels are often associated with a lower risk of dementia.
HDL can protect mice from CAA, memory deficits, and neuroinflammation.
HDL protects against CAA and Ab-induced inflammation in 3D artery models.
HDL-based biomarkers may identify Alzheimer's disease subjects with vascular dysfunction.
Repurposing existing HDL therapies for Alzheimer's disease is promising because of positive safety data.
function in protease inhibition, complement regulation, hemostasis, and inflammation
Known vasoprotective functions of HDL include promoting endothelial nitric oxide (NO) synthase activity, reducing inflammation, and suppressing vascular adhesion molecule expression

MIXED GENETIC EVIDENCE ON HDL AND VASCULAR RESILIENCE
Mendelian randomization aims to determine the causality of a modifiable risk factor on disease risk by measuring how disease risk changes based on randomly distributed genetic variants that affect the risk factor
Although it is well accepted that high plasma HDL-C levels associate with reduced heart disease mortality
Several groups observe that genetic variants associated with HDL-C do not alter coronary heart disease (CHD), myocardial infarction, or carotid atherosclerosis risk
Two Mendelian randomization studies also suggest HDL-C levels are not causal for Alzheimer's disease risk
Importantly, these studies address only a causal link between disease risk and elevated HDL-C levels mediated by particular genes; they do not take into account the complex changes to HDL function and composition that can occur in disease and that can be superior predictors of disease risk
Recently, two large genome-wide association studies (GWAS) for Alzheimer's disease found lipoprotein metabolism and HDL particle gene sets to be significantly associated with Alzheimer's disease risk.
Genes in these sets encode HDL biogenesis proteins and HDL protein components, such as APOE, ABCA1, APOC1, APOM, APOA2, PON1, CLU, LCAT, CETP, and APOAI

EPIDEMIOLOGICAL EVIDENCE FOR A PROTECTIVE EFFECT OF HDL ON ALZHEIMER'S DISEASE
Several studies show that Alzheimer's disease risk is attenuated by higher levels of HDL cholesterol (HDL-C) or apoA-I, the major protein component of HDL
Cross-sectional studies showed serum apoA-I and HDL-C levels are significantly lower in Alzheimer's disease patients and inversely correlated with Mini Mental State Examination (MMSE) scores
A role for HDL in Ab clearance is suggested by positive correlations between plasma apoA-I and Ab40 in CAA patients
In people without dementia, positive associations have been found between HDL-C levels and working memory
The prospective Honolulu-Aging study followed 929 Japanese-American men and found that the highest quartile of plasma apoA-I at baseline correlated with the lowest risk of dementia 16 years later
Similarly, those with the highest baseline HDL-C in a cohort of 1130 elderly people in New York followed for a median of 4 years had reduced Alzheimer's disease risk
However, other cross-sectional studies including the Framingham study of 1100 elderly participants
Baseline age and follow-up length may explain these inconsistencies
Indeed, the above studies with follow-up times greater than 10 years found significant associations between HDL-C levels and Alzheimer's disease risk
Furthermore, those measuring baseline HDL-C levels at middle age all found significant associations with Alzheimer's disease risk
HDL may, therefore, exert its greatest influence on Alzheimer's disease risk at mid-life.
The mechanisms by which HDL influences Alzheimer's disease risk remain unknown.
Many HDLassociated proteins, such as apoA-I, apoJ, apoE, apoC-III, apoD, and apoA-IV are present within the brain parenchyma, cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), and cerebrovascular intima of leptomeningeal arteries
Except for apoE, the CSF levels of these proteins correlate moderately with their respective levels in plasma, suggesting transport or diffusion from the periphery to the brain.
Although it has been reported that HDL can be transported through human brain microvascular endothelial cells via scavenger receptor (SR)-BI
Therefore, HDL might indirectly influence brain health as a circulating factor primarily acting from the cerebrovascular lumen and intima (Fig.

VASOPROTECTIVE FUNCTIONS OF HDL IN ALZHEIMER'S DISEASE ANIMAL MODELS
Studies in mice genetically engineered to develop amyloid have explored how HDL levels affect Alzheimer's disease-relevant outcomes.
Genetic ablation of apoA-I worsened memory deficits and increased CAA in APP/PS1 mice, a common Alzheimer's disease model
Conversely, APP/PS1 mice with transgenic apoA-I overexpression exhibited attenuated memory deficits, CAA, and neuroinflammation
Treatment of Alzheimer's disease mice with HDL-based therapeutics resulted in similar improvements
Although these studies have contributed toward understanding how HDL may protect from cerebrovascular dysfunction in Alzheimer's disease, they may have only modest translational value because of differences in the distribution of circulating lipoproteins between rodents and humans.
In mice, circulating lipids are mainly carried by HDL whereas in humans they are mainly carried by LDL
These differences are, in part, governed by the activity of cholesterol ester transfer protein (CETP).
CETP facilitates exchange of cholesteryl esters and triglycerides between lipoprotein subclasses and high CETP activity associated with lowered HDL-C levels
However, mice and rats do not express CETP, which may partly underlie their high HDL-C levels
Mice genetically engineered to express human CETP have a moderate dose-dependent reduction of HDL in the presence of both murine, and human apoA-I, but no change in other lipoprotein pools
In addition, the murine and human APOE genes are substantially different
To our knowledge, there has not been a concerted effort to produce an animal model combining expression of human apoE, apoA-I, CETP, APP, and tau to improve the predictive power of murine models with respect to the vascular contributions to Alzheimer's disease.

MECHANISTIC STUDIES OF HDL-MEDIATED VASOPROTECTION IN IN-VITRO MODELS
Developing human-based vascular models that retain anatomical and physiological similarities to humans are, therefore, highly desirable to overcome the difficulties of translating research from mice to humans.
Many BBB studies have been performed using two dimensional (2D) cell culture of human brain endothelial cells from primary, immortalized, or pluripotent stem cell sources [106-114].
However, as cells behave differently in 3D compared with 2D environments [115], 3D BBB models are considered superior.
Trans-well systems offer highly reproducible models for permeability assays [116,117] but lack complex cell-cell and cell-matrix interactions.
Multicellular spheroids of human primary brain endothelial cells, pericytes, and astrocytes spontaneously self-organize into a BBB-like structure
Several 'organon-a-chip' approaches have been developed to overcome these barriers, beginning with microfluidic ,125] (Fig.

CONSIDERATIONS TO EVALUATE HDL AS A POTENTIAL THERAPEUTIC AGENT FOR THE VASCULAR CONTRIBUTIONS TO ALZHEIMER'S DISEASE
The human, animal, and in-vitro studies discussed above provide support for HDL-based therapeutic approaches to protect or repair the BBB.
Several HDL-based therapeutics for CVD have advanced to clinical trials and have both safety and efficacy data (Table
RVX-208 lacked efficacy against atherosclerosis and caused a dose-dependent increase in liver transaminase levels
ACP-501 was well tolerated in stable CHD patients
Early trials suggested niacin treatment could reduce cardiovascular events and atherosclerosis [137], however, two large randomized control trials (RCT) were terminated because of lack of efficacy
Several trials for CETP inhibitors were terminated early because of futility or safety issues including increased mortality in the case of torcetrapib
However, the most recent phase III trial of the potent CETP inhibitor anacetrapib had no adverse effects and reduced major coronary events
CETP inhibitors may be especially useful for repurposing for Alzheimer's disease as certain CETP polymorphisms are associated with Alzheimer's disease risk and memory decline, particularly in APOE4 carriers

Evaluation of HDL-based therapeutics on Alzheimer's disease-relevant outcomes in animal models
Although no HDL-based therapeutic strategies have been tested for Alzheimer's disease in clinical trials, several preclinical studies have been performed in Alzheimer's disease mice.
Intravenous administration of reconstituted HDL reduced soluble brain Ab levels in APP/PS1 mice
APP23 mice treated intravenously with recombinant apoA-I Milano had reduced microgliosis, Ab deposition, and CAA
Oral D-4F treatment improved memory, Ab deposition, microgliosis, astrogliosis, and other markers of inflammation in APPswe/PS1DE9 mice
Outside the context of Alzheimer's disease, D-4F treatment after middle cerebral artery occlusion reduced neuroinflammation and white matter damage [147] and D-4F improved cognition and reduced brain arteriole inflammation in atherosclerotic mice

Additional lipid-modifying therapeutics for the prevention and treatment of dementia
Lipid-modifying approaches not directly targeting HDL may also be of interest for Alzheimer's disease (Table
Statins inhibit 3-hydroxy-3-methyl-glutaryl-coenzyme A (HMG-CoA) reductase to block cholesterol synthesis and subtly increase the HDL:LDL ratio [149].
Meta-analyses suggest statin use lowers dementia risk in prospective trials
Retrospective cohort studies on niacin found higher intake during young adulthood improved some measures of cognitive function 25 years later [154], and older adults with higher intake had reduced risk of Alzheimer's disease and cognitive decline over 6 years of follow-up [155], however, these studies lacked direct measurement of blood niacin levels.
Drugs targeting ATP-binding cassette A1 (ABCA1), such as liver-x-receptor (LXR) and retinoid-x-receptor (RXR) agonists, are another potential indirect HDL-based therapy as the rate-limiting step of HDL biogenesis involves ABCA1-mediated efflux
Direct LXR and RXR agonists increase plasma HDL-C levels [159-162], central nervous system (CNS) apoE lipidation, and cognitive function in Alzheimer's disease animal models (reviewed in
Significant hepatotoxic and systemic side effects have hampered clinical development of direct LXR/RXR agonists [164-166], although new, LXR-independent ABCA1 modulators may avoid these liabilities
The first ABCA1-targetting compound to reach clinical trials was the RXR agonist bexarotene, which in a phase I trial raised CSF apoE levels but had poor bioavailability [168] (Table

LEVERAGING HDL AS A POTENTIAL THERAPEUTIC TO PROTECT AND REPAIR THE CEREBROVASCULATURE IN ALZHEIMER'S DISEASE
The considerable evidence for the safety of several HDL-based therapeutics in clinical trials suggest these agents could be potentially repurposed for Alzheimer's disease.
Specifically, HDL may be of interest to prevent CAA and Alzheimer's diseaserelated neuroinflammation based on its effects in mouse models

HDL AS A POTENTIAL PREDICTIVE BIOMARKER FOR VASCULAR COMPROMISE IN ALZHEIMER'S DISEASE
Biomarker research for Alzheimer's disease has rapidly progressed in recent years with the development of imaging techniques to visualize Ab and tau deposits in living people and breakthroughs in fluid biomarker sensitivity and specificity
As HDL can be isolated from the blood of Alzheimer's disease patients and assayed in-vitro, it may be possible to develop HDL-based assays that specifically report on cerebrovascular health, particularly if they correlate with cerebrovascular disorders, such a CAA, microinfarcts, or WMH.
Again, there is currently no evidence that HDL can enter the brain parenchyma as an intact particle in vivo, instead HDL circulating in the lumen of cerebral vessels is proposed to impact brain health through effects on vessel health.
It is well understood that HDL composition and function is altered by aging and in T2DM, and CAD patients
Reduced cholesterol efflux and anti-inflammatory activity have also been observed in HDL from Alzheimer's disease subjects



FIGURE 1 .
FIGURE 1. Vasoprotective functions of HDL relevant for Alzheimer's disease.
HDL has been shown to have at least four distinctive functions that could protect against Alzheimer's disease.
HDL suppresses the pathological accumulation of Ab in cerebral vessels known as cerebral amyloid angiopathy (CAA).
HDL suppresses vascular inflammation induced by Ab or pro-inflammatory cytokines and global neuroinflammation in Alzheimer's disease.
HDL stimulates the production of nitric oxide from brain endothelial cells.
HDL delays the fibrillization of Ab.
Although large, spherical HDL is unlikely to cross the blood-brain barrier, apoA-I can gain access to the brain via the blood-CSF barrier at the choroid plexus.
HDL-like particles in the brain are mainly apoE-based.
ApoE is found in three isoforms in humans; apoE2, apoE3, and apoE4.
APOe4 is the major genetic risk factor for late-onset Alzheimer's disease and apoE4 has several detrimental functions including delaying Ab transport out of the brain, promoting blood-brain barrier breakdown, and increasing neuroinflammation.
ApoE is also found in the CSF along with apoA-I.
Ab, amyloid beta; apoA-I, apolipoprotein A-I; apoE, apolipoprotein E; BBB, blood-brain barrier; CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; HDL, high-density lipoprotein; LDLR, low-density lipoprotein receptor; LRP-1, low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein 1.


. The recombinant apoA-I protein CER-001 [126-128], apoA-I mimetics, such as D-4F [129,130] and L-4F [131], the plasma-derived apoA-I formulation CSL-112 [132], and autologous administration of patient-derived apoA-I [133] were all well tolerated in phase I clinical trials for acute coronary syndrome or stable CHD.
Although development of many of these agents was halted because of failure to meet primary outcomes of reduced atherosclerosis [126-128] or improved HDL function [131], CSL-112 and autologous apoA-I administration have shown promise and are undergoing phase III trials (NCT03473223, NCT03135184).


Campisi M, Shin Y, Osaki T, et al. 3D self-organized microvascular model of the human blood-brain barrier with endothelial cells, pericytes and astrocytes.
Biomaterials 2018; 180:117-129.
This study describes a blood-brain barrier model composed of human-induced pluripotent stem cell-derived endothelial cells, brain pericytes, and astrocytes grown in a fibrin gel allowing for the self-assembly of a microvascular network.
122.
& Maoz BM, Herland A, Fitzgerald EA, et al.
A linked organ-on-chip model of the human neurovascular unit reveals the metabolic coupling of endothelial and neuronal cells.
Nat Biotechnol 2018; 36:865-877.This study describes a human neurovascular unit model composed of primary human brain microvascular pericytes and endothelial cells, primary human cortical astrocytes, and human neurons differentiated from hippocampal neural stem cells in three coupled chambers arranged such that the individual functions of each cell type can be evaluated.
123.&&Robert
J, Button EB, Yuen B, et al.
Clearance of beta-amyloid is facilitated by apolipoprotein E and circulating high-density lipoproteins in bioengineered human vessels.
Elife 2017; 6:; pii: e29595.
This study demonstrates a novel function of HDL in 3D bioengineered arteries in preventing Ab vascular accumulation.
124.



Table 1 .
HDL-based therapeutics in clinical trials for cardiovascular diseases and under investigation for dementia


[68]r studies found that the levels of HDL particles containing apoE and lacking apoJ predict greater WMH volume in normal and MCI subjects[180], and that plasma apoJ levels are higher in subjects with CAA-related intracerebral hemorrhages compared with Alzheimer's disease subjects[68].CONCLUSIONA growing body of evidence in humans, mice, and 3D in-vitro models supports a role for HDL in cerebrovascular resilience.
As various HDL formulations have already been developed and tested in clinical trials for CVD, repurposing those with attractive safety profiles may offer a novel strategy for preventing or treating the cerebrovascular disorder associated with Alzheimer's disease.
Assays of HDL function could also act as biomarkers for cerebrovascular disorder in Alzheimer's disease, which could assist in stratifying Alzheimer's disease patients for more specific therapeutic interventions and providing a wider window for treating patients before irreversible neurodegeneration occurs.
RF, Albert MS, Alonso A, et al.
Association0Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities (ARIC) Cohort.
JAMA Neurol 2017; 74:1246-1254.
This study followed 15 744 people for 25 years in communites throughout the USA and found that the vascular risk factors during midlife were associated with increased risk of dementia.