Anxiety and depression in Alzheimer’s disease: a systematic review of pathogenetic mechanisms and relation to cognitive decline
Objectives To explore the pathogenetic hypothesis provided to explain the comorbidity of anxious and depressive symptomatology and AD and to assess the association between anxious and depressive symptoms and the AD-related cognitive impairment.
Methods In October 2020 and March 2021, PsycINFO, Embase, Ovid, and CINAHL were searched for peer-reviewed original articles investigating anxiety and/or depression in AD.
Results A total of 14,760 studies were identified and 34 papers on AD patients were included in the review.
Suggested biological causes of depression and anxiety in AD include higher strychnine-sensitive glycine receptor (GlyRS) functioning and selective reduction of N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA) receptor NR2A density, cortical and limbic atrophy, lower resting cortical metabolism, lower CSF Aβ42 and higher t-tau and p-tau levels, and neuritic plaques.
At the same time, dysthymia arises in the early stages of AD as an emotional reaction to the progressive cognitive decline and can cause it; anxiety can appear as an initial compensating behaviour; and depression might be related to AD awareness and loss of functional abilities.
Affective symptoms and the expression of the depressive symptoms tend to reduce as AD progresses.
The neurodegeneration of areas and circuits dealing with emotions can elicit anxiety and depression in AD.
In the early stages of the disease, anxiety and depression could arise as a psychological reaction to AD and due to coping difficulties.
In late AD stages, the cognitive impairment reduces the emotional responses and their expression.
Anxiety and depression are more intense in early-onset AD, due to the major impact of AD on the individual.

Introduction
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a primary neurodegenerative dementia and one of the leading causes of disability in older people
AD is clinically characterized by a progressive, global cognitive impairment that affects a person's ability to perform everyday activities and is associated with brain changes that involve the extracellular accumulation of beta-amyloid plaques outside neurons and intraneuronal deposition of tau tangles inside neurons
Although the core symptoms of AD are memory impairment and deficits in other cognitive domains
In AD, the prevalence of anxiety ranges from 9.4% (preclinical phase) to 39% (from mild to severe decline)
Anxiety is generally characterized by excessive worry, tenseness, irritability, wandering, and decreased engagement in once pleasurable activities
Anxious symptoms seem to be associated with more severe impairments in activities of daily living and worse behavioural concerns
Typical depressive symptoms in AD are insomnia, social withdrawal, reduced purpose-oriented behaviour, loss of interest in once-enjoyable activities and hobbies, guilt, hopelessness, and sadness
Anxiety and depression often overlap, especially in patients with mild AD

Search strategy
The literature search was performed in October 2020 on PsycINFO, Embase, MEDLINE, and CINAHL databases.
Then, a search update followed in March 2021 on the same databases.
The search was conducted by L.C., a librarian expert in data extraction from databases, using keywords including the following terms (MeSH and free words): ("Alzheimer's disease"
See online resource "SM 1" for the details of the search strategy.

Study eligibility criteria
Only full-text original articles published in English language on peer-reviewed journals were included in the search.
In detail, studies with longitudinal, prospective, cross-sectional, multicentre, evaluative, or comparative designs, and not assessing interventions were analysed.
Furthermore, studies had to be on patients with a diagnosis of AD.
Diagnosis of AD had to be done using approved diagnostic criteria, i.e., those of DSM-III-R, DSM-IV, DSM-IV-TR, NIA-AA, NINCDS-ADRDA, ICD-10, CERAD, and Braak stage.
No age-filters were used.
Finally, they had to investigate symptoms of anxiety and/or depression; then, they had to propose pathogenetic hypothesis on anxiety and depression in AD and/or to investigate the association between anxiety and/or depression and cognitive impairment.
The exclusion criteria were (1) literature reviews; (2) systematic reviews; (3) meta-analysis; (4) case reports or case series studies; (5) clinical trials;
Studies of grey literature (theses, abstracts, books, dissertations) were not included in the search considering the high number of peer-reviewed articles published on the topic.
No limitations were established on publication data of the studies.
No limitations were established on methods of anxiety and depression assessment on condition of these criteria: studies had to assess anxiety and/or depression using validated scales or structured interviews.

Data collection and analysis
Two researchers (NC and AC) identified the potential studies of interest, screening titles, and abstracts.
All the studies that did not meet all the inclusion criteria or that complied with almost one exclusion criterion were excluded.
Then, the remaining studies were screened reading their full text, and the selected articles were revised to verify whether they fulfilled the inclusion criteria.
If there was any disagreement in the study selection, a third investigator (RB) read the article and NC, AC, and RB decided together for the inclusion of the article in the review or not.
All the studies selected for the review were revised considering the country, objectives, design, sampling and sample size, outcome measures, and results.
Any direct contact with authors was necessary with the following exception: for Panegyres et al.'s study
So, the people responsible for the C-Path Online Data Repository used by authors were contacted and they provided the missing information.

Risk of bias
We assessed the quality of the included articles using the Newcastle-Ottawa Quality Assessment Scale (NOS)
Two independent investigators (A.C. and N.C.) analysed each article.
Scores ranged from 0 to 9 points, with higher scores indicating higher study quality.
We considered NOS scores of 0-3, 4-6, and ≥ 7 to indicate low, medium, and high quality, respectively.

Results
The identified potentially relevant studies, resulting from the searches on the abovementioned databases, were 14,760.
Of these, 4700 were on PsycINFO, 1351 on Embase, 4738 on Ovid, and 3971 on CINAHL.
After comparison of the databases, 3888 duplicates were removed.
Screening titles and abstracts, 10,798 studies were identified as not meeting the inclusion criteria or fulfilling almost one exclusion criterion and were excluded.
Then, the full texts of the 74 articles considered relevant for the inclusion in the review were analysed.
Of those, 40 were excluded because they did not meet the inclusion criteria, or they meet almost one exclusion criterion.
Finally, 34 papers were included in the systematic review after the end of the screening process.
The selection procedure is represented through a flow diagram in the online resource "SM 2."

Methodological aspects
Country Fifteen studies were conducted in the USA
Objectives Of the 34 studies, 17 explored the pathogenetic hypothesis that explains the comorbidity of AD, anxiety, and/or depression.
Among these, 4 evaluated the association between anxiety, depression, and AD biomarkers; 8 evaluated whether anxious and depressive symptomatology in AD arise after the diagnosis of AD or as a reaction to perceived cognitive decline.
Ten studies investigated whether anxiety and/or depression can influence the cognitive functions, 3 evaluated the prevalence of depressive and anxiety symptoms, 2 assessed the trajectories of depression, 1 examined if depression is a risk factor for the onset of AD, and 1 study explored clinical differences between early-onset AD and late-onset AD patients.

Study design
Of the 34 studies, 12 were longitudinal studies, 9 were cross-sectional studies, 1 was a comparative study, 1 was a multicentric study, 5 were prospective studies, 2 were retrospective studies, 1 was a cohort observational study, 2 were prospective longitudinal studies, and 1 was a retrospective longitudinal study.

Sample
The samples consisted of 12,512 elderly patients with diagnosis of AD or with probable AD in total.
All the screened studies included both genders, predominantly women (56.4%).
Patients' mean age was 73.82 ± 6.8 years (range = 57.7-86.2).
Relevant variability among studies was observed in the number of participants.
Sample sizes ranged from 20 to 3747 AD patients.
The AD duration varies between studies: in 14 studies, patients suffered from AD from less than 6 years, and in 5 studies, patients suffered from AD from at least 7 years.
The authors of the remaining studies did not provide precise data on AD duration.
At the time of the assessment, most patients were in a mild-to-moderate AD stage.
Only in 4 studies, participants were patients with severe AD
In addition to AD, patients also showed a comorbidity of depression and/or anxiety.
Of all the samples, 18 consisted of subjects with AD and depression; 5 consisted of subjects with AD and anxiety; and 5 included subjects with a comorbidity of AD, and depressive and anxious symptoms.
In the other samples, during the study, patients with AD developed depression or anxiety.
About the samples of the included studies, only 2 of them were from psychiatric settings
Most samples were from dementia specialty clinics.
Among them, 15 were from outpatient settings, 4 were inpatient settings, 2 nursing home settings, and 3 in-home settings.
The other remaining studies, instead, did not provide further information on the sample.
Outcomes assessment For AD diagnosis, 26 studies used criteria established by the NINCDS-ADRDA
Two studies
In one study
Few studies
For the assessment of the cognitive impairment, the Mini Mental State Examination (MMSE)
Most studies evaluated anxiety and depression using the Neuropsychiatric Inventory (NPI)

Risk of bias assessment
The risk of bias assessment of the included studies showed high-quality design in most of our studies (25 out of 34), while the rest appeared with a medium risk of bias (9 out of 34).
A closer analysis revealed that most of the research did not clarify the duration of the follow-up or how many patients concluded it; some articles lost "stars" within the "comparability category"; finally, several studies did not specify in detail the history of the investigated disease.
The table in the online resource "SM 3" shows the results of the risk of bias assessment, specifying how many "stars" we evaluated in each included study.

Results

Pathogenetic hypothesis for anxiety, depression, and AD comorbidity
Depression and anxiety occur throughout the AD course both due to brain damage and psychosocial factors
Higher anxiety levels seemed to be associated with higher strychnine-sensitive glycine receptor (GlyRS) functioning and selective reduction of N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA) receptor NR2A density
Anxiety in AD could be explained by the atrophy in the right precuneus and inferior parietal lobule and hyperperfusion of the bilateral anterior cingulate cortex
Higher anxiety was associated with lower resting metabolism in the bilateral entorhinal cortex, anterior parahippocampal gyrus, left anterior superior temporal gyrus, and insula
Depression was associated with AD pathology, i.e., lower CSF Aβ42 and higher t-tau and p-tau levels
Depression can be determined by decreased cortical metabolism, neuritic plaques, and neuronal damage in the temporal cortex that lead to disinhibition of the HPA-axis.
On the other hand, the association between depression, HPA hyperactivity, and cardiovascular disease can determine AD progression
AD development seems to stop the continuity of the depressive state due to impaired memory and executive control
Affective symptoms and the expression of the depressive symptoms tend to reduce as AD progresses
Dysthymia was primarily in the early stages of AD, as an emotional reaction to the progressive cognitive decline, while major depression may be related to biological factors and is a symptom of the neurodegenerative AD processes
Banning et al.
Depression can also be reactive to AD-related loss of functional ability
Anxiety and depression were higher in patients with early-onset AD compared to patients with late-onset AD due to the following factors present in early-onset AD patients: greater changes in lifestyles, roles, and responsibility; poor social adjustment; cognitive impairment; dementia severity; and more rapid progression
Van Vliet

Fig. 1 Causal factors for anxiety and depression in AD

Association between anxiety, depression, and cognitive impairment
Cognitive impairment seemed to mediate the association between the presence of anxiety, lower CSF levels of Ab42, and higher levels of CSF t-tau and p-tau
Lower inhibition performance on Stroop test was associated with subsequent higher risk of anxiety and depression, due to the involving of anterior cingulate cortex
Association of depressive symptoms and cognitive impairment seems to be independent of cortical plaques and tangles
Depressive symptoms in AD were associated with a greater severity of cognitive impairment
Depression did not increase as mild cognitive impairment developed
It could be an early reaction to perceived cognitive decline
Depression can cause cognitive impairment
Cognitive impairment was associated with a small reduction in mood symptoms and a modest increase in somatic symptoms: the AD progression determines the degradation of the ability to experience or express emotion
A summary of the 34 studies included in the systematic review is reported in Table

Discussion
The review aims to provide a bio-psycho-social frame to explain why AD patients can suffer from anxiety and depression, considering the phenomenon in its complexity.
Thus, multiple pieces of punctual evidence have been combined to resume and conceptualize the literature state of the art on reasons underlying the comorbidity between anxiety, depression, and AD.
For this reason, the results of the studies analysed in this review are heterogeneous because they consider not only biological, but also psychosocial aspects and they deal with AD in all its different phases relative to its progression.
They evidence that both anxiety and depression could be due to brain damage on the one hand and psychosocial factors on the other.
The neurodegeneration of neural areas and circuits dealing with emotions can determine hyperactivation and disinhibition of the HPA axis that can elicit the anxious and depressive symptoms.
In this regard, it has been hypothesized that hyper perfusion and atrophy of cerebral areas-i.e., anterior cingulate cortex, precuneus and parietal lobule-but also receptor alterationsi.e., NMDA receptor-could be linked to depressive symptoms
This condition of chronic distress, in turn, can lead to neurodegeneration and contribute to AD progression.
Then, during the late AD stages, the high rate of brain damage could stop the depressive condition due to the impairment of memory and the executive functions, and the intensity and expression of the affective symptoms are reduced.
This phenomenon could be present because a more severe cognitive decline is frequently associated with loss of insight in AD
Stronger negative emotions require a good cerebral function: if the cognitive impairment is too serious, patients will not be able to produce this type of emotional response
On the other hand, the early stages of AD seem to be characterized by dysthymia, as an emotional reaction to the cognitive decline, and anxiety, as an initial compensating behaviour.
During the initial phases of AD, depressive symptoms can manifest due to AD awareness, the impairment of the socio-relational functioning, and the loss of functional abilities.
Thus, in this phase, anxiety and depression could arise due to difficulties in the adaptation to the disease and represent the psychological response to the loss of self-sufficiency and independence
Instead, major depression could be more related to biological factors, such as neurotransmitters and endocrine alterations or cortical apoptosis.
Literature evidence also differences in anxiety and depression between early-onset and late-onset AD.
They seem to be more intense in early-onset AD due to more changes in lifestyles and life roles, to more responsibilities to cope with and to poorer social adjustment to the disease.
Moreover, early-onset AD is often characterized by more rapid progression, dementia severity, and cognitive impairment and this can promote the psychological symptoms.
The late-onset AD can occur in the elders in comorbidity with other concerns, such as physical disability or bereavements.

Results
To examine the emergence of the first clinical symptoms over a 14-year period of follow-up before the dementia phase of AD Longitudinal study.
Subjects were evaluated at home at the initial visit and at 1, 3, 5, 8, 10, 13, and 15 years 350 AD Pt.; M: 243; F: 107; age: 86.

Results
To examine the temporal relationship between depressive symptoms, function, and cognitive status in Pt with probable AD Multicentre cohort study Pt were followed for up to 14 years and evaluated every 6 months 536 Pt with probable AD (210 with AD and depression) M: 220; F: 316; age: 74; AD duration: 4.06 years Dementia severity: mild level of cognitive and functional impairments AD criteria: NINCDS-ADRDA; DSM-III-R Cognitive and functional ability assessment: 3MS; BDRS Depression assessment: CUSPAD Depression was associated with functional impairment but not with cognitive impairment.
Decline in function, indeed, preceded the first episode of depressive symptoms → Lower functional activity may be a risk factor for the onset of depressive symptoms in AD  with severe cognitive impairment → Premorbid major depressive episodes might increase the risk of developing AD, while prevalence of depressive episodes that occurred in the context of AD may be related to neurodegenerative events that contribute to the aetiology of major depression among AD Pt In AD Pt with depression, a lower neuronal count in the locus coeruleus and a higher in the basal nucleus of Meynert than AD Pt without depression were observed.
There were no differences of the neuron numbers in the SN Pt with depression showed less cognitive impairment and their verbal skills were better preserved → The observed disproportionate loss of noradrenergic and cholinergic neurons in the LC and basal nucleus of Meynert may represent an important organic substrate of depression in AD Thus, in late-onset AD, depressive symptoms are the most prevalent and seem to be more persistent.
The results of the studies show an association between anxiety, depression, and cognitive decline.
Anxious and depressive symptoms can manifest as an initial psychological reaction to the cognitive impairment.
Furthermore, on its turn, depression can impact on the cognitive functioning, causing an increase of the cognitive deficits: i.e., during the remission of the depressive symptoms, the capacities of planning mediated by the frontal circuits improve.
This role of influence of depression on cognition has been observed only in the intermediate AD phases.
Finally, higher cognitive impairment is associated with higher somatic symptoms of anxiety and depression and lower affective symptoms.
This could be due to reduced metacognitive possibilities to experience and express emotions.
The methodology of the symptoms' assessment could have moderated the abovementioned findings.
Assessment tools more specifically dedicated to the analysis of anxiety and depression in AD can estimate symptoms differently than those provided by more generic criteria, as the DSM or the ICD
In this regard, Vilalta-Franch and colleagues
Furthermore, they observed that the use of the Neuropsychiatric Inventory (NPI) can be biased by the fact that caregivers usually overestimate patients' depressive symptoms due to their own distress
The minority of studies performed longitudinal research designs, so further research with longitudinal observations is needed to better explore the variation of anxiety and depression along the AD course.
Moreover, few studies assessed the AD severity, despite it emerging as a factor playing a role with respect to the considered psychological symptomatology.
Another limitation of the studies is that they have used different AD diagnostic criteria, such as NINCDS-ADRDA, NIA-AA, DSM, and ICD.
Furthermore, NINCDS-ADRDA, although it is the most used and more valid than the other diagnostic criteria, is less accurate than the currently used NIA-AA criteria.
Large criteria for source search have been preferred to more stringent ones to collect and mix more evidence.
At the same time, they reduced quality and homogeneity of evidence.
In fact, NOS scores indicated that the quality of the included studies is not high, and studies were heterogeneous in aims, types of assessment, sampling, participants, AD duration, and neuropsychological assessment, that in most cases were not adequate.
In this regard, also time impacted on method heterogeneity between older studies and the more recent ones, because the assessment criteria have changed and improved over time.
Implementing more circumscribed reviews could preserve research quality and favour a more specific, detailed, and reliable comprehension of the described clinical phenomena.
Moreover, most studies assessed anxiety and depression when AD was mild or moderate and not severe: this is understandable considering the serious cognitive decline that characterizes the AD advanced phases and hinders the psychological assessment, but, at the same time, it limits the exploration of anxiety and depression in patients with severe AD.
Finally, AD is often present in comorbidity with dementias due to other causes, such as the vascular one.
So, it would be useful to study anxiety and depression also in clinical condition of multiple dementias.

Conclusion
The neurodegeneration of areas and circuits dealing with emotions can elicit the anxious and depressive symptoms that, in their turn, can lead to neurodegeneration.
In the early AD stages, anxiety and depression could arise as a psychological reaction to the disease and due to difficulties in the adaptation to AD.
During the late AD stages, the serious cognitive impairment reduces the emotional responses and their expression.
Finally, anxiety and depression are more intense in early-onset AD, due to the major impact of AD on the individual.
Further research, especially with longitudinal design, considering all the AD stages, performing adequate neuropsychological assessment, and investigating psychosocial factors are needed to better clarify the comorbidity between depression, anxiety, and AD.



Fig. 2
Fig. 2 Relationships between anxiety, depression, AD, and cognitive impairment



2 ;
AD duration: n.a.; dementia severity: n.a AD criteria: NINCDS-ADRDA Cognitive ability assessment: a battery of tests including MMSE Depression assessment: Center for Epidemiologic Studies-Depression scale (CESD) Association between global deficits and depressive symptoms.
→ Depression could be an early reaction to perceived cognitive decline Wilson et al. [31hypothesis that depressive symptoms increase during the prodromal phase of AD Prospective cohort study 190 Pt with incident AD, M: 54; F: 136; age: 80.0; AD duration (years): 3.9; dementia severity: n.a AD criteria: NINCDS-ADRDA Cognitive ability assessment: MMSE Depression assessment: CES-D No significant changes in depressive symptoms after the AD diagnosis, although symptoms tended to decrease in women relative to men and in those with a higher premorbid level of openness and a lower premorbid level of agreeableness.
Not increasing in depression as mild cognitive impairment developed → Depressive symptoms might influence the relation of the AD pathologic changes to cognition.
Depression was associated with sex and personality, and some people experience a depressive reaction to AD


5; age duration: n.a Dementia severity: moderate level at the study onset and a severe level at the last evaluation AD criteria: McKhann criteria Cognitive function assessment: MMSE Depression assessment: HRS-D + quantitative structured interviews with family members Premorbid neuroticism personality was associated with an increased rate of depressive symptoms in AD Pt Cognitive impairment was associated with a small reduction in mood symptoms and a modest increase in somatic symptoms → Decline in mood symptoms with increasing severity of cognitive impairment in Pt with AD can be explained as the result of the degradation of the ability to experience or express emotion as severity of AD increases Wilson et al. relationship between depressive symptoms, clinical AD, and cognitive impairment Longitudinal study 130 elder participants, of whom 51 with probable AD AD criteria: NINCDS-ADRDA Cognitive ability assessment: 19 cognitive function tests Depression assessment: Center for Epidemiologic Studies Depression Scale (CES-D) Association of depressive symptoms with clinical AD and cognitive impairment seems to be independent of cortical plaques and tangles.
→ Depression-related glucocorticoid effects on neuronal function can contribute to risk of dementia.
Depressive symptoms can also contribute to cognitive decline and clinical AD through some psychological mechanism Zubenko et al. [26prevalence and clinical features of the major depressive syndrome of AD, comparing Pt with AD to elderly Pt without AD Comparative study 243 Pt with probable AD.
M: 100; F: 143.
Age: 78.4; age at onset of AD: 69.0; dementia severity: moderate level 151 No-AD Pt.
M: 70; F: 81; age: 70.9 AD criteria: NINCDS-ADRDA Cognitive function assessment: MMSE; CDR Depression assessment: HAM-D; CADD Higher lifetime prevalence of major depression among AD Pt and higher prevalence of MD in AD Pt



Table 1
Characteristics of the included studies Pt with early-onset AD; M: 31; F: 61; age: 59.0; AD duration (years): 5.6; dementia severity: mild to severe AD criteria: NINCDS-ADRDA Cognitive ability assessment: MMSE Depression and anxiety assessment: Neuropsychiatric Inventory No differences in depression and anxiety among the three AD severity groups → Early-onset AD can lead to a poor social adjustment in society and family.Depression and anxiety are influenced by both psychosocial factors and advancing brain damage Kaiser et al. [34] USA To evaluate anxiety in early-onset AD (EOAD) versus late-onset AD (LOAD) Cross-sectional 45 Pt (23 with EOAD, age: 57.68; 22 with LOAD, age: 80.32); M: 31; F: 14; AD duration (years): 3.09 Cornell Scale for Depression in Dementia and Geriatric Depression Scale Association between depression and changes in the temporal and parietal regions, including supramarginal, superior and inferior temporal and fusiform gyri, right posterior cingulate, and precuneus.Correlation between cortical thickness and t-τ was greater in depressed pts. in precuneus and parahippocampal cortex → More neurodegeneration on limbic structures in depressed AD patients.



Table 1
Neuropsychiatric InventoryDepression and anxiety prevalence is lower in young-onset AD than in late-onset AD Depression is the most prevalent symptom in late-onset AD, and it decreases over time.
Depression is less persistent in young-onset AD than in late-onset AD → Non-memory phenotype is associated with less atrophy of the medial temporal lobe, so with less symptoms.
In oldest patients, contextual factors, i.e., death of a loved one or physical disability, and cerebrovascular diseases may increase depression



Table 1



Table 1
depression may influence the clinical expression of AD, analysing the relationship between cognition, the neuropathological stages of AD, and depressive symptoms Longitudinal study Pt with cognitive impairment were evaluated every 6 months, annually for those without 89 Pt with AD (48 with depression) M: 39; F: 50; age: 79.4 Dementia severity: 14.24% Pt in the pre-clinical stage of AD, 21.36% in the intermediate stages of AD, 43.61% in the final stages of AD AD criteria: Braak stage Cognitive function assessment: CAMCOG Depression assessment: CAMDEX Depression was associated with a more severe cognitive impairment, but only in intermediate stages of AD.
Indeed, depressive symptoms had no impact during the early and advanced stages of AD → Depressive symptoms may contribute to the cognitive decline of AD Pt.
The low prevalence of depression in the final stages of AD may be due to the fact that demented Pt are not able to express the depressive disorder Gilley et al. [27] USA related to the development of depressive symptoms in Pt with AD Longitudinal study.
Pt were evaluated at baseline and at up to 4 annual follow-up examinations 410 Pt with AD, M: 136; F: 274; age: 75.


CIDI Partial correlation between the onset of cognitive impairment and the onset of depression → Depression in AD might not be a symptom of psychological distress, but a symptom of the neurodegenerative process of AD that causes cognitive dysfunction as well



Table 1
[22]valuate the cognitive functions of patients (Pt) with probable AD and major depression in comparison with Pt with AD and no depression Longitudinal study.Two evaluations: at baseline and 1-year follow-up 10 Pt with AD and depression (developed after the onset of symptoms of dementia) compared with 10 The depressed patients had significantly more first-and second-degree relatives with depression than did control subjects Alzheimer's disease as it evolves may interact with an existing genetic vulnerability to affective disorder, which is not expressed until the degenerative changes of Alzheimer's disease unfold Zweig et al.[22]USA AD Pt showed higher levels of neuronal loss and higher counts of NFTs, particularly within the LC.
Patients with AD complicated by major depression had fewer neurons at the mid-level of the LC and at the rostral level of the CSN in comparison with nondepressed patients → These findings demonstrate histological changes in the brain related to the presence of depression Cambridge Examination for Mental Disorders of the Elderly; CIDI, Composite International Diagnostic Interview; CDR, Clinical Dementia Rating; CDR-SB, Clinical Dementia Rating scale sum of boxes; CERAD, Consortium to Establish a Registry for AD; CES-D, Center for Epidemiologic Studies Depression Scale; CSDD, Cornell Scale for Depression in Dementia; CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; CUSPAD, Columbia University Scale for Psychopathology in Alzheimer's Disease; DBS, Dementia Behaviour Scale; DMAS, Dementia Mood Assessment Scale; DS, Blessed Dementia Scale; EOAD, early-onset Alzheimer's disease; FAB, Frontal Assessment Battery; FAS, Verbal Fluency; FAST, Functional Assessment Staging scale; FH-RDC, Family History Research Diagnostic Criteria; FIM, Functional Independence Measure; GAD, general anxiety disorder; GDS, Geriatric Depression Scale; GDS, Global Deterioration Scale; GlyRS, Glycyl-tRNA synthetase; HADS-A, Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale-Anxiety subscale; HAM-A, Hamilton Anxiety Rating Scale; HAM-D, Hamilton Depression Rating Scale; HDRS, Hamilton Depression Rating Scale; HRS-D, Hamilton Rating Scale for Depression; iADL, instrumental activity of daily living; ICD-10, International Classification of Diseases Tenth Revision; IPL, inferior parietal lobule; MD, major depression; MDRS, Mattis Dementia Rating Scale; LOAD, late-onset Alzheimer's disease; MMSE, Mini Mental State Examination; mMMSE, Modified Mini-Mental State Exam; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; NIAA, National Institute on Aging-Alzheimer's Association criteria; NINCDS-ADRDA, National Institute of Neurological and Communicative Disorders and Stroke and the Alzheimer's Disease and Related Disorders Association criteria; NMDA, N-methyl-d-aspartate; NPI, Neuropsychiatric Inventory; NPI-Q,