Cortisol, Amyloid-β, and Reserve Predicts Alzheimer’s Disease Progression for Cognitively Normal Older Adults
Elevated cortisol as a measure of hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal-axis hyperactivity has emerged as a predictor of clinical progression of Alzheimer's disease (AD), in conjunction with amyloid-␤ (A␤) abnormalities.
Yet factors exist which have the propensity to delay AD symptomatic expression in the face of an AD-type biomarker-based pathological profile.
This study sought to determine whether abnormal cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) A␤ and elevated cortisol levels are associated with clinical transition to mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and AD in cognitively normal (CN) individuals, and if this association is modified by reserve proxies.
Data from 91 CN individuals participating in the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) with available morning CSF cortisol and A␤ 42 were evaluated.
Reserve was modelled as a latent composite score of standardized intracranial volume and lifetime experience proxies.
Cox regressions were used to test associations between baseline CSF cortisol/A␤ 42 , reserve score and AD progression, adjusting for age, sex, apolipoprotein E genotype, and depressive symptoms.
Individuals with elevated cortisol + abnormal A␤ 42 levels at baseline showed highest risk of clinical progression.
After a median of 84 months follow-up, significant cortisol/A␤ reserve interaction for clinical

INTRODUCTION
Late onset Alzheimer's disease (AD), by far the most common form of dementia, is thought to be of complex and multifactorial etiology, resulting from complex interactions of a plethora of genetic and environmental factors across the lifespan.
Cerebral accumulation of amyloid-␤ (A␤) and tau proteins are thought to be key histopathological hallmarks and their intracerebral processing may be an important driver for disease etiology
On the other hand, evidence from studies of animal models and human studies indicate that aberrant activity of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) system contributes to AD etiopathogenesis, as well as in the development of cognitive decline and associated symptomatology
Indeed hypersecretion and aberrant receptor-mediated signaling actions of glucocorticoid (GC), the HPA axis's end-effector molecule (released as cortisol in man), have been reported to impede normal A␤ and tau processing
Furthermore, they have been shown to potentially facilitate AD-related cognitive deficits in animal disease models
The detrimental consequences of a hyperactive HPA axis have been reported at the prodromal and clinical stages of AD, with both central
Likewise, a combinatory biomarker exploration of 208 analytes revealed cortisol to be one of five biomarkers that could reliably predict clinical progression within a period of 3 years
Experiential data in cognitively normal (CN) older individuals, though limited, posits abnormal GC secretion as a predictive marker for rapid cognitive decline in individuals with excess cerebral A␤
Yet to date, no evidence on clinical translatability of this finding in terms of AD clinical progression is available.
Research on modifiable factors affecting onset and progression of cognitive decline and dementia has received growing attention.
A key finding is that high were also used for study analyses
ICV in ADNI was estimated by the automated MRI method, which combined three tissue classes of segmentation: gray matter, white matter and CSF spaces.
ICV (cm 3 ) data was dichotomized via median split procedure into low (≤1505.01
cm 3 ) and high (>1505.01
cm 3 ).
Occupation was graded on a scale of 0-3 defined from The National Statistics Socio-economic Classification
Level 0 represented unemployed participants such as housewives; Level 1 represented partly-skilled or unskilled occupations; Level 2 represented skilled occupations; and Level 3 featured professional and managerial occupations.
Inverse probability imputation method was used to deal with the 8 missing values in IQ score

Statistical analysis
Comparisons of categorical variables including gender, APOE-4 (+ve/-ve) carrier status, and occupation between the four biomarker combination groups were performed using a Chi-squared test.
Continuous variables including age, reserve composite, ICV, IQ, education, and GDS were compared using analysis of variance (ANOVA) with Tukey post-hoc test, for the four biomarker combination groups.
Time to progression to a more severe diagnostic state (i.e., MCI or AD), based on the most recent diagnostic assessment was inputted as the study outcome within the survival analysis.
For individuals that did not progress, final visit time was used as the censoring time.
Kaplan-Meier (KM) curves were employed to compare the risk of progression across the four biomarker groups.
Cox proportional hazards models were fitted to explore associations between reserve, cortisol and A␤ 42 with risk of progression in separate models.
Model 1 was an unadjusted model exploring interaction between A␤ 42 and cortisol levels.
Model 2 examined the three-way interaction between reserve, cortisol, and A␤ 42 by adding the production terms between these variables.
Model 3 was further adjusted for baseline measures of age, gender, APOE 4, and GDS.
Moreover, interaction between reserve score and the four biomarker combination groups was also tested using the likelihood ratio test.
Marginal plots were then used to show the relative risk of progression among these four groups per the reserve score.
In addition, we conducted supplemental analyses 205 to explore the reserve, cortisol, and A␤
Participants in 289 the GC+/A␤+ group with high reserve scores had a relatively lower risk for clinical progression (Supplementary Table
Notably, the interaction between reserve, cortisol, and A␤ 42 remained significant after controlling for total-tau abnormalities and other CSF risk biomarkers within an exploratory model (Supplementary Table
A significant role for GDS and APOE 4 carriage in increasing the risk of progression for the entire population was noted, with respective HR of 1.78 (p < 0.001) for the former, and 4.30 (p < 0.001) for the latter in Model 3 (Table
To further explore the relationship between reserve and clinical progression, we examined the effect of the independent reserve variables in four separate models for ICV, IQ, occupation and education; and the interaction of each of these variables with CSF levels of A␤ 42 and cortisol.
Differential effects of the distinct reserve variables were noted (Supplementary Table
In the IQ interaction model, a significant decrease in risk was observed in those individuals that have high levels of pre-morbid IQ in the GC+/A␤+ group (HR: 0.065, p = 0.026).
Similarly, in the ICV and occupation interaction models, significant decreases in risk were observed for individuals with high ICV (HR: 0.010, p = 0.012), and  HPA axis activity is enhanced by time-of-day, stress, anxiety, and depression
In this set of analysis, we found that observed results with the cortisol/ A␤ interaction on its own and in the presence of reserve were independent of the effect of the exploratory risk biomarkers (Supplementary Table
In summary, we report that cortisol elevations are predictive As such, the investigators within the ADNI contributed to the design and implementation of ADNI or provided data but did not participate in the analysis or writing of this report.
Authors' disclosures available online (https:// www.j-alz.com/manuscript-disclosures/18-1030r2).



U n c o
r r e c t e d A u t h o r P r o o f ponents were standardized to have a mean of 0 and 145 standard deviation of 1.
The reserve composite score 146 for each individual was calculated by summing the 147 factor loading of each component multiplied by the 148 standardized component [39].
For exploratory anal-149 yses, categorical values of the reserve components 150 were used.
Years of formal education completed was 151 dichotomized into low (≤15 years) versus high (>15 152 years) using a median split of the CN study sample.



153
AMNART was used to estimate premorbid IQ[40,    154 41] and scores were stratified as low (≤42 points) and 155 high (>42 points) via median split of the CN study sample.



227
participants and biomarker-group strata.
Differences 228 in sample size for each biomarker group were noted, 229 with the highest number of participants seen in the 230 GC-/A␤-, and the lowest being in the GC-/A␤+.
231 There were also differences in the mean age 232 between the groups (p < 0.05), with significant 233 differences occurring between the GC-/A␤-, 234 GC-/A␤+, and the GC+/A␤+ groups (Tukey HSD test, p < 0.05).
The proportion of APOE-4 carriers was also significantly different between groups (p < 0.005) with the highest proportion falling into the GC+/A␤+ group.
A composite score for the four reserve components was derived using factor analysis, which yielded one common factor with eigenvalue of 1.046.
All components loaded well on this factor, and loadings were used to calculate the composite score with the formula: Composite score = 0.6625× education years +0.4315 × IQ + 0.4772× occupation level +0.4395 × ICV (all components were standardized).
No reserve variables or other measures were significantly different between the biomarker groups (p > 0.05).
CSF cortisol evaluation across ADNI diagnostic groups Since this study is the first to determine an association between a hyperglucocorticoid state/A␤ interaction and disease progression from the preclinical stage, no threshold range of pathological cortisol was available to provide a reference point for cohort stratification.
To this end, we sought to compare central cortisol levels for different baseline AD diagnostic groups, given the availability of data from prodromal and clinical AD patients within the ADNI study.
The mean CSF cortisol levels for MCI (n = 148) and AD (n = 69) patients were similar to that of CN (n = 91) individuals, with nil significant



Fig. 1 .Figure 2
Fig. 1.
Kaplan-Meier (KM) survival estimates for the study biomarker groups.
Probability of non-progression from cognitive normal stage to clinical AD-dementia, for each glucocorticoid and amyloid biomarker combination group is shown.
Estimated number of remaining individuals at risk for disease progression at each time point are also represented.
Individuals in the Cortisol High/A␤ 42 Abnormal (GC+/A␤+) group progressed fastest from the pre-clinical to clinical disease stage, with only 12% non-demented (2 out of 17 at baseline) at time of study censor period.
GC-, low cortisol level; GC+, high cortisol level; A␤-, normal A␤ 42 level; A␤+, abnormal A␤ 42 level.



267
Reserve, cortisol, Aβ 42 , and stable versus 268 progressive disease stage 269 After a median follow-up time of 84 months, 19 270 of the 91 subjects progressed from CN to MCI, and 271 another 10 subjects progressed to AD.
The risk of 272 progression during follow-up period among the four 273 biomarker groups is shown in Figure 1.
Individuals 274 in the GC+/A␤+ group were at higher risk of clin-275 ical progression compared to the GC-/A␤-group 276 (HR = 3.67, p = 0.017 in an unadjusted Cox model).
277 The results from the Cox models evaluating the 278 effect of CSF levels of A␤ 42 and cortisol on time to 279 progression, and the moderating effect of the reserve 280 composite on the A␤ 42 /cortisol association are shown 281 in



324
have been linked to the symptomatic expression of 325 AD [15, 16, 44-46]; yet it is not known whether this 326 originates from an earlier time-point and if reserve factors help to offset disease progression trajectory associated to HPA axis hyperactivity and A␤ abnormalities, from pre-clinical disease stages.
Addressing the latter was a primary objective of our study, and we sought to investigate whether reserve moderates the adverse influence of CSF cortisol elevations and A␤ abnormalities on AD clinical progression from the preclinical stage.
Using data from the ADNI, we show that risk of clinical progression was highest in CN individuals exhibiting both abnormal A␤ and HPA axis hyperactivity.
To our knowledge, this is the first report on the impact of combined central A␤ abnormalities/higher cortisol levels on AD clinical progression from the preclinical stage, and suggests that cortisol may act in concert with A␤ to progress symptom onset.
Our results are in line with a recent report from the Australian Imaging Biomarkers and Lifestyle Study of Ageing (AIBL) [22], showing rapid cognitive decline from baseline for CN individuals with high cerebral A␤ load presenting with elevated plasma cortisol levels [22]; however, that study did not address progression to disease states and the CSF cortisol levels were not considered.
Cortisol has been shown to be upregulated in prodromal and clinical AD [16, 18], and differences between AD patients and controls have been reported particularly at the morning time-point [47].
The finding of comparable hormone levels for baseline CN individuals and MCI/AD patients lends credence to the possibility that the elevated cortisol levels seen in CN individuals may have been brought about by pathogenic mechanisms occurring prior to symptom onset.


of faster clinical progression in individuals with A␤ abnormalities.
Interestingly, reserve indicators ameliorate the observed risk.
Our data suggests an enhanced risk for AD clinical onset and progression in individuals presenting with abnormal CSF levels of A␤ and elevated glucocorticoid levels and, importantly, that this combined effect can be moderated by presence of reserve factors.
These findings necessitate further research into HPA axis hyperactivity as a co-identifier with amyloid abnormalities, for high AD risk, and highlight the importance of accounting for lifetime exposures and factors in the interpretation of results from longitudinal aging and 468 dementia studies.
469 The findings presented further provide a rationale 470 for lifestyle intervention studies looking into later-471 life promotion of reserve and brain maintenance and 472 the potential use of high cortisol levels as selection 473 or stratification criterion.
At-risk for AD individuals, 474 based on abnormal A␤ status, with high cortisol lev-475 els may benefit from closer monitoring and lifestyle 476 interventions.
approval of the manuscript; and decision to submit the manuscript for publication.
Data used in preparation of this article were obtained from the ADNI database.


relation-



Table 1
Baseline characteristics for the full sample across cortisol and A␤ groups



Table 2 .
The interaction for cortisol and A␤ 42 on



Table 2
Cox regression of interactions between cortisol, A␤ 42 , and reserve score with risk of clinical progression


. Individuals included in this study had no reported depression 364 and were relatively healthy, with no chronic diseases that may have increased central glucocorticoid levels.