Association of locus coeruleus integrity with Braak stage and neuropsychiatric symptom severity in Alzheimer’s disease
The clinical and pathophysiological correlates of locus coeruleus (LC) degeneration in Alzheimer's disease (AD) could be clarified using a method to index LC integrity in vivo, neuromelanin-sensitive MRI (NM-MRI).
We examined whether integrity of the LC-norepinephrine system, assessed with NM-MRI, is associated with stage of AD and with neuropsychiatric symptoms (NPS), independent of cortical pathophysiology (amyloid-β and tau burden).
Cognitively normal older adults (n = 118), and individuals with mild cognitive impairment (MCI, n = 44), and AD (n = 28) underwent MR imaging and tau and amyloid-β positron emission tomography (with [ 18 F]MK6240 and [ 18 F]AZD4694, respectively).
Integrity of the LC-norepinephrine system was assessed based on contrast-to-noise ratio of the LC on NM-MRI images.
Braak stage of AD was derived from regional binding of [ 18 F]MK6240.
NPS were assessed with the Mild Behavioral Impairment Checklist (MBI-C).
LC signal contrast was decreased in tau-positive participants (t 186 = -4.00,
p = 0.0001) and negatively correlated to Braak stage (Spearman ρ = -0.31,
p = 0.00006).
In tau-positive participants (n = 51), higher LC signal predicted NPS severity (ρ = 0.35, p = 0.019) independently of tau burden, amyloid-β burden, and cortical gray matter volume.
This relationship appeared to be driven by the impulse dyscontrol domain of NPS, which was highly correlated to LC signal (ρ = 0.44, p = 0.0027).
NM-MRI reveals loss of LC integrity that correlates to severity of AD.
However, LC preservation in AD may also have negative consequences by conferring risk for impulse control symptoms.
NM-MRI shows promise as a practical biomarker that could have utility in predicting the risk of NPS or guiding their treatment in AD.

INTRODUCTION
The locus coeruleus (LC), the primary site of norepinephrine neurons in the human brain, is an important site of neurodegeneration in Alzheimer's disease (AD)
Neuropathological studies have found that the LC is the first brain region to accumulate hyperphosphorylated tau proteins years prior to the onset of cognitive impairment and clinical diagnosis
Although the LC is clearly implicated in AD, challenges studying LC physiology in humans in vivo have limited our understanding of the timing of LC changes and their association with characteristic aspects of AD pathophysiology and clinical features.
Neuromelanin-sensitive MRI (NM-MRI)
This brief and non-invasive scan yields a high signal contrast in the LC, presumably due to its high concentration of neuromelanin (NM), a paramagnetic pigment
Reduced LC NM-MRI signal is associated with smaller LC volume postmortem
While previous studies have demonstrated the utility of NM-MRI in AD
To support this, the validated
Consistent with the known functions of the norepinephrine system, changes in the LC-norepinephrine system have been implicated in cognitive deficits and neuropsychiatric symptoms (NPS) in patients with AD
NPS are a common and burdensome aspect of AD
Norepinephrine disturbances correlate to NPS in AD
The nature of LC dysfunction in AD may be complex, and compensatory changes may occur in response to LC degeneration, possibly even leading to hyperactivity in remaining LC neurons
Indeed, cerebrospinal fluid levels of norepinephrine and biosynthetic capacity of norepinephrine (indexed as tyrosine hydroxylase expression) are elevated in AD despite LC degeneration
These changes may have negative consequences in AD as some types of NPS, including agitated, aggressive, and psychotic symptoms and prescription of neuroleptic agents, have been linked to high or preserved norepinephrine function
Although no prior NM-MRI studies have investigated NPS in AD, in other populations the NM-MRI signal correlates to behaviors resembling aspects of NPS including depression
Similarly to norepinephrine function, cortical pathology, including aggregation of amyloid-β
Thus, disentangling the pathophysiological correlates of NPS may require simultaneous examination of these different insults to determine their independent contributions to the emergence of NPS.
We postulate that NPS reflect an imbalance in specific aspects of AD pathophysiology: integrity of the LC on the one hand and amyloid-β and tau accumulation in the cortex on the other hand.
The combined effects of these processes may lead to a disruption in cortical and subcortical regulation of behavior, promoting emergence of NPS.
Identifying neuroimaging measures that strongly predict NPS would not only help understand the mechanism of their pathogenesis but would also support the effort to find biomarkers to assess NPS risk, guide prescription of existing treatments or advance trials of novel treatments.
Here we combine these advanced neuroimaging methods with assessment of NPS using the validated Mild Behavioral Impairment Checklist (MBI-C)
We hypothesize that LC signal will be reduced in AD but correlate positively to NPS severity.
Cognitively unimpaired participants had no objective cognitive impairment and a CDR score of 0. Mild cognitive impairment (MCI) individuals had subjective and objective cognitive impairment, preserved activities of daily living, and a CDR score of 0.5.
Patients with mild-to-moderate sporadic AD dementia had a CDR score between 0.5 and 2, and met the National Institute on Aging and the Alzheimer's Association criteria for probable AD determined by a physician
Participants were excluded if they had other inadequately treated conditions, active substance abuse, recent head trauma, or major surgery, or if they had MRI/PET safety contraindication.
AD patients did not discontinue medications for this study.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Participants and clinical measures
NPS severity was assessed using the MBI-C,
The participant's primary informant, most frequently their spouse, completed the MBI-C.
The MBI-C is composed of 34 questions and subdivided into five domains: decreased drive and motivation, affective dysregulation, impulse dyscontrol (agitation, impulsivity, and abnormal reward salience), social inappropriateness, and abnormal perception/ thought content.
Each question answered "Yes" is accorded a severity rating (1 = mild, 2 = moderate, or 3 = severe).
To be endorsed, symptoms must have emerged later in life and persisted for minimum 6 months continuously or intermittently.
The Douglas Institute Research Ethics Board approved this study; all participants provided written informed consent.

MRI acquisition
All neuroimaging data were acquired at the Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI).
Magnetic resonance (MR) images were acquired on a 3T Prisma scanner.
NM-MRI images were collected via a turbo spin echo sequence with the following parameters: repetition time (TR) = 600 ms; echo time (TE) = 10 ms; flip angle = 120°; turbo factor = 4; in-plane resolution = 0.6875 × 0.6875 mm 2 ; partial brain coverage overlaying the pons and midbrain with field of view = 165 × 220; number of slices = 20; slice thickness = 1.8 mm; number of averages = 7; acquisition time = 8.45 min.
Whole-brain, T1-weighted MR images (resolution = 1 mm, isotropic) were acquired using an MPRAGE sequence for preprocessing of the NM-MRI and PET data.
Quality of MRI images was visually inspected for artifacts immediately upon acquisition, and scans were repeated when necessary, time permitting.
Cortical gray matter volume and estimated total intracranial volume were obtained using FreeSurfer version 6.0 (Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging) standard segmentation pipeline.

Preprocessing of NM-MRI images
LC signal was measured for the whole LC and LC subregions (rostrocaudal sections) using a semi-automated algorithm incorporating steps similar to those described in previous studies
This method performs an intensity-threshold-free cluster search within an overinclusive mask of the LC in native space.
For simplicity we refer to it as a "funnel tip" method, see Fig.
Although LC signal is measured on native space NM-MRI images, it is necessary to spatially normalize the NM-MRI images in order to register an overinclusive LC mask (referred to as the LC search mask) from MNI space to native space for each participant.
Initial preprocessing steps were performed as in our prior work examining NM-MRI signal from the substantia nigra
To bring the NM-MRI image of each participant into standardized space, T1-weighted images were normalized to MNI space, then NM-MRI images were coregistered to the T1-weighted images, and finally these two transforms were applied to the NM-MRI images.
A visualization template (Fig.
Subsequent steps used custom Matlab scripts.
An LC search mask was drawn over the MNI space visualization template to cover the LC, defined as the hyperintense voxels at the anterior-lateral edge of the 4th ventricle spanning 15 mm in the rostrocaudal axis (from MNI space coordinates z = -16 to -31, see Fig.
The rostrocaudal limits were set based on the position of the LC from a brainstem atlas
The mask was divided into five rostrocaudal sections of equal length (3 mm).
The full LC search mask and the five mask sections were then warped to native space using the inverse transformation generated in the spatial normalization step and resampled to NM-MRI image space.
This warped LC search mask defined a search space wherein to find the LC for each participant.
A cluster-forming algorithm was used to segment the LC within this space, defined as the four contiguous voxels (total area = 1.96 mm 2 ) on each side and axial slice with the highest mean signal.
To minimize partial volume effects, only the peak intensity voxel of these four was retained for calculation of LC signal (on the assumption that this voxel had the highest fraction of LC tissue).
The automated segmentation was visually inspected and was found to perform 2.2% of operations suboptimally (e.g. by locating the LC within a bright artifact occasionally present within the 4th ventricle), requiring manual correction.
Contrast-tonoise ratio (CNR) for each voxel v in a given axial slice was then calculated as the relative difference in NM-MRI signal intensity I from a reference region RR in the same slice as: CNR v = (I vmode(I RR ))⁄mode(I RR ).
We used a reference region with low NM concentration, the central pons (Fig.
Finally, every LCcontaining slice was linked to one of the five rostrocaudal LC sections based on which of the five sectioned LC masks was present on the same axial slice (if two sectioned masks were present on the same slice, the LC section was defined for each side by the sectioned mask covering the most LC voxels).
LC signal was calculated for each of the five sections by averaging CNR values from all LC voxels within the section.

PET acquisition and analysis
All individuals had [ 18 F]AZD4694 and [ 18 F]MK6240 PET scans acquired with a brain-dedicated Siemens High Resolution Research Tomograph.
See previous studies for more detailed PET methods
Tau [ 18 F]MK6240 images were acquired at 90-110 min after the intravenous bolus injection of the tracer and were reconstructed using an OSEM algorithm on a 4D volume with four frames (300 s each)
Amyloid-β [ 18 F]AZD4694 images were acquired at 40-70 min after the intravenous bolus injection of the tracer, and scans were reconstructed with the same OSEM algorithm on a 4D volume with three frames (600 s each)
At the end of each PET acquisition, a 6-min transmission scan was conducted with a rotating 137 Cs point source for attenuation correction.
The images were corrected for dead time, decay, random and scattered coincidences, and for motion.
In order to normalize the PET data, T1-weighted MRIs were non-uniformity and field distortions corrected.
PET images were then automatically registered to T1-weighted image space, and the T1-weighted images were linearly and non-linearly registered to the ADNI standardized space
PET images were meninges-and skull-stripped and non-linearly registered to the ADNI template using the transformations from the T1-weighted image to ADNI template and from the PET image to T1-weighted image space.
[ 18 F]MK6240 standardized uptake value ratio (SUVR) and [ 18 F] AZD4694 SUVR maps were calculated using the inferior cerebellum and whole cerebellum gray matter as the reference region, respectively
PET images were spatially smoothed to achieve a final 8-mm full-width at half-maximum resolution.
[ 18 F]MK6240 values were extracted from a temporal ROI used previously to define tau positivity
Tau-positive cases were defined as those with SUVR > 1.24 in the temporal ROI, as in our prior work
A continuous measure of SUVR from this ROI was also included in several analyses.
Subjects were divided into Braak stage groups
Discordant cases (where regional tau burden did not follow the anatomical progression proposed by Braak) were Contrast-to-noise ratio for all voxels was calculated relative to signal extracted from this region.
Bottomright: segmentation of the LC in native space.
The LC search mask (yellow, signifying the middle section) was deformed from MNI space to native space to provide a search space wherein the LC was identified on left and right sides as the four adjacent voxels with highest signal contrast.
To minimize partial volume effects, of these 4, only the peak-contrast voxel was retained for each side and slice.
LC signal was calculated per section by averaging CNR values from all such voxels within the section.
excluded from analyses of Braak stage.
Global [ 18 F]AZD4694 SUVR values were estimated to generate a measure of cortical amyloid-β burden based on a composite set of regions including the precuneus, prefrontal, orbitofrontal, parietal, temporal, anterior, and posterior cingulate cortices

Statistical analysis
Statistical tests relating final imaging measures to clinical measures were performed on Matlab software.
LC signal was related to clinical group using ANCOVAs with Tukey's post hoc tests.
LC signal was related to tau burden in the temporal ROI by linear regression with the model:
where LC signal was the average signal in whole LC in some models and the signal for each LC section in others; [ 18 F]MK6240 SUVR was continuous in some models and binary (cutoff = 1.24) in others.
Partial Spearman correlations were used to relate LC signal to measures of AD severity.
Linear regressions and partial Spearman correlations were used to relate NPS severity to LC signal and other neuroimaging measures.
The general form for the linear regressions was:
Non-parametric analyses were favored where possible because many measures were ordinal (e.g.
CDR score, Braak stage) or not normally distributed according to Lilliefors test (e.g.
MMSE score, NPS severity).
All analyses controlled for age and sex.
See Results for details of the specific models used.

RESULTS

Loss of locus coeruleus signal in AD
First, we confirmed that our novel method of LC signal measurement replicated past reports
Post hoc testing found a significant difference between CN and AD (p = 0.021) but not between CN and MCI or MCI and AD (p = 0.19 and p = 0.92 respectively; Tukey's HSD).
AD defined biologically by tau positivity ([ 18 F]MK6240 SUVR >1.24 in the temporal ROI
p = 0.0013, Cohen's d = 0.48, linear regression controlling for age and sex.
Next, we examined the anatomical topography of tauassociated signal loss within the LC, which we divided into five rostrocaudal sections on the left and right side.
The middle section and the section below it (encircled sections in Fig.
This was true whether tau burden was calculated as a dichotomous or a continuous measure of SUVR in this ROI.
LC signal averaged from these sections was markedly reduced in tau-positive individuals (t 186 = -4.00,
p = 0.0001, Cohen's d = 0.59, linear regression controlling for age and sex, Fig.
Therefore, we retained this as the LC signal measure to be used for all subsequent analyses, referred to as the "mid-caudal LC" (Fig.

Locus coeruleus signal and AD stage and severity
We found that mid-caudal LC signal loss was significantly correlated to more advanced Braak stage of AD (Spearman ρ = -0.31,
p = 0.00006, n = 160; partial correlations controlling for age and sex; see Fig.
Analysis across all stages found that LC signal was lost at the rate of 0.67% CNR per stage, although the rate of loss was higher from stage 3-6, equal to 1.10% CNR/stage (linear regression controlling for age and sex).
Consistent with this, general clinical severity, measured as cognitive impairment and Fig.
A-C Schematic representations of the LC.
A LC schematic overlaid on anatomical template in coronal view to illustrate position in the brain.
B, C LC schematic showing signal loss in each of the rostrocaudal sections based on tau burden in the temporal ROI (left hemisphere shown in D, right hemisphere is similar).
In B tau burden was dichotomized ([ 18 F]MK6240 SUVR > 1.24 to define tau-positive cases) and in C it was left as a continuous measure.
The strongest relationship was seen in the mid-caudal LC sections (MNI space z coordinate = -28 to -22; encircled in chartreuse green and matching the yellow and green LC sections shown in Fig.
Bilateral LC signal from these sections was retained as the metric used for subsequent analyses of LC signal.
Scatterplots showing relationship of mid-caudal LC signal to tau status (E) and measures of AD severity including Braak stage as determined with [ 18 F]MK6240 PET imaging (F), cognitive impairment (G), and dementia severity (H).
L left, R right, MMSE mini-mental state exam, CDR clinical dementia rating scale.
dementia severity, was also negatively correlated to LC signal (MMSE errors: ρ = -0.14, p = 0.058, n = 187; CDR score: ρ = -0.28,
p = 0.0001, n = 188; partial correlations controlling for age and sex; see Fig.
Taken together, these findings suggest that degeneration of LC may be progressive throughout the early course of AD.

Locus coeruleus signal and symptoms of Alzheimer's disease
We next investigated the clinical correlates of mid-caudal LC signal controlling for key pathophysiological measures to assess the independent contribution of the LC to these measures.
First, we tested the relationship of the LC signal to NPS severity (MBI-C total score) in all participants.
We found a significant interaction between tau positivity and LC signal on NPS severity (β Int = 0.75, t 171 = 2.76, p = 0.006) due to a significant relationship between LC signal and NPS severity in tau-positive participants (β 1 = 0.81, t 171 = 3.36, p = 0.0009) but no such relationship in tau negative participants (β 1 = 0.06, t 171 = 0.42, p = 0.67, linear regression controlling for CDR score, age, and sex).
We further investigated the LC signal's association with NPS in the tau-positive group (n = 51) and found that it was present using parametric or non-parametric statistics and that the association was slightly strengthened when additional pathophysiological measures were included in the model (Table
This positive correlation is consistent with our hypothesis that preserved and/or elevated LC function is associated with worse NPS.
While in most models tau burden in the temporal ROI also significantly predicted higher NPS severity, LC signal was consistently the more influential predictor.
Furthermore, the full model including all pathophysiological measures explained a substantial amount of variability in NPS severity (R 2 = 0.50, adjusted R 2 = 0.41; Table
Post hoc analyses examining MBI-C domains and including the covariates from the full model found the correlation to LC signal was significant only for the impulse dyscontrol domain (ρ = 0.44, p = 0.0027, Fig.
Subsequent examination of all LC sections (Fig.
Lastly, we examined the relationship of LC signal to cognitive impairment, measured as errors on the MMSE.
Unlike the analysis in the section on AD stage and severity (Fig.
We found that this relationship was not significant (ρ = -0.20,
p = 0.18, n = 52, Spearman partial correlation on taupositive participants controlling for covariates as in the full model).
This would suggest that LC signal may not have a strong and direct association to general cognitive impairment in AD.

DISCUSSION
Here we report several findings regarding the clinical and pathophysiological correlates of LC signal, a proxy measure of norepinephrine neuron loss, in AD.
Loss of LC signal appears to be Fig.
A Neuropsychiatric symptom severity was strongly predicted in a linear regression model combining several multimodal neuroimaging measures of pathophysiology ("full model" in Table
R 2 = 0.41).
The most influential predictor in this model was LC signal, which was positively correlated to NPS severity (B).
Of the five domains of NPS, LC signal was most strongly correlated to the Impulse Dyscontrol domain (C).
NPS severity score was adjusted in B and C based on other covariates in the model.
D LC schematic showing correlation of LC signal to impulse control deficits for all rostrocaudal LC sections (controlling for covariates as in "full model").
a progressive process that correlates with AD stage as indexed both by Braak stages cortical tau proliferation and by severity of clinical symptoms.
Despite these detrimental correlates of LC signal loss in AD, preservation of LC signal can also be detrimental as it is associated with worse NPS in AD patients.
The relationship between LC signal and NPS was not confounded by the presence of cortical pathology; indeed, both LC signal and cortical tau burden independently predicted severity of NPS.
Critically, we found a significant interaction between tau status and LC signal on NPS severity suggesting that tau may dysregulate LC function in a disease-specific way that is distinct from alterations in LC function during normal aging.
Specifically, we found no clear relationship between LC signal and NPS severity in healthy individuals.
This finding is unsurprising since the level of endorsement of NPS was low in such individuals (Table
On the other hand, we found that in tau-positive individuals, a preserved level of LC signal was associated with NPS risk.
This is consistent with evidence of a positive relationship between norepinephrine function and NPS in AD
We propose a model whereby variability in the progression of different disease processes may leave some patients with cortical tau pathology but spared LC integrity, possibly leading to dysregulation in the cortical and subcortical regulation of behavior and the expression of impulse control problems and other NPS.
Perhaps the cortical tau insult interferes with top-down regulation of behavioral responses to stressful or arousing situations when the LC-norepinephrine system is intact or hyperactive, leading to agitated or aggressive behavior.
Furthermore, NPS may be promoted not only by interaction of LC signal with cortical tau, but also with tau in the LC itself, which cannot be measured with PET imaging due the size of the LC but would be expected to be present in those with cortical tau
These findings are consistent with prior reports showing efficacy of norepinephrine blocking agents against aggressive and agitated behaviors in AD
NM-MRI could have promise in this regard as a biomarker to indicate patients with high LC signal whose NPS may respond to such treatment, as opposed to patients with low LC signal whose NPS may have an origin unrelated to the norepinephrine system and who could be harmed by treatments exacerbating their already low norepinephrine system function.
Furthermore, while NPS are often recognizable by clinical observation alone, a biological measure such as LC signal could show promise as a biomarker of NPS risk prior to their overt manifestation.
Such a risk marker would be important for clinical decision-making, supporting vigilance of emergent NPS, and allowing administration of NPS treatments at the earliest stages, even during the prodrome.
Our findings provide insight regarding the anatomical topography and timing of LC signal loss in AD.
Consistent with reports of a highly variable extent of LC cell loss in AD
LC signal loss was most pronounced in central LC, consistent with this region having the greatest density of norepinephrine cells and the greatest number of cells lost in AD
This anatomical variability underscores the strengths of our "funnel tip" LC signal measurement approach, allowing automated determination of approximate rostrocaudal position within the LC, while still extracting the signal from unprocessed images to avoid distortion of this small structure.
This approach has the promise to target specific effects that may be anatomically segregated from other, potentially confounding, effects.
For instance, we saw the tau effect was strongest in the middle LC section, whereas the NPS effect was strongest in the section below the middle (Figs.
Such a subdivision of the LC could help probe specific circuits that may be subserved by distinct LC regions, consistent with recent work demonstrating a modular organization of LC circuitry
Yet, despite this organization, distinct modules tend to be intermingled and more research is needed to determine the extent of any topographical pattern to LC projections in primates
Thus, it may be premature to provide an explanation for why caudal LC would be specifically linked to impulse control symptoms and whether this is due to the connectivity of this subregion
Regarding the timing of LC signal loss in AD, mirroring postmortem evidence
This suggests that there is substantial delay between the accumulation of tau in the LC at the earliest stage of AD
Nevertheless, close examination of the relationship between LC signal and Braak stage (Fig.
Although this may be simply due to a low number of observations (e.g. at Braak stage 3), such a rebound in LC signal could reflect a biological process linked to a hyperactive LC-norepinephrine system after the onset of degeneration
For instance this could lead to increased cell size, or accelerated NM accumulation, changes that could increase the LC signal
Indeed, a correlation of NM signal to catecholamine function has been observed in the dopamine system
In this speculative scenario, it could be that loss of NM-MRI signal is apparent even at Braak stage 1 (when LC signal was significantly reduced relative to Braak stage 0, t 88 = 2.36, p = 0.020) but that reductions in LC NM-MRI signal due to degeneration become somewhat confounded by increases in NM-MRI signal due to hyperactivity during intermediate Braak stages.
While this would add noise when NM-MRI is used as a marker of early LC degeneration, it may enhance its sensitivity as a marker of NPS, which may be exacerbated not only by preservation but also hyperactivity of the LC
Our study had many strengths including a relatively large sample and inclusion of multimodal neuroimaging measures of pathophysiology.
However, certain methodological aspects may limit interpretation of the data.
Our study supported a role for the norepinephrine system in NPS but function of other neurotransmitter systems (e.g.
acetylcholine, serotonin) may also play an important role in NPS
We found that combining measures of cortical and LC pathology explained a substantial amount of variance in NPS severity; however, a detailed examination of the role of the cortical measures in promoting NPS was beyond the scope of this work.
We do not interpret, for instance, the absence of a relationship between our measure of cortical amyloid-β burden and NPS as being in conflict with prior studies targeted to specific brain regions and types of NPS
Indeed, NPS are a heterogeneous combination of symptoms and it may be overly simplistic to expect LC signal or any measure to predict all NPS domains, some of which could even be associated with low LC signal
One domain, psychotic symptoms, are of interest but could not be investigated in our sample due to very low level of endorsement.
We focused on early stages of AD (CDR <3, with CDR for most AD cases <2) and cannot draw conclusions regarding the role of the LC in moderate to severe dementia.
At these later stages, perhaps the influence of compensatory increases in norepinephrine function on NPS could be overwhelmed by a more advanced degeneration of the system.
Indeed, some preclinical work suggests that with more advanced LC damage, NPS-like behavior begins to diminish Arguing against this, some postmortem studies (where cases are highly advanced) have a positive relationship between antemortem NPS and norepinephrine function
A detailed assessment of cognition in AD was beyond the scope of this paper but future work could test whether the association seen between LC signal and specific cognitive domains in healthy aging
Finally, our MRI data, like most published LC NM-MRI studies
Ideally, a 7 Tesla scanner
At the resolution employed here, measurement of LC signal may have been subject to partial volume effects in which LC voxels contain non-LC tissue.
Nonetheless, the in-plane resolution was much smaller than the area of the LC (in-plane area of one voxel = 0.47 mm 2 , crosssectional area of the LC ~1.8 mm 2
In summary, the LC signal tracks Braak stage of AD and is positively correlated to the severity of NPS, independently of other aspects of pathophysiology.
These results demonstrate the utility of NM-MRI to interrogate the role of the norepinephrine system in human studies of AD pathophysiology.
They also provide early evidence in favor of NM-MRI as a practical and non-invasive biomarker that could have potential to indicate NPS risk or likelihood of response to specific treatments.
and to drafting of the work and revising it critically for important intellectual content.
MS, FL, and SG contributed collection of neuroimaging and/or clinical data.
GM, J-PS, and CT contributed to implementation and analysis of neuroimaging measures.
VC, LT, AM, and SC contributed to data processing and analysis.
DW contributed to interpretation of results.
All authors contributed to writing and editing the manuscript.



Fig. 1
Fig.1Measurement of LC signal.
Left: visualization template in MNI space created by averaging the spatially normalized NM-MRI images from all participants.
Middle: magnified views of the visualization template with the LC search mask overlaid.
This mask was manually traced on the visualization template over the hyperintense region surrounding the LC and divided into five sections (displayed in different colors), each spanning 3 mm in the z-axis.
Top-right: unprocessed NM-MRI image showing the pons of a representative individual; the central pons reference region is encircled in white.
Contrast-to-noise ratio for all voxels was calculated relative to signal extracted from this region.
Bottomright: segmentation of the LC in native space.
The LC search mask (yellow, signifying the middle section) was deformed from MNI space to native space to provide a search space wherein the LC was identified on left and right sides as the four adjacent voxels with highest signal contrast.
To minimize partial volume effects, of these 4, only the peak-contrast voxel was retained for each side and slice.
LC signal was calculated per section by averaging CNR values from all such voxels within the section.


Study participants from the community or outpatients at the McGill University Research Centre for Studies in Aging were enrolled in the Translational Biomarkers of Aging and Dementia (TRIAD) cohort [55], McGill University, Canada.
The cohort participants had a detailed clinical assessment, including the Clinical Dementia Rating Scale (CDR) and Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE; for clinical and demographic description of the sample see Table



Table 1 .
Clinical and demographic measures.



Table 2 .
Prediction of neuropsychiatric symptom severity (MBI-C total score) in tau-positive individuals.All analyses included age and sex as covariates.
Analysis including cortical gray matter volume also included estimated total intracranial volume as a covariate.