Immune and Inflammatory Determinants Underlying Alzheimer's Disease Pathology
This study examines the link between peripheral immune changes in perpetuation of the Alzheimer's disease (AD) neuropathology and cognitive deficits.
Our research design using human AD patients and rodent model is supported by past evidence from genomic studies.
We observed an active immune response against Aβ as indicated by the increased Aβ specific IgG antibody in the serum of AD and patients with mild cognitive impairments as compared to healthy controls.
A similar increase in IgG and decrease in IgM antibody against Aβ was also confirmed in the 5xFAD mouse model of AD.
More importantly, we observed a negative correlation between reduced IgM levels and cognitive dysfunction that manifested as impaired memory consolidation.
Strong peripheral immune activation was supported by increased activation of microglia in the brain and macrophages in the spleen of AD mice compared to wild type control littermates.
Furthermore, inflammatory cytokine IL-21 that is involved in antibody class switching was elevated in the plasma of AD patients and correlated positively with the IgG antibody levels.
Concurrently, an increase in IL-21 and IL-17 was observed in spleen cells from AD mice.
Further investigation revealed that proportions of T follicular helper (Tfh) cells that secrete IL-21 are increased in the spleen of AD mice.
In contrast to Tfh, the frequency of B1 cells that produce IgM antibodies was reduced in AD mice.
Altogether, these data indicate that in AD the immune tolerance to Aβ is compromised leading to chronic immune/inflammatory responses against Aβ that are detrimental and cause neuropathology.

Introduction
Alzheimer's disease (AD) has become the most common form of dementia in the elderly, affecting over 5 million people in the United States alone.
Unfortunately, current therapies are not very effective.
Hence, there is an urgent need to improve our understanding of the mechanisms that drive the development and progression of AD.
A growing body of work now indicates that age-related cognitive decline is caused by agerelated inflammation
In fact, it is likely that inflammation is a key trigger for Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI) and its evolution to AD.
Recent evidence from genomic studies has highlighted the role of inflammation and the immune system in the etiology of AD
AD is characterized by the deposition of amyloid beta (Aβ) protein and formation of neurofibrillary tau tangles.
Aβ is a self-protein that is present in healthy individuals.
However, in AD abnormalities including defective clearance lead to accumulation of Aβ.
The excess Aβ aggregates and forms oligomers as well as fibrils that are deposited in the brain as plaques, leading to neurodegeneration and pathology associated with AD.
The defective clearance of Aβ is believed to Electronic supplementary material The online version of this article (
contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.
enhance inflammation though the underlying mechanisms are not well understood.
The immune system plays a major role in preventing inflammatory responses against self-antigens such as Aβ
Antigen presenting cells (APCs) such as dendritic cells and macrophages take up foreign antigens, but this uptake also induces the upregulation of activation markers and the secretion of pro-inflammatory cytokines.
The APCs then present the antigen to T cells in the lymph node to initiate adaptive immune T and B lymphocyte responses.
The CD4 T cells proliferate and aid B cells in removing the antigen while CD8 T cells kill infected cells.
The initial encounter of B cells with antigens results in the production of IgM class antibodies.
Once help arrives in the form of CD4 T cells, an isotype switch occurs where the IgM antibody class switches to IgG or another isotype.
Further, the B cell receptor rearranges, enhancing the affinity of IgG for the antigen and facilitating its clearance.
In contrast, the uptake of self-antigens by APCs does not result in their activation or inflammatory cytokine secretion.
Therefore, there is no downstream T and B cell activation.
The tolerance to Aβ appears to be compromised in AD, as studies indicate that AD patients display strong Aβ-specific T cell responses
An increase in Aβ antibodysecreting B cells has also been observed in AD
Our previous studies also indicate that the immune system loses its tolerance to Aβ in AD patients resulting in chronic ongoing immune/inflammatory responses against the antigen
In addition to increased immune activation, emerging evidence suggests that these immune cells can affect neuroinflammation.
Recently, CD4 T cells were demonstrated to enhance the expression of MHC-II on microglia and affect neuroinflammation
The objective of the present study is to use the 5xFAD mouse model of AD to determine possible mechanisms responsible for the increased inflammatory/immune responses and to determine whether these changes correlate with cognitive impairments.
A clearer understanding of the link between peripheral immune changes and cognitive dysfunction has the potential for development of novel circulatory biomarkers for AD.

Materials and Method

Human Serum Samples
De-identified serum samples from AD (Alzheimer's disease) and MCI (mild cognitive impaired) patients as well as ageand sex-matched healthy controls (HC) were obtained from the Alzheimer's disease research center (ADRC) core at UCI. Participants enrolled in the UCI ADRC cohorts undergo, at minimum, a comprehensive annual evaluation that includes a neurological and physical examination, neuropsychological assessment, brain imaging, lumbar puncture, blood and diagnostic tests, and an interview with a study partner.
Table

Mice
All animal experimentation procedures were performed in accordance with the guidelines provided by NIH and approved by the University of California Irvine Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee.
Animals were maintained in standard housing conditions (20 °C ± 1 °C; 70% ± 10% humidity; 12 h:12 h light and dark cycle) and provided ad libitum access to standard rodent chow (Envigo Teklad 2020x) and water.
Early and late stage male and female AD mice and their wild type littermate controls were evaluated at approximately 3-4 and 8-9 months of age, respectively and described henceforth as 4 mo and 8 mo ages.
In both cases the animals were stratified by age to maintain equivalent age distributions between experimental groups.

Behavioral Testing
For one week prior to behavior, testing the lead investigator, blinded to the animal groupings, handled all mice for habituation for 2-3 min per mouse each day.
Independent investigators, blinded to the experimental groups, scored all behavior files.
Male mice were tested separately from female mice.
For the FE test two contexts (A and B) were used to determine whether mice could learn and then extinguish conditioned fear responses over the course of 5 days
The conditioning testing chamber (context A; 17.5 × 17.5 × 18 cm; Coulbourn Instruments) had a steel grid floor and the scent of 10% acetic acid in water, while the extinction chamber (context B) had a smooth Plexiglas floor, additional stimulus lighting and the scent of 10% almond extract in water.
Each test chamber was disinfected in between testing trials.
Digital cameras were mounted in the ceiling of each chamber and connected via a quad processor for automated scoring of freezing (FreezeFrame, Coulbourn Instruments).
For each mouse, the fear conditioning protocol for day 1 used context A and started with a 120 s pre-fear conditioning habituation followed by 3 pairings of a 120 s, 80 dB, 16 kHz white noise conditioned stimulus (CS) co-terminating with a 1 s, 0.6 mA foot shock (US) presented at 2 min intervals (day 1, T 1 -T 3 ).
For extinction training, starting on day 2, each mouse was placed in context B and allowed to acclimate for 2 min followed by extinction training that was comprised of 15 non-reinforced 120 s CS presentations at 5 s intervals.
Fear extinction data is presented as the average of 5 tones.
Extinction training was repeated daily for 2 additional days.
Subsequently, retention testing was performed on day 5 where each mouse was returned to context B and following a 2 min acclimation period freezing was assessed during three non-US reinforced CS tones (16 kHz, 80 dB, lasting 120 s) at 2 min intervals.
Extinction memory was calculated as the percentage of time spent freezing during the test.
After behavior studies were completed, immunohistochemical and immunological analyses were performed on subsets of the same mice that had been used in the behavior studies.

Aβ Antibody Assay
Previously collected plasma samples from aged and young human subjects and serum samples from AD, MCI and agematched HC were assayed for the presence of Aβ42 specific antibodies using an in-house ELISA as described
Plasma from mice was assayed in a similar manner to human plasma except that the secondary IgG and IgM antibodies used for detection were antimouse.

Flow Cytometry and Cytokine in Mouse Spleen
Spleen was collected from 5xFAD mice and their littermate controls at 4 months and 8 months of age.
Single cell spleen suspensions were stained with antibodies specific to T follicular helper cells (Tfh) (CD4 + CXCR5 + PD-1 + ), B1 cells (CD19 + CD5 + CD43 + ), or macrophages (CD11c -, CD11b + , MHC-II + ).
The antibodies were obtained from Biolegend (San Diego, CA).
Analysis was done using Flow Jo software (Treestar, Ashland, OR).
For cytokine analysis, spleen cells (1×10 6 /ml) were stimulated with phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA; 50 ng/ml; Sigma) and ionomycin (1 μg/ml; Sigma) in RPMI medium containing 10% FBS.
Supernatants collected after overnight stimulation were assayed for 15 analytes including, IL-6, TNF-α, IFN-γ, IL-17, IL-22, IL-10, IL-1β, IFN-α, CCL-2, CXCL-10, CCL-5, GMCSF, IL-1α, IL-33, IL-21 using magnetic bead based kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

Immunohistochemistry of Brain Samples
Mice were deeply anesthetized using isoflurane and euthanized via intracardiac perfusion using 4% paraformaldehyde (ACROS Organics; NJ) in 100 mM phosphate buffered saline (PBS; pH 7.4, Thermo Fisher Scientific)
Brains were cryoprotected (10-30% sucrose gradient over 2-3 days) and sectioned coronally into 30 μm using a cryostat (Leica Microsystems, Germany).
For each endpoint, 4 representative coronal brain sections of the amygdala and medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC) regions from each of the 4 animals per experimental group were selected at approximately 15 section intervals and stored in PBS.
For the immunofluorescence labeling of microglial activation marker CD68, rat antimouse CD68 (1:500; AbD Serotec) primary antibody was used with Alexa Fluor 594 secondary antibody (1:500).
Tissues were then DAPI nuclear counterstained and sealed in slow fade/gold antifade mounting medium (Life Technologies).

Thioflavin S Staining
Sections were rehydrated in an ethanol series (100%, 95%, 70%, 50%) and then incubated in a 0.5% thioflavin S solution in 50% ethanol for 10 min.
Tissues were rinsed twice in 50% ethanol and then rinsed twice in PBS.
Sections were mounted and sealed with slow fade/gold antifade mounting medium (Life Technologies).

Confocal Microscopy, Image Processing and 3D Quantification
The stained coronal brain sections were scanned using a confocal microscope (Nikon Eclipse Ti C2) equipped with a 40× PlanApo oil-immersion lens (1.3 NA, Nikon) and an NIS-Elements AR interface (v4.30, Nikon).
30 z stacks (1024 bit depth) at 0.5 μm from three different fields (318 × 318 × 24 μm) were imaged in each section in the areas of interest.
The digitized z stacks were deconvoluted using the AutoQuant software (version X3.0.4,
Media Cybernetics, Rockville, MD).
An adaptive, 3D blinded method was used to create deconvoluted images for direct import into the Imaris module (version 8.1.2,
Bitplane, Inc., Zurich, Switzerland).
The 3D algorithm-based surface rendering and quantification of fluorescence intensity for each marker was carried out in Imaris at 100% rendering quality.
In the case of CD68, each channel was analyzed separately where 3D surface rendering detects immunostained puncta or nuclear staining (DAPI) satisfying pre-defined criteria, for the puncta size (0.5 to 1 μm) verified visually for accuracy.
Using deconvoluted confocal z stack volume from the control group (WT) as a baseline for the minimum thresholding, a channel mean intensity filter was applied and used for all the experimental groups for each batch of molecular markers.
The pre-set parameters were kept constant throughout the subsequent analysis of immunoreactivity for each antigen.
To maintain uniformity among the varying number of puncta for each individual time point and/or antigen analyzed, the number of puncta per 318 × 318 × 24 μm was normalized to WT control and data was expressed as mean immunoreactivity (percentage) relative to WT controls.

Cytokine Assay
Plasma samples from AD, MCI and healthy controls were assayed for IL-6, TNF-α, IFN-γ, IL-17, IL-22, IL-10, IL-1β, IFN-α and Granzyme B using a Magpix multiplex kit (Thermo Fisher) following the manufacturer's instructions.
IL-21 was assayed by specific ELISA (RnD Systems).

Statistical Analysis
Graph Pad Prism software was used for statistical analysis.
Unpaired Student's t test was used for measuring significance within groups.
For comparisons between three or more groups, one-way ANOVA followed by Tukey's test was used.
Spearman's test was used for correlation.
Values of p < 0.05 were considered significant.
All tests were two tailed with 95% confidence interval.

Results
Aβ (1-42) Peptide Specific Antibodies of IgM Isotype Are Decreased in 5xFAD Mice Compared to Littermate Controls
We have previously reported
The ratio of IgM to IgG is significantly decreased in AD patients compared to both MCI and healthy controls.
Increased IgG against an antigen is an indication of an immune/inflammatory response against that antigen.
We also analyzed the data to determine differences between males and females.
However, there was no significant difference in the levels of IgM and IgG antibodies in AD, MCI and controls.
To confirm that AD mice display similar changes in Aβ specific IgM and IgG antibodies as humans, serum from 5xFAD mice and littermate controls of 4 and 8 months of age was collected and ELISA was performed as for human samples.
Aβ specific IgM antibodies were significantly decreased in the serum of early and late AD mice compared to controls (Fig.
Concomitantly an increase in IgG antibodies in early and late AD mice was also observed, but the difference was significant only at the late AD stage (Fig.
Here also, we did not observe a significant difference between males and females at both early and late time points.
The 5xFAD model displays a fast AD pathology therefore changes including Aβ plaques are apparent as early as 4 months of age (Supplementary Fig.
These data also suggest that 5xFAD is serve as a good pre-clinical model, as they display similar immunological changes as those observed in humans.
Elevated IgG antibodies also indicate an ongoing immune/inflammatory response against Aβ in the AD mice.

Correlation of IgM and IgG Responses with Cognitive Function
To link AD neuropathology and the peripheral immune response, mice were evaluated for cognitive function.
Fear extinction (FE) memory refers to the active process of memory consolidation including dissociating a learned response to a prior adverse event.
In this test, mice are first taught to expect a foot-shock after a tone is played, causing them to freeze in fear of the anticipated averse event.
During the following three days, the mice undergo extinction training where they repeatedly hear the tone, but receive no foot-shock.
Cognitively intact animals are able to abolish that fear memory and continue moving about instead of freezing, indicating minimal stress and anxiety.
However, the AD mice showed severely impaired memory consolidation as indicated by an increased percent of test time spent freezing compared to the aged-match WT mice (Fig.
The WT mice exhibited a gradual decrease in freezing behavior (data not shown) over the extinction training whereas AD mice maintained higher freezing levels.
These behavior data clearly link the neuropathological hallmarks of AD with cognitive dysfunction.
Importantly, the cognitive function of AD mice (impaired fear memory consolidation) showed a strong negative correlation with reduced IgM levels (Fig.
p = 0.04).
On the contrary, the correlation between the IgG levels and freezing behavior was not significant (r = -0.48,
p = 0.23).
Together, these data demonstrate a correlation between immune/inflammatory responses in periphery and neuro-pathological changes in the AD brain.
activation was also evaluated.
It is well established that microglia in the brain are over activated in AD, and as expected the brains of AD mice showed a significant elevation in activated microglia (the resident immunecell) at both the early and the late stages of disease progression compared to controls in the amygdala (Fig.
To explore whether this activation of macrophages is also observed in the periphery, flow cytometry was used to determine the level of activation of macrophages in the spleen.
The level of expression of MHC-class II on macrophages was found to be significantly higher on splenic macrophages from AD mice at both at 4 months and 8 months as compared to controls (Fig.
This increased level of MHC-II is indicative of activation, as the upregulation of MHC-II is associated with antigen presentation
These data indicate that periphery and brain reflect similar AD-related changes.

Macrophages/Microglia Display Increased Activation in 5xFAD Mice Compared to Littermate Controls

Inflammatory Cytokines Are Increased in AD Patients and 5xFAD Mice
Increased inflammation is usually associated with an ongoing immune response; therefore, we determined the level of inflammatory cytokines in the plasma from AD, MCI and HC.
As is evident from Fig.
IL-21 is a highly inflammatory cytokine secreted primarily by T follicular helper cells (Tfh) cells and/ or Th17 cells
It is involved in class switching of antibody isotypes from IgM to IgG
For this reason, we performed correlation analysis between IL-21 and IgG in AD and MCI groups.
There was significant correlation between IgG levels and IL-21 in both MCI (r = 0.40; p = 0.03) and AD groups (r = 0.45; p = 0.01).
These data indicate that IL-21 may play a role in the increased IgG response in AD and MCI patients.
None of the other cytokines tested demonstrated a significant difference between the three groups.
Tfh Cells Are Increased and B1 Cells Are Decreased in 5xFAD Mice Compared to Littermate Controls Tfh cells play a crucial role in B cell proliferation and switching of IgM antibody isotype to IgG and other isotypes as well as antibody secretion
Furthermore, IL-21 is the signature cytokine of Tfh cells; therefore, we compared the percentages of Tfh cells in the spleens of AD and WT mice.
The percentage of Tfh cells was significantly increased in the spleens of AD mice as compared to controls at both 4 and 8 months of age (Fig.
The presence of Tfh cells indicates an active, ongoing immune response.
The increase in Tfh cells in AD mice was much more significant at the early time point suggesting that the immune response starts at the early stage of AD.
These data indicate potential involvement of Tfh cells in the increased IL-21 and IgG antibodies observed in AD patients and mice.
One of the mechanisms of clearance of self-antigens such as Aβ is via IgM antibody.
A special subset of B cells called B1 cells specializes in producing IgM antibodies, which are often polyreactive.
B1 cells are spontaneous IgM producers at homeostasis and are crucial for clearance of self-antigens without overt inflammation
For that reason, the proportion of B1 cells in the spleen of AD and WT mice were compared by flow cytometry.
A significant decrease in the number of B1 cells was observed in AD mice as compared to WT (Fig.
In addition, a significant correlation between B1 cells and IgM was observed between B1 cells and IgM levels in WT mice while no correlation was apparent in AD mice (p = 0.001, r = 0.97).
These data support our previous observation of a decrease in IgM antibodies in AD patients and AD mice and suggest that it could be linked to a decrease in B1 cells.

Discussion
The present study demonstrates that the proportions and/or activation of peripheral immune system cells is significantly increased in AD patients and mice compared to controls.
More importantly, this immune activation is linked to cognitive dysfunction.
We have previously demonstrated
We observe a similar increase in IgG in the mouse model (Fig.
A probable scenario for the increase in IgG is that the continuous exposure of the immune system to high levels of Aβ, possibly due to impaired clearance, leads to breaking of immune tolerance and immune reactivity to Aβ.
The chronic activation due to Aβ enhances inflammation and increases neuropathology.
This is supported by our data (Fig.
In addition, the activation of macrophages in the spleen and their counterpart microglia in the brain was also increased in AD mice compared to controls, indicative of an inflammatory response in the brain and in the periphery (Fig.
The concomitant changes in the brain and in the periphery suggest the possibility of developing a blood-based biomarker for diagnosis of AD.
The level of inflammatory cytokine, IL-21 was increased in the circulation of AD and MCI patients compared to HC as demonstrated previously
Furthermore, it correlated positively with IgG levels in both MCI and AD subjects.
IL-21 belongs to γC family of cytokines along with IL-2, IL-15 etc.
It is produced primarily by CD4 T cells particularly the Tfh subset in the germinal centers where it acts on B cells to mediate class switching and sustain production of antibodies via differentiation of B cells to plasma cells
IL-21 also acts in an autocrine manner and promotes the development of Tfh cells that may be reason that increased proportions of Tfh cells are observed in the spleen of AD mice compared to controls (Fig.
In addition, IL-21 is a highly inflammatory cytokine that can enhance the
We do find secretion of IL-17 and IL-21 in spleen cells from AD mice (Fig.
Th17 cytokines including IL-17, IL-21 and IL22 are reported to be increased in AD patients
Furthermore, both IL-21 and IL-17 have been implicated in numerous autoimmune inflammatory diseases
More recently, IL-21 was found to be highly elevated in the mouse brain after cerebral ischemia
Thus IL-21 may not only be promoting antibody class switching, but also enhancing inflammation in AD subjects.
Interesting changes in the proportions of both Tfh and B1 cells in AD mice were also observed in this study (Fig.
Tfh cells are found with in the germinal centers and an increase in their percentages is indicative of an ongoing immune response
Tfh cells are essential for generation of optimal antibody responses; however, an excessive Tfh cell response can result in breakdown of tolerance.
For example, increased numbers and activity of Tfh cells have been reported in lupus
Similarly, increased frequencies of Tfh cells and B cell plasmablasts have been found in peripheral blood and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) from multiple sclerosis patients with relapsing-remitting or secondary progressive forms of the disease
Furthermore, elevated levels of IL-21 in plasma and CSF were observed to correlate with disease severity.
An increase in activated Tfh cell frequencies in circulation is also found in another neurological autoimmune disorder, Neuromyelitis Optica Spectrum Disorders (NMOSD)
These patients also displayed increased IL-21 levels in both CSF and plasma.
It is therefore plausible that the increased proportions of Tfh cells as observed in AD mice are not only a source of IL-21 but may also be playing a role in breakdown of tolerance against Aβ.
Future studies with human subjects will explore whether the frequencies of Tfh cells and IL-21 levels in circulation can be used as potential biomarkers for AD.
Another immune cell that displayed significant changes in AD mice compared to littermate controls was the B1 subset.
Antibodies are secreted by B lymphocytes that can be divided into two major subsets, B1 and B2 (Montecino-Rodriguez and Dorshkind 2012;
B1 and B2 subsets display different phenotypic markers, ontogeny and functions.
B2 are the conventional B lymphocytes that are capable of producing various subtypes (IgG, IgE) of high affinity antibodies via class switching.
In contrast, the principal function unique to B1 cells is spontaneous, constitutive secretion of antibody, termed natural antibody that appears in the absence of infection or immunization.
B1 cells plays a critical role in housekeeping removal of cellular debris and self-proteins
Natural antibody is predominantly IgM, and it is estimated that 80-90% of resting serum IgM is derived from B1 cells
More importantly, serum IgM is preferentially produced by B1 cells in the spleen.
Natural antibody tends to be polyreactive, autoreactive, and anti-microbial at relatively modest affinity
The effectiveness of B1 cell natural antibody may depend, in part, on that polyreactivity that provides the means for a single antibody to heteroligate different and possibly widely spaced, surface antigens, thereby increasing effective avidity.
Further, IgM effectively binds the complement component C1q that also helps in clearance
One of the major homeostatic functions of the natural antibodies is to help in the removal of autoantigens such as Aβ
In this regard, natural autoantibodies against Aβ have also been demonstrated to play a protective role against AD
Autoantibodies against varying Aβ epitopes have been detected at higher levels in the blood of control subjects as compared to AD patients
Thus, reduced proportions or function of B1 cells may contribute to the decreased IgM in antibodies observed in AD patients and mice.

Conclusions
In summary, our data indicate immune tolerance to Aβ is compromised and a strong immune /inflammatory response against Aβ is generated in AD.
This may be a compensatory mechanism to clear Aβ but the increased inflammation leads to neuropathology in the brain.
Furthermore, we also report that the peripheral immune changes are linked to cognitive dysfunction and some of those peripheral immune changes, such as IL-21 and Tfh, may be developed as biomarkers for AD.



Fig. 1
Fig. 1 Aβ (1-42) peptide specific antibodies of IgM isotype are decreased in AD patients and in 5xFAD mice compared to littermate controls.
The levels of Aβ peptide (1-42) specific antibodies, as well as Aβ scrambled peptide, were measured in the plasma samples of AD, MCI and age matched healthy controls (HC).
(A) Dot plots depict the Aβ specific IgM to IgG antibodies.
Mean± S.D. of 26 AD patients, 26 MCI patients and 26 HC.
Equal number of males and females in each group.



Fig. 3
Fig. 3 Macrophages/microglia display increased activation in 5xFAD mice compared to littermate controls.
(A-C) Representative highresolution confocal micrographs from the basal lateral amygdala (BLA) of WT and AD mouse brains (red, CD68; blue, DAPI nuclear counterstain; Scale 40 μm).
(D) Quantification of CD68 immunohistochemical staining demonstrated that compared to controls, AD mice had increased microglial activation at both 4 and 8 months of age as compared to WT



Fig. 4
Fig. 4 Inflammatory cytokines are increased in AD patients and 5xFAD mice.
(A) Dot plots depict the levels of cytokines in the plasma of human AD, MCI and HC samples.
Mean ± S.D. of 26 AD patients, 26 MCI patients and 26 HC.
(B) Dot plots display the levels of cytokines



Fig. 5
Fig. 5 Tfh cells are increased and B1 cells are decreased in 5xFAD mice compared to littermate controls.
(A) Spleen cells were stained for Tfh cells (CD4 + , CXCR5 + , PD-1 + ) and analyzed by flow cytometry.
Contour plots depict the percentage of Tfh cells in AD and WT mice.
Dot plots depict the % of CD4 + , CXCR5 + , PD-1 + Tfh cells at 4 and 8 months of age.
(B) Spleen cells were stained for B1 cells (CD19 +



Table 1
Description of AD, MCI cohort