High-definition tDCS improves delayed memory in Alzheimer's disease patients: A pilot study using computational modeling to optimize electrode position
Background: There is a lack of consensus regarding the optimal stimulation parameters when using transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) to improve memory performance in patients with Alzheimer's disease (AD).
In healthy individuals, inter-individual differences in brain anatomy significantly influence current distribution during tDCS, an effect that might be aggravated by variations in cortical atrophy in AD patients.
Methods: Nineteen AD patients were randomly assigned to receive either real high-definition tDCS (HD-tDCS) or sham HD-tDCS.
Computational modeling of the HD-tDCS-induced electric field in each patient's brain was analyzed based on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans.
The chosen montage provided the highest net anodal electric field in the left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC).
An accelerated HD-tDCS design was conducted, stimulating with 2mA for 3 x 20 minutes on two separate days.
Pre-and post-intervention cognitive tests and T1 and T2-weighted MRI and diffusion tensor imaging data at baseline were obtained and analyzed for each participant.
Results: Different montages were optimal for individual patients in terms of the electric field distribution in the brain.
The active HD-tDCS group improved significantly in delayed memory and Mini Mental Status Examination (MMSE) performance compared to the sham group.
Five participants in the active group had higher scores on delayed memory post HD-tDCS, four remained stable and one declined.
There was a significant positive correlation between fractional anisotropy in the HD-tDCS group in the anterior thalamic radiation and the score change in delayed memory.
Conclusions: HD-tDCS targeting the left DLPFC significantly improved delayed memory in AD.
Our study can be regarded as a proof-of-concept attempt to increase the efficacy of tDCS.
Due to the small sample size, the present findings should be confirmed in larger samples.

INTRODUCTION
While ultimately searching for a cure for Alzheimer's disease (AD), research on treatment options to slow cognitive decline plays an important role
Transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) is a promising method for reducing memory impairment in AD
During tDCS, two or more electrodes are placed on the scalp and deliver weak, typically 1-2 mA, current to the head, which induces electric fields in the cortex underneath the electrodes.
Although promising, the results of applying tDCS to treat cognitive symptoms in AD are still inconsistent
Even though key symptoms and patterns of brain atrophy related to AD are clearly defined, individual cases show great heterogeneity regarding the severity of symptoms, progression from early to severe stages, and the extent of brain degeneration
All these factors can change the effectiveness of noninvasive brain stimulation on symptoms.
Of note, however, are anatomical differences that may contribute strongly to variations in stimulation outcomes by influencing current distribution in the cortex
AD in its early stages is characterized by memory impairment
Delayed memory refers to the ability to both recognize and recall information after a retention period.
Although AD atrophy starts in the medial temporal lobe
In AD, neuroplasticity and excitability in the DLPFC are impaired
Several tDCS studies have targeted the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) in AD patients
In addition to gray matter atrophy, structural disconnections in AD have been demonstrated using diffusion tensor imaging (DTI), which enables the measurement of microstructural properties of the white matter.
Several DTI studies have shown widespread white matter changes related to AD in temporal and parietal regions
Studies have also revealed less fractional anisotropy (FA) and higher mean diffusivity (MD) in the cingulum bundle, the fornix and the splenium of the corpus callosum
In addition, AD patients have reduced FA in the anterior thalamic radiation (ATR) tract compared to both healthy controls and elderly patients with major depressive disorder
The ATR tract connects the anterior and middle nuclear groups of the thalamus with the frontal lobes, and the DLPFC in particular
FA reduction in these pathways is correlated with cognitive decline
Studies of white matter integrity and tDCS outcome in patients with aphasia,
The association between white matter tract alterations in AD and tDCS treatment effects has not, to our knowledge, been investigated previously.
Computational modeling is an emerging method in the field of noninvasive brain stimulation and enables simulation of the distribution of electric currents across different brain areas and tissues
The specific individual anatomy of the gyri and sulci, the amount and distribution of the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and the thickness of the scalp and skull are key variables that affect the pathway of tDCS currents
Supporting the role of CSF,
A simulation study of two AD brains showed different effective stimulation sites in the cortex, even though electrode coordinates on the scalp were consistent
To ensure that the target region of the cortex is affected by the tDCS-induced current, computational modeling may be especially important in AD studies, considering the strong heterogeneity in brain atrophy across patients
Studies on AD to date have used conventional bipolar montages consisting of one anode electrode placed either over the left temporal cortex or over the left DLPFC, with the return electrode placed above the right hemisphere, often over the right DLPFC
Modeling studies of conventional tDCS protocols demonstrate diffuse current flow between the electrodes, where the peak current density can be located between the two electrodes, rather than underneath
HD-tDCS increases focality, compared to conventional tDCS
This method typically consists of smaller electrodes, in which one anode electrode is placed above the target region, surrounded by four return electrodes.
This montage is also often referred to as a "4x1 montage"
Brain degeneration in AD is linked to both the progression of cognitive impairment
It is of clinical importance to study how gray matter atrophy and white matter alterations related to AD impact the clinical effects of tDCS.
A study by Kim and colleagues
However, an analysis of tDCS-induced currents in the DLPFC has not been conducted in AD patients.
It also remains elusive how anatomical properties are linked to performance on cognitive tests following tDCS in the AD population.
The aim of the present study was to investigate the effect of HD-tDCS on memory performance in patients with AD, with two main outcome measures: 1) cognitive test scores measured before and after HD-tDCS intervention and 2) MRI data investigating the relationship between inter-individual variability in brain anatomy and the effect of tDCS treatment.
To optimize tDCS focality over the DLPFC, electrode placement was tailored to each individual patient.
Computational modeling of HD-tDCS-induced electric fields was used to predict the current flow in each participant, aiding the selection of the electrode montage from a set of eight different possibilities that had a) the highest anodal stimulation in the DLPFC compared to other regions of the brain and b) of the montages that fulfilled ruled a, the montage with the highest anodal current compared to the cathodal current in this region was chosen.
Our main hypothesis was that participants receiving HD-tDCS would show better performance on delayed memory tasks after treatment than participants receiving sham stimulation.
We also expected that individual anatomy would affect HD-tDCS treatment, with a negative correlation between improvement in delayed memory and white matter alterations, operationalized as reduced FA and increased MD.
Cortical thickness, surface area and volume were hypothesized to have a positive correlation with memory improvement.
Furthermore, we hypothesized that there would be a positive correlation between improvement in delayed memory after HD-tDCS and the tDCS-induced electric field in the left DLPFC.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Participants
The study consisted of a double-blind, sham (placebo)-controlled, parallel-group trial, with an allocation ratio of 1:1.
Participants had to fulfill the criteria for the diagnosis of probable AD according to the National Institute of Neurological and Communicative Disorders and Stroke Alzheimer Disease and Related Disorders Association (NINCDS-ADRDA
Further inclusion criteria were as follows: aged 60-85 years, a Mini Mental Status Examination (MMSE) score of >17, and if medicated for AD (with memantine or cholinesterase inhibitors) the dose had to have been stable for >90 days.
The exclusion criteria were depression or other psychiatric diagnoses present at enrollment, cancer, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, metal in the body interfering with MRI, or severe sightand/or hearing disabilities that would affect cognitive testing.
Participants were recruited from the Department of Geriatric Medicine at the University Hospital of North Norway (UNN), Tromsø.
All participants signed written consent approved by The Regional Committees for Medical and Health Research Ethics (REK, project number 2017/794).
This is a pilot study reporting the results of the first six HD-tDCS sessions of a more extensive study registered at ClinicalTrials.gov
(Identifier: NCT03325205).
MRI scans were performed at UNN.
All other data were collected at UiT The Arctic University of Norway.

MRI acquisition

Creation of head models and computational modeling
Head models creation and simulation of the tDCS-induced electric field (E-field) were based on the pre-released version of SimNIBS 2.1 (www.simnibs.org/)
The E-field was simulated for eight different 4x1 montages centered over the DLPFC for each brain (Table
Calculations of the normal component of the E-field were based on the finite element method (FEM)
The normal component is oriented perpendicular to the cortical surface, with the current either flowing inward or outward.
Current entering the cortex is commonly associated with increased neural excitability ("anodal effect", positive values of the normal component), whereas current leaving the gray matter towards the CSF is inhibitory in nature ("cathodal effect", negative values of the normal E-field)
Detailed head models were created based on T1 and T2 MRI images, consisting of five different tissue types: skin, skull, gray matter, white matter, and CSF (Figure
Conductivity values for the different tissue types were based on default settings in SimNIBS (Supplementary Table
The DLPFC was located in each brain according to the Ranta atlas
The electrode montage was chosen based on two rules.
Rule 1 was that the highest value of anodal current had to be in the left DLPFC compared to other regions in the frontal cortex.
For the montages that fulfilled rule 1, rule 2 was applied, which was that the montage with the highest difference between anodal minus cathodal Efield in the left DLPFC was chosen.
This second rule was designed to prevent strong cathodal currents in the target area, which are associated with neural inhibition.
Therefore, this measure of the difference between anodal and cathodal E-fields can be regarded as the "net" maximal anodal E-field in the target area.
All electrodes were round-shaped, with a diameter of 12 mm and thickness of 1 mm plus a gel layer of 2.5 mm.
Current intensity for the anodal electrode was set to 2 mA, with each of the 4 cathodes receiving a current intensity of 0.5 mA.
Individual placement of tDCS electrodes was achieved by first manually defining four reference points (nasion, inion, left and right pre-auricular points), and using these as inputs to an adapted version of a published script

Group allocation: Real HD-tDCS and sham HD-tDCS
Block randomization was generated by a computer randomization list (Randomizer.gov).
The list was prepared by an investigator with no clinical involvement in the trial.
The allocation rate was 1:1 using block sizes of 10.
Labels depicting anodal tDCS ("1") and sham tDCS ("2") were placed in sealed envelopes with serial numbers written on the envelope according to the randomization list.
The envelopes were shuffled, and the participants received the envelope at the top of the pile when enrolled in the study.
The tDCS device was set to double-blind mode.

tDCS
Active or sham HD-tDCS was applied over the DLPFC via five surface-based round electrodes (12 mm in diameter) using a CE mark-approved Starstim® tDCS system from Neuroelectrics.
There was a single anode electrode in the middle (2 mA) surrounded by four cathode electrodes (0.5 mA each).
The montage over the DLPFC was optimized for each participant based on the results from computational modeling (see "Creation of head models and computational modeling").
The electrodes were fixed to the head using the Starstim cap for the F3 montage and a 128 channel EEG cap for the other montages.
For the HD-tDCS group, the current was ramped up to 2 mA over a duration of 30 seconds and remained at this strength for 19 minutes before it was ramped down to 0 mA over the last 30 seconds.
For the sham condition, the current was ramped up to 2 mA over the first 30 seconds and then ramped down again to 0 mA during the next 30 seconds.
The same procedure was performed after 18 minutes.
This sham-procedure does not give a significant dose of tDCS, but makes the patients feel both the ramp up and ramp down sensation of tDCS to increase blinding.
A total of six sessions were applied over two days, with one or two days of rest in between.
Three HD-tDCS sessions were given each day with an "accelerated tDCS design" of 20 minutes of HD-tDCS -15 minutes of rest -20 minutes of HD-tDCS -15 minutes of rest -20 minutes of HD-tDCS.
All participants received a local anesthetic (EMLA) cream applied to the locations at the scalp where the electrodes would be placed 30 minutes before the stimulation, for reducing both itching and discomfort in the HD-tDCS group and to facilitate higher blinding efficiency between the two groups.
During the stimulation-sessions the patients were seated comfortable in a chair, resting.
The "offline" design was chosen based on previous reviews showing that offline tDCS was found to be more effective than "online" designs for older adults
The design was also chosen to make the tDCS procedure less overwhelming for the AD patients that suffer from reduced cognitive capacity with increased risk of tiredness.
To make the test situation as similar as possible between pre and post testing and to minimize test-fatigue in AD patients, posttests were administered with a two-day delay after the last HD-tDCS session.
An additional rationale for the two-day delay was to measure whether multiple sessions of tDCS in an accelerated design gave effects useful for the patients in their daily living, based on LTP effects, rather than solely acute effects
The participants visited the university five times for different procedures, including screening and pretesting, six active or sham sessions of HD-tDCS and posttest (see Figure

Neuropsychological assessment
The primary outcome measures were immediate and delayed verbal memory, based on tests from the Repeatable Battery for the Assessment of Neuropsychological Status (RBANS).
RBANS is a standardized neuropsychological test battery used in both basic research and clinical assessment
The test shows high specificity (82%) and sensitivity (98%) for the detection of AD
Immediate memory consists of a 10-item list that is repeated and that the participant is to immediately recall four times and a story that is repeated and that the participant is to immediately recall two times.
Delayed memory consists of both verbal and visual memory tasks.
After approximately 20 minutes, the 10-item list was used to test recall and recognition, whereas a story was used to test recall.
In addition, there is a visual recall test of a complex figure.
RBANS consists of two parallel versions (A and B), with different wordlists and stories to reduce test-retest effects.
Reliability coefficients are between 0.81 and 0.94 for the population between 60 and 89 years of age
Secondary outcome measures consisted of global cognitive function using the RBANS battery, covering five domains: immediate verbal memory, visuospatial/constructional, language, attention, and delayed visual and verbal memory.
Screening tests for dementia were also part of the secondary outcomes, consisting of MMSE

MRI analysis
Volume, surface area and thickness values were provided by FreeSurfer version 6.0 software
This pipeline includes motion correction, normalization to Talairach space, intensity bias correction, skull stripping, surface registration and segmentation.

FreeSurfer segmentation outputs were visually inspected in Freesurfers visualization application
FreeView for severe errors as recommended in the FreeSurfer documentation (e.g., skull strip errors, segmentation errors and pial surface misplacement) and no severe errors were found.
Thus, no manual correction was performed on the segmentation outputs.
To calculate cortical thickness, FreeSurfer use the algorithm of mean distance between vertices of a corrected, triangulated white matter surface and the pial surface
See Fischl and colleagues
The hippocampal volume and the parcellated thickness of the entorhinal cortex were analyzed since they are hallmark structures of AD atrophy
Based on the modeling studies of Miranda
Statistical analyses of cortical thickness and surface area were performed within the software package Permutation Analysis of Linear Models (PALM)
Mris_preproc was used for resampling the individual surfaces to an average surface to accommodate statistical analysis in FS 6.0.
The design matrixes for the permutation analyses consisted of score changes on the delayed memory test and in age.
Both covariates were mean centered before the analyses.
Permutation analyses were performed with 5000 iterations, and threshold-free cluster enhancement (TFCE)
A familywise error rate-corrected p < .05 was considered significant.
The major white matter pathways were automatically reconstructed with TRActs Constrained by UnderLying Anatomy (TRACULA)
TRACULA relies on the underlying anatomy from the cortical parcellation and subcortical segmentation accomplished using FreeSurfer.
The trac-all script was run that involved a) preprocessing of the DWI (correction for motion and eddy currents), b) registration of the individual DW and anatomical images to the common (atlas) space, c) reconstruction of white matter tracts from the template using a deterministic fiber tracking algorithm and d) extraction of statistics on standard diffusion measures (FA and MD) for each reconstructed pathway.
Labeling of white matter tracts was based on an established protocol
Since the tDCS current was delivered to the left DLPFC, the following tracts were analyzed: left anterior thalamic radiation (lATR), left cingulum cingular bundle (lCCG) and forceps minor (FMIN).It was assumed that these tracts would be stimulated by the tDCS-current due to their connections and/or closeness to the DLFPC (Figure
High FA values represent higher structural connectivity between nodes in a network.
Individual differences in white matter (variations in structural connectivity) may influence the behavioral response to stimulation

Statistical analyses
The demographic and clinical characteristics of the participants are described with means and standard deviations (SDs).
Independent t-tests were used to compare the demographic and baseline

Baseline characteristics
Table
There was a significant difference in the delayed memory scores at baseline (HD-tDCS group: M = 14.00,
SD = 2.87, sham group: M = 22.67, SD = 9.79; t(17) = -2.68,
p= .016).
The maximum score possible on the delayed memory tasks was 62.

Optimal electrode montage
Of the eight different montages that were simulated over the left DLPFC, four were selected for at least one of the participants (Table
See Figure

Effect of HD-tDCS on cognitive performance
A Shapiro-Wilk test (p >.05) and a visual inspection of the participants' histograms, normal Q-Q plots and box plots showed that all RBANS subscores and the RBANS total score for the two groups were not significantly different from normal distributions.
For the screening tests (MMSE, Clock Drawing Test and TMT), however, data from the sham group were not normally distributed.
In the HD-tDCS group, data for all screening tests except the clock-drawing test were normally distributed.
The generalized linear model showed that delayed memory change scores were different between the HD-tDCS group and the sham group shown by the main effect of group (B = 3.13, SE = 1.51,
Wald χ 2 (1) = 4.26, p = .039)
with higher change in the HD-tDCS group compared to the sham group.
None of the other included covariates (baseline memory performance, age, and sex) reached significance (all p's > .39).
MMSE performance improved in the HD-tDCS group compared to the sham group (B = 2.78, SE = 1.12,
Wald χ 2 (1) = 6.13, p = .013),
and the effect of Age on the change score on MMSE was significant (B = -.16,
SE = .08,
Wald χ 2 (1) = 2.49, p = .041)
showing that lower age was associated with better MMSE performance.
There were no other significant group effects for the other outcome variables, see Supplementary Table

E-field in the left DLPFC and score changes on the delayed memory subtest
Pearson's correlation analysis indicated a non-significant positive correlation between the score change on the delayed memory subtest in the HD-tDCS group and the net maximal anodal E-field in the DLPFC (r(8) = .34,
p = .34).
An independent t-test showed no significant difference in the net anodal E-field in the target region between the participants who had improved performance on delayed memory after HD-tDCS treatment (M = 0.07 V/m, SD = 0.03) and the participants who did not show improved performance on memory tasks after HD-tDCS treatment (M = 0.05 V/m, SD = 0.003); t(8) = 1.26, p = .242.
However, the effect size was g = .
Figure

Relationship between score changes and brain volume, cortical thickness and cortical surface area
Correlation analysis of MRI data collected at baseline (total gray matter volume, volume of the left and right hippocampus and cortical thickness of the left and right entorhinal cortex) and score changes on the delayed memory subtest showed no significant results (Supplementary Tables
Permutation analyses showed no statistically significant differences in cortical thickness or surface area between the HD-tDCS and sham groups at baseline.
There was a tendency towards an association between cortical thickness and score changes on the delayed memory subtest, whereas participants in the HD-tDCS group with a thicker cortex in regions in the left hemisphere had higher score changes on the delayed memory tasks (Figure
The results were non-significant.
These associations were not found in the right hemisphere in the HD-tDCS group.
No association was found in the sham group regarding thickness/surface area and score changes for delayed memory.

Correlation between memory performance and DTI parameters
FA and MD were measured in the lATR, lCCB and FMIN.
Analysis was based on 16 participants due to low quality MRI to complete DTI analysis for three of the participants (HD-tDCS group = 9, sham group = 7).
T-tests showed no significant group difference in DTI measures between the active and sham groups at baseline (Figure
Correlation analysis (Table
p =.017.)
The results are presented in a scatterplot (Figure
There were no other significant results for FA or MD in the HD-tDCS group.
In the sham group, there were no significant differences between changes in delayed memory performance and FA or MD.

DISCUSSION
The main purpose of this study was to investigate whether HD-tDCS leads to improvements in memory function in patients with AD.
The second aim was to test relations between individual differences in brain anatomy and the cognitive effect of HD-tDCS.
To increase the focality of tDCS, HD-tDCS was used, and electrode placement was individually optimized based on computational modeling of each participant's MRI scans.
Significant improvements in the primary outcome variable delayed memory and the secondary outcome variable MMSE were found in participants receiving HD-tDCS compared to the sham group.
More specifically, five participants in the active group had higher scores on delayed memory post HD-tDCS, four remained stable and one declined with one point.
The discovery of enhanced performance following tDCS is in line with previous findings in AD patients
A review from Cai and colleagues, based on seven studies with a total of 146 AD patients concluded that tDCS had a significant effect on improving cognitive function overall; however, the results must be interpreted with caution.
More specifically, considering previous studies on AD targeting the same region as the present study, the results regarding the therapeutic potential of tDCS vary.
The conclusion of Boggio and colleagues
Results from that study were based on a single 2mA tDCS session, lasting for 30 minutes, compared to our accelerated design with a total of six 20-minute sessions.
Other studies that have shown improved cognitive performance after tDCS over the left DLPFC in AD patients have used MMSE scores as their measure of cognitive improvement; for example, the study by Khedr and colleagues
In contrast to our findings, Im et al.
Delayed memory was not specifically measured by Khedr et al.
Not all tDCS studies over the DLPFC have shown promising effects.
The studies of Cotelli and colleagues
Although the same target region was stimulated in all these studies, the primary outcome measures differ substantially.
In addition, the severity of the disease at enrollment is inconsistent across studies.
These factors make comparison of the studies challenging.
As discussed by Khedr et al.
All previous studies have used conventional tDCS compared to the more focal HD-tDCS montage used in the present study.
Since the current distributions vary in HD-tDCS and conventional tDCS electrode montages
Rather, our study should be considered as a proof-of principle study showing how HD-tDCS affects the E-field in the DLPFC of AD patients and exploring the relationship between HD-tDCS induced E-fields and cognitive measures.
A significant positive correlation between FA in the HD-tDCS group in the anterior thalamic radiation and the score change in the delayed memory subtest was found.
These results support our hypothesis that participants with more intact white matter connections show stronger effects of HD-tDCS as a memory enhancer.
The anterior thalamic nucleus receives information related to memory from the hippocampus, whereas the anterior thalamic radiation, a white matter bundle, connects the thalamus to the frontal cortex, especially to the DLPFC
This result may indicate that patients with better-preserved white matter connections between the stimulation site and the thalamus/hippocampus benefitted the most from HD-tDCS.
If this bundle is only moderately damaged, communication between the anterior thalamus and the left DLPFC may be enhanced by increasing DLPFC excitability, and thereby, the susceptibility of neurons in that region to inputs from the thalamus.
In addition, the analysis of cortical thickness showed a tendency towards an association between larger thickness and score changes indicating improvement on the delayed memory subtest.
Intriguingly, such associations were absent in the right hemisphere of patients receiving active HD-tDCS, or in both hemispheres of study participants in the sham HD-tDCS group.
Those with more preserved gray and white matter connections may therefore be more susceptible to the beneficial effects of HD-tDCS.
However, the relationship between cortical thickness and score changes was not significant, and the low sample size of 16 subjects in the DTI analysis must be taken into consideration when interpreting these results.
The white matter tracts selected for the analysis was based on its structural closeness to the stimulated target (DLPFC), grounded in the hypothesis that structural connectivity between the stimulated target and the hippocampus influences tDCS effect.
Another approach to study white matter as a predictor for tDCS effect is to target the fornix, which is memory-relevant tract with reduced FA values in AD patients.
Adding this tract to the analysis could further explore if white matter alterations could guideline which patients are most likely to benefit from tDCS treatment.
The functional role of the HD-tDCS-induced E-field was studied by evaluating the relationship between the magnitude of the E-field normal component and score changes in delayed memory.
Even though we found a large effect size in the net maximal anodal E-field in the DLPFC between participants in the HD-tDCS group that had positive score changes on the delayed memory subtest and participants in the HD-tDCS group with negative/no score changes, this finding was not significant.
These results, though inconclusive, are in line with the findings of Kim and colleagues
Mahdavi and colleagues' study demonstrated reduced current density in older adults with cognitive impairment compared to younger adults
Antonenko and colleagues argued how the E-field variation between younger and older adults is affected by multiple factors, including atrophy, head anatomy and brain state
In the present study, we optimized electrode placement by analyzing E-field magnitude in the target are.
However, we did not adjust the HD-tDCS dose according to participants' head anatomy.
Antenenko and colleagues demonstrated that the electric field is reduced in relation to head volume
In future studies, computational modeling can be used to adjust the current intensity to different AD patients to ensure that a similar amount of E-field is induced in the region of interest across participants.
Supporting this point of view, in a modeling study of healthy individuals, significant inter-individual variability in response to tDCS across a range of current intensities was observed
In the present study we stimulated the left DLPFC.
In AD, the DLPFC is hypothesized to be a compensatory brain resource, helping memory function when the function of the medial temporal lobes is reduced
Gigi and colleagues argue that this compensatory mechanism is strongest in prodromal stages of AD and in mild stages of the disease, diminishing with severe AD
This can be linked to our observation that patients with a thicker cortex and better white matter connections tended to improve more on delayed memory tasks than patients with a thinner cortex.
Episodic memory depends on many higher cognitive functions, such as attention, recognition, and familiarity
The HD-tDCS group did also improve MMSE performance compared to the sham group.
Nonetheless, MMSE is a non-specific screening measure of cognitive functioning, and cerebral correlates for this measure are global rather than focal
In healthy controls, stimulation of the DLPFC improved consolidation of long-term memory, showing a lasting effect of tDCS.
Several studies have focused on the prodromal phase and the therapeutic implications of DLPFC stimulation in patients with MCI rather than stimulating patients with developed AD
The delayed memory subtest and the MMSE were the only scores that differed statistically between the HD-tDCS group and the sham group after the HD-tDCS intervention.
The DLPFC is active both during working memory and attention tasks, and one would assume that these functions would also be affected by the anodal current in the targeted area.
However, the effects of tDCS over the DLPFC on executive functions and attention are highly inconsistent, and face the same challenges as discussed above when comparing results due to different electrode montages and outcome measures
Since attention was not improved in the HD-tDCS group, the improvement in delayed memory cannot be interpreted as a result of an increase in overall alertness.
To further address the effect of tDCS on executive function in AD patients, specific executive tasks should be added to the test battery.
This study is the first to use HD-tDCS with the aim of improving memory impairment in AD patients.
The results from our simulations resulted in four different HD-tDCS montages used to reach the maximal net anodal E-field in the left DLPFC.
Considering the heterogeneity of cerebral atrophy in the AD population, focality in stimulation techniques is assumed to be especially important for reaching the desired region, considering that the current is affected by the CSF and the degree of atrophy
Further analysis on a larger sample is needed to obtain more robust findings.
Based upon the literature up to September 2016, no recommendations could be made for the therapeutic approach of tDCS to enhance cognition in AD
In recent years, several studies have explored different factors that can determine or affect the variations observed in the therapeutic response to tDCS, combining cognitive testing with biomarkers and neurophysiology
These combination studies provide information about the relationship between the cognitive effects observed after stimulation and the physiology behind tDCS.
Even though the results at this point are scarce, exploratory studies are needed to establish clinical guidelines concerning the therapeutic potential of using tDCS in AD.
Our study provides insights into how the HD-tDCS-induced E-field is distributed in the brain of an AD patient when using HD-tDCS over the left DLPFC.
The significant results in our study, though on a small sample, support the need for further investigation of HD-tDCS as a therapeutic approach in AD.
The most substantial limitation of this study was the low sample size, which increased the risk of both type I and II errors.
Unfortunately, low sample sizes are quite common in the AD-RCT field due to challenges in both recruitment and follow-up phases
In the present study a strict randomization procedure was followed, which resulted in significant baseline differences in delayed memory.
There were also differences in patient characteristics of sex and age.
Even though these differences were controlled for in the statistical analysis, this imbalance is a limitation to the study.
In future studies, such biases could be reduced by using stratified randomization.
In addition, we do not know if the significant improvement in delayed memory will persist over weeks or months.
Another critical factor is that we did not apply a correction for multiple comparisons to our cognitive tests.
We opted not to correct for multiple comparisons to increase sensitivity to find potentially important effects (with the caveat of a higher risk for false positives, i.e., nonreplicable results).
In this respect, our study should be regarded as proof-of-principle, and outcomes should be treated as preliminary.
None of the participants reported or showed signs of adverse effects.
This is one of the benefits with tDCS.
In addition, the devices are small, feasible and have a low cost.
These advantages make it possible to consider tDCS as a treatment option for everyday use.
Interesting home studies show promising results
Future studies should investigate the therapeutic effect of HD-tDCS on AD when combining daily sessions and optimized electrode positions.
In the present study an "offline" tDCS design was administrated.
Whether online or offline stimulation is preferable is debatable, with studies on older adults showing in favor with offline designs
Combining HD-tDCS with task relevant activity to AD patients may further increase tDCS effect since it potentiates task-relevant networks, and should be further explored in future studies.

Conclusions
To increase focality in tDCS, computational modeling is a valuable method for analyzing the cortical flow of tDCS-induced E-field in AD.
We found that HD-tDCS led to significantly improved delayed memory-and MMSE performance.
Heterogeneity in brain anatomy resulted in four different montages when optimizing the electrode position to maximize the anodal intensity of DLPFC stimulation.
FA in the lATR and score changes on the delayed memory subtest were positively correlated.
Associations between the delayed memory effect of HD-tDCS and both E-field and cortical thickness were observed.
These preliminary findings suggest that optimization of electrode placement may enhance the therapeutic effect of HD-tDCS as a memory enhancer in AD.
Furthermore, patients with more preserved gray and white matter might benefit more from HD-tDCS than patients with more severe atrophy.
tDCS therapy can be adjusted in the clinic to each patient's needs regarding brain anatomy, the degree of cortical atrophy and white matter alterations.
A larger sample size is needed to draw firm conclusions.


MRI data were acquired by a Siemens Skyra 3T scanner located at UNN. T1-weighed images were acquired with a 3D MPRAGE sequence with following parameters: TR/TE = 2300/ 2.96 ms, flip angle = 9°, matrix size = 256 x 256, 192 sagittal slices, and voxel size = 1x1x1 mm.
T2-weighed images were acquired with a 3D turbo spin echo sequence with the following parameters: TR/TE = 14,404/93 ms, flip angle = 111°, no fat suppressio, matrix size = 256 x 256, 192 sagittal slices, voxel size = 1x1x1 mm.
DTI was acquired with: TR/TE = 10,700/80 milliseconds, b-value = 1000 s/mm 2 , 30 gradient directions, matrix size 112 x 112, with 70 axial slices 2 mm thick, voxel size = 2x2x2 mm, with parallel acceleration factor 2. Total scan time was 24 minutes.


data.
Generalized linear models were used to test the difference between groups from baseline to posttest on the outcome variables.
The probability distribution used in the generalized regression models were normal distributions with identity links.
The change scores (baseline -posttest) of the variables Delayed memory, Immediate memory, MMS, TMT, Clock Drawing Test, Verbal Performance, Visuospatial Performance, Attention, and RBANS total were used as dependent variables in separate analyses.
Due to the small sample size, only group, baseline performance of the dependent variable, sex, and age of the participants were included as factors and covariates.The HD-tDCS group was further divided into two subgroups based on their performance on the cognitive tests: a positive effect (PE) group, defined by a positive change in score on the delayed memory test, and a no effect (NE) group, defined by no change in score/negative change in score.
An independent t-test was performed to assess whether there was a difference in E-field intensity in the left DLPFC between the PE and NE groups.
To provide additional information, effect sizes (Hedges' g) were calculated for the t-tests.
Values ≤ 0.49 indicated small effects, 0.50 ≤ g ≤ 0.79 indicated medium effects, and g ≥ 0.80 indicated large effects.
The results were expressed as the mean ± SD.Data were analyzed with SPSS version 26 (www.spss.com).
P values below .05
were considered statistically significant.RESULTSData collection for this study took place fromJuly 2017 to March 2020.
Thirty (N= 30) participants with a mean age of 78.80 ± 7.42 years (22 females) consented to participate.
Six participants scored lower than 17 on the MMSE screening test and were excluded from the study.
One participant decided to withdraw after Meeting 1 (due to worsening of the disease).
Three participants could not complete the study due to the COVID-19 lockdown.
Twenty participants underwent MRI scans.
One participant was excluded due to poor MRI scan quality.
A flow diagram is shown in Figure 4.
All analyses are based on a final sample of nineteen participants (N = 19), with an age range from 61 to 83 years and a mean age of 72.58 ± 7.19 years (14 females).
No adverse effects were reported or observed during the intervention.



Figure 1
Figure 1 Computational modeling workflow



Figure 2 ProcedureFigure 3 4 CONSORTFigure 5
Figure 2



Figure 6
Figure 6Score changes in the delayed memory subtest and net anodal E-field in the left DLPFC



Figure 7 PALM
Figure 7



Figure 8 Mean
Figure 8



Figure 9
Figure 9



Table 1
Electrode positions for the eight HD-tDCS montages used for simulation in SimNIBS.
Electrode labels are based on the extended 10/20 EEG-system.



Table 2
Baseline characteristics



Table 3
Overview of all simulated stimulation montages and how often they were chosen in the HD-tDCS and sham groups.Note.
Electrode labels are based on the extended 10/20 EEG-system



Table 4
Pearson correlations between delayed memory scores and DTI parameters in the HD-tDCS groupNote.
Delayed memory SC= delayed memory score change, lATR= left anterior thalamic radiation, lCCG= left cingulum cingular bundle, FMIN= forceps minor.
*Significant at the .05
level, **significant at the .01
level.
The tests are not post hoc corrected.