Cellular senescence: at the crossroads between inflammation and Alzheimer's disease
Although ageing is the key risk factor for Alzheimer's disease (AD), we do not yet fully understand why.
Senescent cells accumulate in aged tissues and play a causal role in agerelated pathologies due to their pro-inflammatory secretome.
Therefore, senescence-induced inflammation might contribute to AD and bridge the gap between ageing and AD.
Here, we highlight the role of cellular senescence as a driver of the ageing phenotype and discuss the current evidence that connects senescence with AD, exploring the crossroads of cellular senescence and neurodegeneration.

Cellular senescence: a promising hotspot in age-related neuropathies
By 2030, dementia (see Glossary) is expected to affect more than 70 million people worldwide
The most common cause of dementia is Alzheimer´s Disease (AD), contributing to 60-80% of dementia cases, and characterized by both the accumulation of misfolded proteins and neuroinflammation
The greatest risk factor for AD is ageing, with the majority of cases diagnosed in people age 65 or over.
Nevertheless, despite the huge social and financial implications of an increasing elderly population, we still have a narrow understanding of the biology of ageing.
This, alongside the lack of an effective treatment to prevent or slow down the progression of AD, emphasises the need to explore beyond the current assumptions and hypotheses that dominate the thinking in the field.
Among the hallmarks of ageing
First, seminal work by the Van Deursen lab demonstrated that the selective elimination of senescent cells in naturally aged mice lengthens healthspan and delays age-related disorders, suggesting for the first time a causal role of senescent cells in ageing
This is likely to be mediated by the contribution of the senescence-associated secretory phenotype (SASP)
Second, the number of senescence-associated diseases is growing and, as result, the therapeutic potential of targeting senescent cells goes well beyond tumour suppression
Indeed, recent evidence points to a causal role of cellular senescence in taudependent pathology
In this Review we summarize the current understanding of cellular senescence and its associated inflammatory response with a focus on its potential contribution to AD pathology.
We then go on to speculate about new research strategies needed to fill the knowledge gap at the crossroads between inflammation and AD.

Cellular senescence as a source of chronic inflammation
A recent thorough review on the characteristics of cellular senescence can be found elsewhere
Cellular senescence causes tissue ageing due to both intrinsic and extrinsic mechanisms.
Intrinsically, when the irreversible cell growth arrest of senescence
However, it is the extrinsic effects of senescence
The most intriguing feature of senescent cells is indeed their secretory phenotype or SASP (Box 1).
Its heterogeneous and dynamic composition and the specific array of functions vary with the inducer of senescence and the cell type affected
However, generally speaking, the SASP has three main functions.
First, the SASP plays an important cellautonomous role by reinforcing the growth arrest and the secretory phenotype itself through a positive-feedback loop that accounts for the tumour suppressor properties of senescence
Second, multiple components of the SASP can propagate senescence to neighbouring cells in a process called paracrine senescence
Third, the SASP eventually recruits the immune system to clear the senescent cells and halt the inflammation.
Interestingly, whereas immunosurveillance of senescent cells is beneficial in the context of cancer
Although senescent cells in aged tissues represent no more than 15% of the total [27], they contribute to chronic inflammation in two ways.
On one hand, additive or synergistic effects of paracrine senescence amplify the SASP exacerbating inflammation.
Mediators of paracrine senescence include ROS signalling through gap junctions
On the other, immunosenescence results in a declined immune function and a subsequent lower rate of senescent cells clearance
The resulting accumulation of senescent cells further reinforces the inflammation
Supporting this idea, there is an increase of certain circulating SASP factors in human plasma that correlates with advanced age and frailty
Moreover, elimination of senescent cells in ageing mouse models is enough to decrease the levels of systemic inflammatory mediators, pointing to senescent cells as the source of inflammation
Conversely, transplantation of senescent cells into young mice increases systemic inflammation and causes physical dysfunction
With time, these alterations in intercellular communication promote age-related pathologies, including neurodegenerative diseases like AD.

Inflammation in AD
The neuropathological hallmarks of AD include extracellular plaques of abnormally folded amyloid-β (Aβ), intracellular aggregation of the microtubule protein tau in neurofibrillary tangles (NFT), and neuroinflammation
Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have found several polymorphic variants in genes expressed by microglia that modulate the risk of AD, indicating a prominent role of immunity and inflammation in AD that goes beyond the phagocytosis and clearance of Aβ plaques, and, in essence, proves that neuroinflammation represents much more than a by-product of AD pathology
Despite a major role of microglia in neuroinflammation, astrocytes also play their part through release of cytokines enabling bidirectional communication with glial cells, neurons, and the blood-brain barrier (BBB)
Evidence of the crosstalk among the different brain cell types has led to a paradigm shift to explain the AD pathogenesis moving the focus from a neuron-centric amyloid-cascade hypothesis to a non-linear and more complex cellular phase hypothesis underlying the progression of the disease
Although the causal chain of events is not yet clear, insights from transcriptomic studies are helping us to get a better understanding of the specific inflammatory reaction during AD.
For example, placing new early players like oligodendrocytes under the spotlight
Importantly, the fact that clinical diagnosis of AD comes after decades of a long preclinical stage opens up the possibility that targeting early events and identifying early markers may well be the essential step to halt or at least delay the progression of the disease
There is clinical evidence that neuroinflammation is already present in the mild cognitive impairment (MCI) stage, before the start of dementia
This early neuroinflammation may be driven or exacerbated by the accumulation of senescent cells in the aged brain.
Therefore, by specifically modulating the secretome of senescent cells we could potentially restrain neuroinflammation and slow down the progression from MCI to AD. Systemic factors reaching the brain due to the age-related vascular damage constitute another important source of neuroinflammation
BBB breakdown is an age-related event that precedes dementia
Indeed, vascular dysfunction is a risk factor for AD and, probably, one of the earliest pathological events in disease development
Moreover, AD also exacerbates vascular damage mainly due to amyloid deposits in the vascular walls
Pericytes support the BBB function and clear toxic cellular by-products and, therefore, are essential to preserve the brain homeostasis.
There is a causal link between the deposition of oligomeric Aβ and an increase in capillary constriction as a result of dysfunctional pericytes that explains the lower cerebral blood flow seen early in AD
Moreover, due to their frontline position, certain groups of pericytes are the first cell type activated in the CNS in response to systemic inflammation
Interestingly, those pericytes signal to neurons mainly though secretion of the chemokine Ccl2, one of the key components of the SASP mediating paracrine senescence
Further highlighting the appeal of pericytes as therapeutic targets, pericyte loss accelerates the onset and progression of Aβ and tau pathology in mouse models of AD
Two recent papers have presented evidence that obesity
These studies set the groundwork for the idea that cells in the brain exposed to systemic factors can undergo senescence and warrants further investigation.
Getting a better understanding will help us to determine if the pro-inflammatory cytokines released after systemic insults come, at least in part, from senescent cells.

Potential role of cellular senescence in AD
Exciting new evidence regarding a role of senescent cells in neurodegeneration is starting to emerge
It is likely that AD pathology triggers senescence [57], further increasing the burden of senescent cells and inflammation in the aged brain, and possibly starting a positive feedback loop that might exacerbate disease.
This potential scenario highlights the need to choose appropriate AD models that recapitulate the aged brain microenvironment in order not to underestimate the influence that senescence and chronic inflammation might have during neurodegeneration.
Conversely, cellular dysfunction and impaired intercellular communication due to senescence combined with a high-risk genetic background could lead to AD.
Therefore, understanding the key events that enable the shift from healthy brain ageing to pathological ageing and neurodegeneration is essential.
In this regard, comparing the spatial distribution and identity of brain senescent cells during healthy ageing versus pathological ageing at different stages of AD could shed some light on the potential roles of cellular senescence during disease progression.
Based on the current evidence, we hypothesize two primary sources of senescent cells in the AD brain: age-related senescence and pathology-induced senescence.

Age-related senescence as a driver for neuroinflammation. Alongside other risk factors,
age-related build-up of senescent cells in the brain could set an ideal pro-inflammatory environment for the onset of AD.
Although still sparse, growing evidence is helping to clarify which cell types could undergo age-related senescence in the brain and their potential contribution to neuroinflammation.
Microglia.
Several studies have identified age-related changes on microglia.
For instance, there is evidence of a type of dystrophic microglia in the aged human brain different from activated microglia
Moreover, these dystrophic microglial cells are detected around sites of tau pathology in the human brain, and their accumulation probably precedes neurofibrillary pathology
Besides morphological changes, ageing lowers the microglial threshold to trigger an inflammatory response as they enter a "priming" state
Ageing also correlates with myelin degradation, and clearance of the resulting myelin pieces by microglia leads to lipofuscin accumulation on the lysosomes
Accumulation of myelin debris over a certain threshold could overwhelm the phagocytic capacity of microglia and trigger senescence [63], potentially disrupting their role in aiding remyelination
Overall, these results suggest that age-related dystrophic, primed, or lipofuscin-positive microglia are senescent.
Other important feature of aged microglia is the intracellular accumulation of lipid droplets alongside an increase in the number of lysosomes
Lipid accumulation is indeed a marker of senescence as seen in hepatocytes [66], foamy macrophages
However, whether there is a connection with age-related lipid accumulation in microglia and cellular senescence remains to be elucidated.
Based on these observations, it is intriguing to speculate about both cell-autonomous and non-autonomous inducers of senescence -or at least senescence markers -in microglia.
Senescent microglia can directly arise because of ageing or an excessive phagocytosis (e.g.
Aβ).
At the same time, signals coming from senescent neurons (e.g. as a consequence of tau pathology) could elicit bystander senescence on microglia.
Future research will be key to understand whether microglial senescence is a primary event or just a by-product of AD, and to clarify their role in neurodegeneration.
Astrocytes.
Upon injury, disease, or ageing, astrocytes enter a reactive state that involves transcriptional changes and results in a neurotoxic phenotype that will challenge the viability of neurons and oligodendrocytes.
Interestingly, the transition to the reactive state is indirectly mediated by paracrine communication with activated microglia
There is evidence that senescent astrocytes accumulate in the human brain of aged donors, and the senescent cell burden is exacerbated for AD patients
In a similar manner, there is a diseaseassociated astrocyte population that increases with age and during AD progression
Therefore, it is reasonable to speculate that a certain subset of reactive and diseaseassociated astrocytes could be senescent astrocytes.
Due to the paracrine role of microglia on astrocytes, it is possible that microglial cells undergo senescence first, as the primary sensor of damage, and transmit senescence to astrocytes at a later stage.
Due to the crosstalk between brain cell types, a priority question is to understand the potential hierarchies or different waves of senescence in the brain.
Gathering this information should be the preliminary step to design a valid therapeutic strategy that targets senescence.
Neurons.
A controversial matter is whether terminal differentiated cells, like neurons, can also undergo senescence.
In response to severe DNA damage, post-mitotic neurons re-enter the cell cycle and die by apoptosis, which may account for the neuronal loss seen in neurodegenerative diseases like AD
However, some neurons undergo a senescence-like state instead of apoptosis and, importantly, the prevalence of these senescence-like neurons increases with age
The choice of senescence over apoptosis could be beneficial as a way of preserving cell numbers in tissues with restricted regenerative capacity, but at the price of promoting inflammation [75].

Endothelial cells. Endothelial dysfunction in the ageing brain leads to neurovascular
uncoupling and a leaky BBB.
Interestingly, primary endothelial cells from an accelerated ageing mouse model, which displays a higher BBB permeability than WT littermates, are found to be senescent adding to the possibility that endothelial dysfunction could be senescence driven
In contrast, new evidence suggests that certain senescent endothelial cells in the liver show an enhanced detoxifying function and removal of these is detrimental for the animal
As such, the role of endothelial senescence in the brain during ageing and AD warrants further investigation.

Pathology-induced senescence exacerbates AD. Aβ plaques and tau pathology trigger
senescence in the brain
Rather than being mere bystanders, senescent cells start a positive feedback loop that accelerates the progression of AD.
Astrocytes and microglia.
In a mouse model of tau-dependent neurodegeneration, Bussian et al.
Elimination of the senescent glia ameliorates neurodegeneration, which suggests bidirectional communication between cell types in the brain.
An intriguing question arises from the fact that the genetic and pharmacological approaches used in this study to eliminate senescent cells are systemic.
This raises the possibility that the beneficial effects of the elimination of senescent cells in the brain might be enhanced by the elimination of senescent cells in the periphery and the consequent lower levels of systemic inflammation.
The possibility that senescence spreads from neurons to glia in a paracrine manner should be further investigated, as well as identifying which components of the SASP are involved.
In this regard, a new preprint suggests that astrocyte senescence is triggered by uptake of neuronal tau, which results in HMGB1 release
HMGB1 is a danger-associated molecular pattern (DAMPs) secreted by senescent cells shortly after induction
Interestingly, increased HMGB1 levels in the AD brain have been previously associated with the microglia response to amyloid plaques
Therefore, HMGB1 could be an early marker of neuroinflammation driven by senescent glial cells.

Oligodendrocyte progenitor cells (OPCs). It has been recently proposed that
Neurons.
Recent transcriptomic analyses of NFT-containing neurons from post-mortem AD brain unveiled an expression profile compatible with cellular senescence.
Validation with different AD transgenic mouse models further suggests that tau accumulation triggers neuronal senescence, and that the specific elimination of these senescent neurons reduces neurodegeneration
Conversely, crossing a tauopathy model with senescenceaccelerated mice shows an exacerbation of tau pathology

New therapeutic strategies
Despite the prevalence of Alzheimer's disease, there is still no cure.
Therapies aiming to reduce amyloid beta load have all failed at clinical trials and so there is an urgent need to develop new strategies.
Cellular senescence is emerging as an interesting player in the pathophysiology of AD making senotherapies an attractive therapeutic alternative.
Senolytic therapies (Box 3) have already shown promising results in mouse models of tau-dependent neurodegeneration
However, to avoid potential negative effects of eliminating senescent cells
Moreover, senescent cells are heterogeneous and dynamic and so is their associated secretory phenotype
There is therefore an urgent need to elucidate which cell types undergo senescence in AD as well as the timeline and nature of the SASP.
A joint effort towards the establishment of a tissue-specific senescence cell atlas is essential and will provide a key resource where to test the therapeutic potential of future new approaches
Whereas many therapies have shown promise in rodent models, it is important to note that most have failed in human trials thereby stressing the need to use models which rely on human cells

Concluding remarks
Thinking outside the amyloid box and acknowledging the relevance of the cellular phase will be crucial in the search for new therapies to treat AD.
As an example, senescence and senescence-induced inflammation could have profound autonomous and non-autonomous effects impairing the cellular homeostatic responses in the brain.
However, the involvement of cellular senescence in the healthy or pathological ageing brain remains underexplored (see Outstanding Questions).
Age-related build-up of senescent cells in the brain might be responsible for creating the perfect pro-inflammatory conditions to favour the onset of AD in the presence of other risk factors.
Later, still ill-defined positive feedback loops between senescent cells and AD neuropathological hallmarks -Aβ plaques and NFT-accumulating neurons -could accelerate neurodegeneration worsening cognitive impairment.
Therefore, the current evidence of cellular senescence in AD may well just represent the tip of the iceberg.
Supported by the increasing data suggesting a causal link between cellular senescence and age-related diseases outside the CNS, the role of senescence in healthy and pathological brain ageing merits further investigation.

Figure 1. Senescence-induced inflammation during brain ageing and Alzheimer´s
Disease (AD).
New evidence suggests increased inflammation observed in AD may be driven by an increase in cellular senescence driven by amyloid beta and/or tau pathology.
Conversely, ageing, the biggest risk factor for AD, also leads to an accumulation of senescent cells which contribute to chronic inflammation through the senescence-associated secretory phenotype (SASP).
Additional, genetic and/or environmental risk factors may further increase senescence leading to AD pathology.

Box 1 -Regulation of the SASP
A myriad of functions and heterogeneous composition, but also the variety of regulatory pathways involved illustrate the complexity of the SASP (for an in-depth review see
Wellknown mechanisms contributing to senescence include a persistent DNA damage response (DDR)
Leakage of fragments of nuclear chromatin into the cytoplasm of senescent cells trigger activation of the innate immunity cytosolic DNA-sensing cGAS/STING pathway, leading to both short-term and chronic inflammation
SASP is also subject to temporal regulation
Despite these and other pathways already identified, our understanding on the regulation of the SASP is still limited.

Box 2 -Do macrophages undergo senescence?
Outside the CNS, macrophages are recruited by the SASP to clear senescent cells and, as a consequence, they upregulate p16Ink4a and increase SA-β-galactosidase activity
These senescence-associated macrophages (SAM) accumulate with age and can therefore contribute to chronic inflammation.
As an example, build-up of foamy macrophages with senescence markers act as drivers of atherosclerosis in Ldl receptor knockout mice on a high-fat diet
Macrophages and senescent cells share indeed many phenotypes, including lysosomal expansion, metabolic reprogramming, a secretory phenotype, phagocytic capacity and growth arrest
Consequently, some senolytic drugs target macrophages resulting in therapeutic side-effects
However, this senescence-like state in macrophages is reversible at least under certain circumstances
Therefore, it is possible that even if macrophages acquire senescent phenotypes, they are not senescent per se as they fail to meet the irreversibility criteria.
We could also accommodate a new definition of cellular senescence acknowledging the reversibility of the senescent state in certain contexts, as it seems the case for senescent cancer cells
Controversies apart, further evidence is needed to confirm if these senescence-like phenotypes described for macrophages also occur in the brain
Importantly, reversing age-related metabolic changes in peripheral macrophages is enough to lower chronic inflammation and improve cognition [108], which highlights the influence of systemic inflammation in the aged brain.

Box 3 -A snapshot on senolytics.
Naturally aged mice genetically engineered to eliminate p16 Ink4a -positive senescent cells show less age-related pathologies than same-aged counterparts
This discovery started a race to develop senolytics
The most widely used senolytic in proof-of-concept experiments, ABT263
[110], causes thrombocytopenia
Newer senolytic approaches to limit side-effects include the repurposing of FDA-approved drug digoxin
Healthspan: the average length of an organism's life during which they are in good health.
Immunosenescence: gradual deterioration of the immune system with advanced age, mainly affecting the adaptive immunity.
Inflammation: defence mechanism to resolve tissue damage and preserve tissue homeostasis after injury or infection.
It normally involves innate and adaptive immune responses, and the release of pro-inflammatory cytokine mediators.
When acute, is protective.
However, chronic inflammation promotes an array of diseases.
Inflammaging: low-grade and "sterile" (not induced by pathogens) chronic systemic inflammation that develops with advanced age.
Lifespan: the average length of an organism's life.
Period of time between birth and death.
Lipofuscin: age-related intracellular aggregates composed of oxidized proteins and lipidcontaining residues of lysosomal digestion.
Macrophages: effector cells of the innate immune system.
They recognize, phagocytose and destroy microorganisms, diseased or damaged cells.
Macrophages in the brain are called microglia.
Microglia: resident immune cells of the brain that constantly monitor the cerebral microenvironment to respond to pathogens and damage.
Myelin: insulating layer around nerves made up of protein and fatty substances.
The myelin sheath allows electrical impulses to transmit quickly and efficiently along the nerve cells.
Neuroinflammation: inflammation of the nervous system seen in most neurological disorders.
Oligodendrocytes: type of glial cells whose main function is to form and maintain the myelin that surrounds and insulates neuronal axons.
Paracrine senescence: bystander or secondary senescence as a result of non-cell autonomous exposure to specific components of the senescence-associated secretory phenotype.
Senescence-associated secretory phenotype (SASP): heterogeneous, complex and dynamic mixture of cytokines, pro-inflammatory mediators and growth factors secreted by senescent cells and responsible for most of the physiological and pathophysiological roles of senescence.

Figure 1
Figure


Aβ plaques specifically induce senescence in OPCs based on observations in the brains of patients with AD and in an Aβ AD mouse model [10].
Eliminating the senescent OPCs using a brief course of senolytics decreases inflammation and microglial activation.
Senolytic treatment for longer periods also decreases Aβ plaque size and improves cognition, suggesting that senescent cells exacerbate Aβ pathology.
This study proposes paracrine effects of senescent cells that merit additional investigation, particularly the influence of the senescent microenvironment as a trigger of microglia activation.



Figure 2 .
Figure 2. Putative pathways of senescence-induced inflammation in AD.
Age-related senescence of vascular cells contributes to the blood-brain barrier breakdown (BBB) and


[114-116], immunotherapy using CAR T cells designed to target a cell-surface protein specifically expressed by senescent cells[117], or inhibition of glutamine metabolism[118].However, the knowledge about the role of cellular senescence in neurodegenerative diseases like AD is still sparse in comparison to other diseases.
Therefore, the potential use of senolytics to treat dementias like AD should be approached with caution until we have a clearer picture of the functions of senescence during brain ageing and AD.GlossaryAgeing: accumulation of molecular and cellular damage over time that affects most living organisms.
It leads to functional decline, growing risk of disease and, ultimately, death.Alzheimer's disease: progressive and irreversible brain disorder that constitutes the most common cause of dementia.
The neuropathological hallmarks include amyloid plaques and neurofibrillary tangles.Astrocytes: abundant glial cells that maintain homeostasis of the brain by providing trophic and metabolic support to neurons.Blood-brain barrier (BBB): a semi-permeable barrier separating the blood from the cerebrospinal fluid, and constituting a barrier to the passage of cells, particles and large molecules.
It mainly consists of a tightly sealed endothelium sheathed by mural vascular cells and perivascular astrocyte end-feet.
Cellular senescence: state of irreversible cell cycle arrest elicited in response to different type of stress to restrain the expansion of old and damaged cells.
Senescent cells undergo many other phenotypic alterations besides the growth arrest, including a secretory phenotype.