A computer-simulated mechanism of familial Alzheimer’s disease: Mutations enhance thermal dynamics and favor looser substrate-binding to γ-secretase
The 4-subunit intramembrane protease complex γ-secretase cleaves many substrates including fragments of the β-amyloid precursor protein (APP), leading to formation of Aβ peptides, and Notch.
Mutations in APP and the catalytic subunit of γ-secretase, presenilin, cause familial Alzheimer's disease (fAD).
Mutations are assumed to change the substrate-binding and cleavage and thereby the Aβ formed.
Whereas a wild-type structure of substrate-bound γ-secretase became recently available from cryogenic electron microscopy (6IYC), the structure and dynamics of mutant proteins remain obscure.
Here, we studied five prominent mutants of substrate-bound γsecretase by explicit all-atom molecular dynamics in a phospholipid membrane model at physiological temperature using the experimental structure as template: The presenilin 1 mutants E280A, G384A, A434C, and L435F and the V717I mutant of APP.
Our structures and dynamics provide the first atomic detail into how fAD-causing mutations affect substrate binding to γsecretase.
The pathogenic mutations tend to increase the space and variability in the substrate binding site, as seen e.g. from the distance from catalytic aspartate to substrate cleavage sites.
We suggest that we have identified the molecular cause of the "imprecise cleavage" that leads to two trimming pathways in γ-secretase, consistent with the FIST model, which may rationalize the experimental Aβ 42 /Aβ 40 ratios as a molecular basis for fAD.

Introduction
Alzheimer's disease (AD) affects more than 30 million people, is considered a major global cause of death, and inflicts a terrible and gradual loss of memory, cognition, daily activity, identity, and mood; treatments remain symptomatic and typically only delay disease progression by some months.
However, rare mutations in the genes coding for the β-amyloid precursor protein (APP) and presenilin 1 or 2 (PS1/2) cause particularly severe, early-onset familial AD (fAD).
γ-secretase is a 4-subunit intramembrane aspartyl protease whose catalytic subunit is PS1 or PS2; the other subunits are Nicastrin (NCT), Anterior pharynx-defective 1 (APH1-A/B) and Presenilin enhancer 2 (PEN2).
Loss of function
This open state was speculated to bind C99 less well, making all the binding constants smaller for the consecutive substrates,
Looser holding of C99 by the PS1 "fist" in the open conformation state leads to less stable enzyme-substrate complexes, more imprecise cleavage, and earlier release of longer Aβ peptides along both pathways, whereas the closely packed conformation state leads to tight squeezing, more precise cleavage mainly along the Aβ 40 pathway, i.e. normal wild-type processing.
Chemo-and bioinformatics studies imply that PS1 and PS2 mutations reduce the stability of the protein and favor the open conformation state.
The relevant conformational dynamics at physiological temperature in a membrane are much expanded compared to the frozen cryo state.
To understand the effect of mutation on substrate binding to γ-secretase, we used the experimental 6IYC structure and restored it to wild type (WT) and simulated five mutations (PS1-E280A, PS1-G384A, PS1-A434C, PS1-L435F and APP-V717I) with three independent simulations for each.
The mutants were selected based on prominence in previous reports.
They tend to increase the Aβ 42 /Aβ 40 ratio in assays and otherwise impair the proteolytic processing of APP and Notch-1
E280A (the Paisa mutation) is the most frequent variant causing fAD.
The mutant is also associated with increased Aβ 42 and decreased Aβ 40 production, and thus a 10-fold increase in the Aβ 42 /Aβ 40 ratio.
Finally, we also studied a substrate mutant V717I (the APP London mutation), a common APP mutation.
V717I increases the Aβ 42 /Aβ 40 ratio and Aβ 42 levels with little effect on Aβ 40 .

Computational methods

Preparation of structural models
The published cryo-EM structure of γ-secretase bound to APP-C83 (PDB: 6IYC) was used to produce all the studied models.
Since the experimental structure contains the D385A mutation to avoid turnover during data collection, we converted back this mutation to wild type computationally with the PyMOL Mutagenesis Wizard.
The structural models of the PS1 mutants E280A, G384A, A434C, and L435F were generated using the same site-directed mutagenesis protocol of PyMOL.
The protein residues were assigned their standard protonation states at pH = 7.4 and missing side chains were assigned using the WHATIF server
We note that the missing N-terminal residues of the substrate in the experimental structure were not modeled in, and thus we avoid artefacts of adding hypothetic coordinates but potentially also miss a real effect if these atoms contribute differently to mutant binding.
In our study, the catalytic residues Asp257 and Asp385 of PS1 are represented by their deprotonated states, as supported by pK a calculations of experimental and simulated structures.

Each structural model was oriented according to the Orientation of Proteins in Membranes
Database
Each membrane-oriented protein was embedded in a 1palmitoyl-2-oleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine (POPC) bilayer using the CHARMM-GUI
The system charges were electro-neutralized and then, because of the importance of salt to protein dynamics and structural stability,
The resulting structural files were used an input for our simulations.
The simulation systems are summarized in Table

Simulation Protocol
All MD simulations reported in this work were carried out using GROMACS version 2019.4
Initial energy minimization followed the same standard six-step equilibration protocol applied to all membrane-protein-water systems at 303.15 K and 1 bar pressure.
Production simulations were carried out at 303.15 K and 1 bar using a Nose-Hoover thermostat
Long-range electrostatic interactions were calculated by the particle mesh Ewald method
Periodic boundary conditions were applied to all simulations, and bonds involving hydrogen atoms were constrained using the linearconstraint-solving (LINCS) algorithm
Each structure was subjected to three statistically independent simulations using 2-fs time steps for 500 ns via randomized initial velocity seeds.
Trajectory data were saved at time intervals of 200 ps.
Data analysis and visualization were conducted using visual molecular dynamics (VMD)

Analysis of trajectories
The membrane parameters, including deuterium order parameters (S cd ) and the densities of the membrane components, were analyzed over the full trajectories of the protein-water-membrane systems using the built-in modules gmx order and gmx density of GROMACS.
In protein-lipidwater systems, we computed the density profile of the POPC head, tail, and phosphate groups and of water using the tool gmx density.
The FATSLiM program
Backbone structural rootmean-squared deviations along the trajectories (RMSD), the radius of gyration (R g ), and the solvent accessible surface area (SASA) averaged over the three independent simulations were computed using the gmx rms, gmx gyrate and gmx sasa tools, respectively.
The root-mean-squared fluctuations (RMSF) of the Cα-atoms were analyzed for each subunit of all systems with the gmx rmsf tool.
The Cα distance and minimum distance between any two atoms of the catalytic Asp257 and Asp385 were computed using the gmx distance and gmx mindist programs.
The hydrogen bonds were calculated using the gmx hbond utility with a donor and acceptor distance of 0.35 nm and a hydrogen-donor-acceptor angle cut-off of 30°.
In order to understand the conformational states in more detail, we performed clustering analysis of the last, equilibrated 300 ns of all 18 trajectories using the RMSD-based gmx cluster tool with a cut-off of 0.2 nm with the last 300 ns trajectories.
In each case, the top-ranked structure (most representative of the trajectory) was analyzed below.
The free-energy landscape (FEL) was generated to identify representative low-energy conformations, using the GROMACS gmx sham tool, and plotting the landscape using Origin Pro.
The large concerted motions were analyzed by extracting the top principal components (PCs) using MODE-TASK
PCA by singular-value decomposition on Cα-atoms was performed using the last 300 ns of each trajectory.
The lipid binding occupancy (percentage of frames where lipid was in contact with any amino acid), the duration of interaction, and the lipid counts (average number of lipid surrounding a residue) were determined using the python code PyLipID (
All the helical properties were analyzed using the gmx bundle, gmx helix, or gmx helixorient tools of GROMACS.
The GROMCAS module gmx do_dssp, which explicitly uses DSSP version 2.0 (

Results and discussion

Simulated structures compared to experimental cryo-EM structures
Recent cryo-EM structures (6IYC and 6IDF) have shown that both the catalytic subunit PS1 and the substrate undergo noticeable conformational changes upon substrate binding.
At the same time, the segment Val721-Lys725 of the substrate C83 has features that resemble a β strand in close connection with two other substrate-induced strands in PS1, which together form a threestranded β-sheet in the cryo data.
The significance of this sheet at physiological temperature has been debated, since it is subject to partial thermal unzipping, but the real composition of the in vivo system is likely so variable that it is impossible to decide if this motif has functional importance.
Å for PS1 and 2.36-3.58
Å for the substrate (data summarized in Table
The most ensemble-representative structure snapshots of each simulated trajectory displayed good structural convergence with average Cα RMSD of 2.06 ± 0.39 Å relative to the experimental structure 6IYC (Figure
The global RMSD and topological arrangement of the TM domains are in essential agreement as expected, whereas the mobile loops in Nicastrin ECD and disordered cytosolic loops in PS1 differed due to the thermal motions that we explicitly simulated, which cannot be seen in the cryo-EM data.
Figure
The average Cα-RMSD of PS1 was ~1.36, 1.24, 1.31, 1.66, 1.17, and 1.17 Å, respectively, for the WT, E280A, G384A, A434C, L435F, and V717I proteins, indicating very close similarity to the experimental structure of the backbone conformations, well-below the experimental resolution (6IYC solved at 2.60 Å).
The main differences are noticed in HL1 and the local tilt of TM3, TM6, TM6a and TM9 in the mutants as compared to the WT (Figure
Importantly, the average Cα-RMSD of the substrate C83 was computed to 3.31, 3.07, 3.58, 2.67, 2.36 and 3.17 Å, respectively, for the WT, E280A, G384A, A434C, L435F and V717I proteins, indicating much larger variability in the substrate fitting of the WT and mutant proteins.
The RMSD of the substrate is on the high side as compared to the experimental C83, mainly because the bound C83 in 6IYC represents the PS1-cross-linked mutant, and the N-terminal region is flexible and contains some missing residues.
We also expect that the experimental Asp-Ala mutation in the active site required to avoid substrate turnover

Membrane dynamics of substrate-bound γ-secretase mutants
In order to also assess the realism of the membrane-protein system, which is not visible in the cryo data, the POPC bilayers were analyzed in detail (Figure
The order parameters and density profiles were in accordance with previously simulated
Computed acyl order parameters for both chains were in good agreement with the experimental values
The RMSD as a function of simulation time (Figure
The backbone RMSDs of the WT and mutants systems converged after ~200 ns and displayed a constant trend in RMSD with an average RMSD of ~0.3, 0.28, 0.29, 0.29, 0.26 and 0.29 nm, respectively, for the WT, E280A, G384A, A434C, L435F and V717I proteins, indicating that all systems reached stable conformation states during the last 300 ns that we used for collecting statistics throughout this work (Figure
We extended our RMSD analysis to the individual subunits of γ-secretase (Figure
As expected, the Nicastrin (NCT) was very dynamic in all systems due to its mobile extracellular loop (NCT-ECD).
This flexibility is characteristic of room temperature dynamics and thus not accessible by cryo-EM, but crucially allows NCT to act as a gatekeeper for potential substrates.
In all systems, during the initial 200-ns equilibration phase, the RMSD of the substrate C83 reached ~0.2 nm and later displayed a constant stable trend until 500 ns.
Radius-of-gyration plots showed that most of the γ-secretase proteins have similar R g values in close agreement with the experimental structure (average of ~3.97 nm vs. 3.95 nm for 6IYC) (Figures
The SASA, which measures the total exposure of the protein to solvent, ranged from 598.7-618.5 nm 2 (average of ~ 606.3 nm 2 vs. 606 nm 2 for the experimental 6IYC structure), while in agreement with the experimental average, provides a large fluctuation range in solvent exposure not available from the cryo-EM data (Figure
These results, caused by the breathing mode of NCT, are in agreement with previous simulations of the wild-type protein.
The dynamic stability statistics of all studied MD systems have been summarized in Table

Alzheimer-causing mutations produce more flexible ensembles
We wanted to understand the structural fluctuations of the WT and mutant ensembles, as they may play a role in the pathogenic mechanism according to the FIST model.
Each trajectory experienced a similar pattern of fluctuation for each subunit.
Notably, the NCT-ECD all cases displayed several very flexible regions whereas the single TM (Ser665-Phe698) displayed less flexibility.
As expected, we observed major fluctuations in HL1 (Lys109-Glu123) potentially involved substrate gating,
The segment Phe240-Glu245 of NCT-ECD interacts with the positively charged Lys699 of APP (near HL1 and TM1 of PS1) and may contribute to modulating the Aβ length.
To understand the flexibility in the catalytic site, we studied the fluctuations specifically for Asp257 and Asp385, Glu280, the GxGD motif and the PAL motif (Figure
In most but not all cases fluctuations were larger than for WT in these regions.
TM2, the C-terminal end of TM3, the extended helix from TM6 (TM6a) and TM9 displayed relatively more fluctuation than other transmembrane PS1 helices, in agreement with previous simulations.
0.12±0.04,
0.11±0.02,
and 0.12±0.03
nm for E280A, G384A, A434C, L435F and V717I, respectively, averaged over the three replicates) compared to the WT (0.07 ±0.02 nm).
In some replicates of E280A and L435F, we observed a distinct flexibility of PEN2, and the substrate C83 was more flexible in the mutants compared to the WT ensembles (Figure
Studies have previously indicated major conformational flexibility of the substrate TM as a critical feature.

Global membrane dynamics of γ-secretase-substrate holoenzymes
We also analyzed the overall essential dynamics of the full systems via PCA.
In this analysis, the principal components (PCs) define the concerted atomic displacements of the ensembles.
The first three PCs accounted for ~60% of all motions.
In the simulations, at least one replicate occupies a larger conformational space mostly driven by the concerted movement of the NCT ECD, the intracellular region of PEN2 and APH1-A (Figures
Bai et al.
The same tilting motions can also be applied to the catalytic PS1 and APH-1A subunits.
We aligned the most representative structure from each simulation (obtained from cluster analysis) with the experimental 6IYC, which are in good agreement (average ~2.05
Å) as shown in Figure
We observe that the TM of C83 moved ~1.2 Å from its initial position most likely due to the experimental cysteine and alanine mutations being equilibrated in our wild type model.
We note that the three mutants E280A, G384A and V717I displayed slightly higher tilting of C83.
For the mutants, the TM2, TM3 and TM6a, TM7 and TM9 of PS1 typically exhibited more structural variation, in accordance with the RMSD and RMSF analysis discussed above.

Some mutants produce distinctly wider active sites
Recent studies have reported distinct conformational states of the catalytic active site, which can at least partly be described by the Asp257-Asp385 distance as a measure of the size of the active site.
Consistent with our previous findings and the FIST model, the distances fall in two groups representing a smaller, more compact active site (the semi-open conformation; 1.01-1.05
nm) and a larger, more variable active site (the open conformation, 1.15-1.25 nm) (Figure
We note that G384A and L435F featured particularly open states compared to the other systems, i.e. these mutants shift the main conformation of the protein ensemble from semi-open to open, whereas other mutants do so to a smaller extent.
For comparison, the Cα-Cα distance between end-residues of the substrate gating HL1 (measuring the size of this loop's in terms of its anchor points and the substrate recruitment PAL motif did not show any notable differences between mutants and WT (Figures
In addition to the Cα-Cα distances, we also measured the minimum atomic distances during the last 300 ns for these three motifs (Figure
These are represented by the side-chain interaction and thus much more variable, implying that the side chains can easily adjust in the more important space defined by the Cα-Cα distance, which defines the two conformation states of the active site caused by relative PS1 TM motions.
Analysis of the MD snapshots at different time intervals and for the ensemblerepresentative structures shows water entering the active site from the intracellular side and forming hydrogen bonds with the catalytic aspartates (Figure
Such hydrogen bonds with the catalytic Asp385/Asp257 may activate water for nucleophilic attack on the carbonyl of the peptide bonds of the substrate.
In addition, the residues of the GxGD and PAL motifs also form several hydrogen bonds with water molecules.
These observations agree well with a previous MD study

Most mutations increase substrate cleavage site dynamics
To understand the dynamics between the catalytic aspartates and the cleavage sites of C83, we also measured the distance between these residues (Figure
Thr719-Leu720 or Leu720-Val721 define ε-cleavage sites of the substrate during trimming to produce Aβ either via the Aβ48 or Aβ49 pathway.
The distance between Asp257 and Thr719-Leu720 or Leu720-Val721 and Asp385 and Leu720-Val721 were quite variable.
We propose that the large thermal variation in the distance is the direct structural-dynamic reason for the imprecise cleavage that enables two types of trimming pathways to occur in γ-secretase, while at the same time causing earlier release of relatively longer Aβ peptides (i.e. higher Aβ 42 /Aβ 40 ratio).
This interpretation fits well both with the seminal experimental studies
The average helical length of all TM domains remained the same, but we observed a loss of helical tendency in TM3, TM4 and TM9 in PS1, which is apparently mainly an effect on interaction with the lipid bilayer at room temperature, and thus not obtainable from the experimental cryo-EM data.
None of the helix tendencies are significantly different for the WT and mutants, indicating that they are not a source of pathogenicity, as we propose are the case for the active site size discussed above.
In all systems, the C-terminal end of the TM1 helix lost some of its helical conformation, indicating that this is a persistent feature of the dynamics regardless of the WT/mutant system.
Aβ 42 -lowering γ-secretase modulators commonly target TM1 of PS1, thereby affecting the structure of the site.
Recent competitive inhibition assays indicate that binding of inhibitors affects the water accessibility at the membrane border of TM1.
We also computed the tilt angles of the TMs as a possible molecular basis for the open and semi-open conformation states (Figure
Several of these TMs are involved in substrate binding due to the horseshoe shape of the PS1 structure.
We observed a characteristic tendency towards slightly broader and less dynamic tilt angles in the mutants for TM1, TM2, TM5, TM6a and TM9 as compared to wild type.
TM6a displayed the most notable differences, and a large distribution particularly in the WT, i.e. the mutations tend to restrict the TM6a movement.
As summarized in Table
To better understand how the fAD mutations affect the secondary structure, we computed the time evolution of the secondary structure of PS1 and C83 using DSSP (Figures S21).
We commonly observed complete loss of the β-strands of PS1 or C83, although some simulations retained a small strand extending from TM6a (Figures
This confirms previous side-byside comparisons of the cryo-EM and simulated cold and hot states indicating that the sheet is not stable at room temperature due to thermal unzipping, which is a common feature of short secondary structure elements.
Thus, we cannot assign significance to this motif until supported by other data at room temperature.
To understand how the fAD mutations affect the intermolecular contacts between the catalytic PS1 and the substrate, we computed residue pairs forming hydrogen bonds and electrostatic contacts (Table
As evident from this analysis, most of the fAD mutants tend to lose important non-bonded contacts as compared to the wildtype.
For instance, the densely populated hydrogen-bonding network and electrostatic contacts within the catalytic pocket around GxGD motif become perturbed upon mutation of glycine to alanine at position 384.
Similarly, the L435F mutation results in loss of hydrogen bonding between the PAL motif and substrate C83.
Remarkably, V717I shifted the substrate away from the ε cleavage site.
The mutant G384A showed particularly large effects compared to WT in our study.
This site is located in the GxGD motif
At the same time, G384A substantially increases the Aβ 42 /Aβ 40 ratio as most other PS1 mutations.
Looking at the snapshots of G384A obtained from our simulations, we observed that this fold is completely altered due to the substitution to Alanine, causing loss of these hydrogen bonds (Figure
Val717 of APP (located near the γ-secretase cleavage site) is positioned in a narrow hydrophobic pocket formed by three residues Phe237, Ile387, and Phe388 of PS1.
Several lines of evidence suggest that V717I increases the Aβ 42 /Aβ 40 ratio by increasing Aβ 42 levels with little effect on Aβ 40 levels.
We notably found that the mutation affected the tilt of the substrate helix (Figure
γ-secretase harbors conserved YD (TM6) and GLGD (TM7) motifs in the catalytic site along with the PAL motif at the N-terminal end of TM9.
The GLGD and PAL motifs are highly conserved in related aspartyl proteases.
Ala, Gly, or Ser) preserve γ-secretase activity, whereas bulky amino acids (i.e.
Val, Leu, or Ile) abolish activity.
In some of our simulations, the A434C mutant causes a partial shift at Leu720 and Val721 of the substrate C83 in the ε-cleavage site, and loses the hydrogen bond between Leu432 of PS1 and Met722 of C83.
Although these changes at the initial ε-cleavage sites are qualitative indications, not necessarily dominant aspects of the ensembles, they seem consistent with an experimentally observed effect on the trimming pathways leading to Aβ.
The mutant L435F altered the local conformation of PS1 around the substrate and lost hydrogen bonds in two of our simulations (Figure
This suggests that this fAD mutant primarily affects the positioning of the substrate cleavage region leading to increased relative levels of longer Aβ 43 or Aβ 42 .
In summary, our simulations show consistent changes in substrate positioning caused by all the PS1 fAD mutants, which we assume provides a structural basis for some of the data observed in assays of the mutants.
Specifically, we conclude that the substrate positioning will change the preference between the trimming pathways Aβ 49/46/43 or Aβ 48/45/42 whereas impaired overall binding affinity relative to the wild type will cause an overall loos of activity (and thus earlier release of longer products) along both pathways.
PS1 fAD mutations have previously been shown to weaken the binding of Aβ 42 and reduce the activity of γ-secretase for as measured by Aβ 38 .

Conclusions
We have explored the membrane dynamics at physiological temperature of five FAD-causing mutants of substrate-bound γ-secretase (four PS1 and one APP mutation).
Our results show that pathogenic mutation increase the conformational flexibility of the substrate binding site, which is in accordance with the FIST model and earlier experimental studies of mutant effects on substrate cleavage.
The timescale of these helix movements are well-sampled as shown in many previous studies, giving broad tilt angle distributions with very many visits, but all of course occurring on the experimental structural background.
The catalytic step itself may occur on a timescale of minutes or even hours,
Hypothesized active MD states will be very transient compared to the slow, rate limiting step of peptide bond hydrolysis, which is not proton transfer but the breaking of the covalent peptide bonds.
Thus, any views on transient active states in relation to MD sampling are speculative, and we favor studying perturbations around the dominating ensemble as seen in the cryo-EM data.
Thus, we believe we are studying the mutant effects in the best possible way, but welcome other views on this important matter with open eyes.
In two of the pathogenic mutations G384A (belonging to the important GxGD motif) and L435F (of the PAL motif) we observed a particularly large ensemble-averaged Asp-Asp distance, indicating that the two mutants favor open conformation states, which we argue lead to less stable and more variable binding, imprecise cleavage, and release of relatively longer Aβ products.
Our results also highlight how mutations affect the dynamics of the distance between catalytic site and the cleavage site specific residues involved in the two of the cleavage pathways i.e., Leu49-Val50 and Thr48-Leu49.
The large thermal variation in these distances may be a direct structuraldynamic reason for the imprecise cleavage that enables two types of trimming pathways in γsecretase.
The more open and dynamic state produces less precise cleavage along both pathways and a tendency towards earlier release of the products, giving diverse, and somewhat longer Aβ peptides.
This mechanism, we propose, underlies the molecular function of fAD mutations, and should thus be specifically targeted in future therapeutic strategies.



Figure 1 .
Figure 1.
Studied models of APP-C83-bound γ-secretase.
The left structure represents the wild



Figure 2 .
Figure 2. Structural arrangement of each TM domain (in PS1 and C83) and loops in



Figure 3 .
Figure 3.
The degree of flexibility measured by the Cα-RMSF of catalytic PS1 and the



Figure 4 .
Figure 4. TM domains of simulated substrate-bound γ-secretase WT and mutants compared



Figure 5 .
Figure 5.
The average Cα-Cα distances of the catalytic Asp257-Asp385 pair, the terminal



Figure 6 .
Figure 6.
Time-resolved distance from catalytic Asp257 and Asp385 to ε-cleavage sites at



Figure 7 .
Figure 7. Simulated helix tendencies of the some key TM domains of PS1 and C83 in POPC



Figure 8 .
Figure 8. Violin plots depicting the average tilt angles of TM domains of PS1 and the