Blood-based ATN biomarkers of Alzheimer's disease: A meta-analysis Running title: Blood biomarkers meta-analysis
The Amyloid Tau Neurodegeneration (ATN) framework was proposed to define the biological state underpinning Alzheimer's disease (AD).
Blood-based biomarkers offer a scalable alternative to the costly and invasive currently available biomarkers.
In this meta-analysis we sought to assess the diagnostic performance of plasma amyloid (Aβ40, Aβ42, Aβ42/40 ratio), tangle (p-tau181) and neurodegeneration (total tau [t-tau], neurofilament light [NfL]) biomarkers.
Methods Electronic databases were screened for studies reporting biomarker concentrations for AD and control cohorts.
Biomarker performance was examined by random-effect meta-analyses based on the ratio between biomarker concentrations in patients and controls.
83 studies published between 1996 and 2020 were included in the analyses.
Aβ42/40 ratio as well as Aβ42 discriminated AD patients from controls when using novel platforms such as Immunomagnetic Reduction, IMR.
We found significant differences in ptau-181 concentration for studies based on single molecule array (Simoa), but not for studies based on IMR or ELISA.
Ttau was significantly different between AD patients and control in IMR and Simoa but not in ELISA-based studies.
In contrast, NfL differentiated between groups across platforms.
Exosome studies showed strong separation between patients and controls for Aβ42, t-tau and p-tau181.
Currently available assays for sampling plasma ATN biomarkers appear to differentiate between AD patients and controls.
Novel assay methodologies have given the field a significant boost for testing these biomarkers, such as IMR for Aβ, Simoa for p-tau181.
Enriching samples through extracellular vesicles shows promise but requires further validation.

Introduction
The current standard of diagnosing Alzheimer's disease (AD) clinically is confined to establishing 'probable' or 'possible' AD depending on the level of certainty.
It relies on data gathered through clinical examination, patient and carer interview, with differential diagnosis guided by structural and/or glucose metabolism imaging
The limitations of this approach have been highlighted by the demonstration that a significant proportion of patients diagnosed with AD have their diagnosis changed through in-vivo amyloid positron emission tomography
Syndrome-based AD definition is particularly problematic in the context of preclinical or prodromal disease which is where the major efforts of diseasemodification are currently focused
Biomarker results from CSF, PET as well as structural imaging have allowed to largely close this gap for the purposes of clinical research and define AD pathophysiologically in both its clinical and preclinical phases
This ATN (amyloid, tangle and neurodegeneration) framework has the potential to revolutionise the practice of dementia diagnosis and risk monitoring.
However the expense, invasiveness and dependence on relevant infrastructure limit severely the utility of these methods for standard clinical practice or largescale screening.
The ease of use and analysis of blood biomarkers have established them as a low-cost standard method of modern medicine for the diagnosis and monitoring of a wide gamut of disease processes.
The development of blood-based biomarkers of AD would represent a major advance in the field and the past several decades has seen a number of analytes being tested for this purpose
However, there are several challenges in the development of blood biomarkers for central nervous system (CNS) disorders.
First, the target proteins tend to be of much lower concentration in blood relative to CSF and that an analyte expressed peripherally may reflect systemic rather than CNS changes
Second, the target proteins exist within a matrix of other proteins which are of higher concentration in orders of magnitude, (e.g.
albumin and immunoglobulins) making the investigation of lower abundant proteins extremely challenging
Third, the target analyte may undergo proteolytic degradation by proteases in plasma and it may also be metabolised through the liver or excreted by the renal system
A final consideration is that blood may contain host antibodies against the antibodies of the assay which interfere with the reliability of the test
Because of this, there is an increasing number of studies attempting to identify biomarkers in neuronally derived exosomes isolated from blood as exosomes can protect their contents from degradation
Nevertheless, the measurement of targeted biomarkers in both blood and exosomes requires high sensitivity of the analytical platform.
The recent advent of ultrasensitive measurement techniques such as the immunomagnetic reduction (IMR) and single-molecule array (Simoa) methods, has generated new enthusiasm in the blood biomarker field.
Despite these advances, individual studies of blood biomarker validity show great variability.
This meta-analysis aims to systematically examine the level of evidence supporting the use of individual blood biomarkers as diagnostic tools to differentiate AD patients from healthy subjects.
Here, we focused on analytes relating to the three key AD biomarker (ATN) in blood as well as in neuronally derived exosomes including: amyloid (Aβ40, Aβ42 and Aβ42/40 ratio), tangle pathology (p-tau181) and neurodegeneration (total tau and neurofilament light, abbreviated as t-tau and NfL respectively).
We also compared the performance across different platform including traditional methods such as ELISA and new generation analytical techniques such as IMR and Simoa.

Methods

Literature search
This meta-analysis was conducted according to the PRISMA guidelines
For the metaanalysis of blood biomarkers, the databases PubMed and Web of Science were searched for studies published in English from all years of publication until April 2020 with a combination of the search term (Alzheimer disease OR Alzheimer's disease) AND (biomarker* OR biological marker*) AND (plasma OR serum OR blood) and search terms specific to each biomarker, e.g., AND (Aβ42 OR Aβ-42 OR Abeta42 OR Abeta42 OR Abeta-42 OR A*42 OR Aβ).
All search terms are included in Appendix A.
For the meta-analysis of biomarkers in extracellular vesicles, we identified references from a recent systematic review for which a comprehensive search had been undertaken
Additional references from the databases PubMed and Web of Science were identified with the search term "Alzheimer's disease AND extracellular vesicles".
Since Badwhar and Haqqani had searched for studies published until October 2019, we searched for studies which had been published after that.

Inclusion and exclusion criteria
For inclusion, studies had to: 1) Report data for one of the following blood biomarkers relevant to AD pathology: Aβ40, Aβ42, Aβ42/40 ratio, t-tau, p-tau181, neurofilament light (NfL).
2) Include measurements of the respective biomarker a. in blood plasma or serum or extracellular vesicles extracted from plasma or serum in b. a group of patients with Alzheimer's disease and a healthy control group, each with at least 10 individuals c. using a quantitative method to assess biomarker concentrations (such as ELISA, IMR, Simoa).
3) Report mean and standard deviation or standard errors of these measurements.
4) Report the diagnostic criteria used to diagnose AD patients.
Studies fulfilling these criteria were excluded if 1) the control group contained participants with inflammatory, neurological or psychiatric diagnoses that might affect biomarker concentrations
2) The study reported biomarker data from cellular blood fractions other than extracellular vesicles.
When two studies reported data from the same sample, only data from the more comprehensive study were included to avoid duplication.
If studies reported that they had used a cognitive healthy control group (defined as healthy or cognitively normal or cognitively unimpaired or non-demented) but did not give further information, it was deemed eligible.
If all criteria were fulfilled, but means and standard deviations or standard errors were not given, the authors of the paper were contacted and kindly requested to provide the respective data.

Study selection
The search for studies on biomarkers in blood yielded 2290 studies.
After removal of duplicates, 1148 studies remained which were screened for eligibility by reading titles and abstracts.
In addition, relevant meta-analyses and reviews were identified and screened for additional references, yielding 58 potentially eligible studies.
Out of those 1206 studies, 933 were excluded due to not meeting inclusion criteria.
Of the remaining 273 studies, 83 studies were found to be eligible for the present meta-analysis after a careful assessment of accordance with the in-and exclusion criteria (see Figure
For extracellular vesicles biomarkers, 8 and 61 studies were identified from a recent review
After removal of duplicates and criteria check, a total number of 9 studies were included in the final meta-analysis (Figure

Coding of variables
Data were extracted using a predefined coding scheme.
First, general information about the study such as the authors, year of publication and the country in which the study was conducted were coded.
Sample sizes of AD and control group as well as the mean (M) and standard deviation (SD) of plasma or serum levels of the respective biomarker were extracted for all included studies.
If only standard errors (SE) were reported, SD was calculated using the formula #$ = √( • #*.
In addition, M and SD of participant age were coded for both groups, again applying the abovementioned formula whenever necessary.
When only the range of participant age was given, the range rule of thumb (#$ = (,-.
-min)/4 ) was applied to obtain standard deviations.
Furthermore, we coded whether participants had undergone systematic psychiatric and physical health evaluation at study baseline, and if those with major comorbidities were excluded.

Meta-analytic strategy
All analyses were carried out using the R package metafor by Viechtbauer (2010)
As an effect size, the ratio of the mean biomarker concentration in the AD vs. control group was calculated for each study, and transformed by calculating its natural logarithm 6( 7 8 9: 8 ;<=>?<@
A
The logarithm was calculated to obtain a symmetric measure where values below 0 (corresponding to a ratio below 1) indicate that the mean biomarker concentration was lower in the AD group and values above 0 (corresponding to a ratio above 1) indicate that mean biomarker concentration was lower in the control group.
A measure based on the ratio of means was chosen since biomarker concentrations vary across laboratories and assays.
The variance of the log-ratio was estimated using the delta method
B-C D6( 7 8 9: 8 ;<=>?<@ AE = 1 ( 9: 7 #$ 9: 8 9: A G + 1 ( ;<=>?<@ 7 #$ ;<=>?<@ 8 ;<=>?<@
A G Random-effect models using the REML method
Random-effect models build on the assumption that the true effect size varies across studies according to a normal distribution with mean µ and variance τ 2 (heterogeneity).
This means that each study has its own true effect size θi (with i being the study subscript).
Estimated effect sizes yi are assumed to be normally distributed with mean θi and variance vi, which is the study-specific sampling variance that arises due to measurement error.
Whenever an analysis contained studies in which biomarker concentration was measured in more than one study group (e.g., if a study included two pairs of AD and control group), dependencies between these groups were taken into account by calculating a mixed-effect model with groups nested in studies
For mixed-effects models, τ can be calculated using the formula:
where
is the variance of the effect size estimate between studies, while I MN>ON= G is the variance of the estimate between samples within studies.
Heterogeneity was assessed by a Qtest
Furthermore, prediction intervals were calculated.
Prediction intervals must be distinguished from confidence intervals: The former are based mainly on the variance of true effect sizes across studies, while the latter are based exclusively on the standard error of the overall effect size estimate.
Significance of the estimated overall effect size was assessed using confidence intervals, while heterogeneity of the effect sizes across studies was examined using prediction intervals.
We decided to calculate random-effect models instead of fixed-effect models even when the Q-test indicated homogeneity because of the methodological variability of the studies included.
Subgroup analyses for the most common assay methods (ELISA, IMR and Simoa) were conducted.
Also, subgroup analyses were carried out for studies in which the mean ages of the AD and control group did not differ significantly (according to a two-sided Welch two-sample t-test at an alpha level of 5 %) and for studies in which control subjects were excluded if they were found to have significant relevant comorbidities (as described above).
Publication bias was investigated using funnel plots, the trim and fill method and the Egger test
Since neither of these methods is implemented for mixed-effect models in R, we decided to base all analyses of publication bias on random-effect models, which were estimated for the analysis of publication bias if they had not been estimated for meta-analytical comparisons.
The alpha level for all tests was set to 5 % for all tests reported below, and all confidence and prediction intervals reported are 95 % intervals, except it is otherwise specified.

Results

Description of studies
A total of 82 studies, published between 1996 and 2020, were included in the meta-analysis of biomarkers in blood .
Twenty three percent (n = 21) of the studies were conducted in the USA.
Nine studies, published between 2015 and 2020, were included in the meta-analysis of biomarkers in extracellular vesicles
Five studies were conducted in the USA, 3 studies were conducted in China, and one study was conducted in South Korea.
More comprehensive descriptions of the samples will be given in the sections below.

Meta-analyses of blood biomarkers
Results of overall meta-analytical comparisons for all blood biomarkers as well as subgroup analyses on assay method are displayed in Table

Amyloid
For Aβ40 the overall results were based on a total number of 3092 subjects in the AD group and 5219 subjects in the control group.
An overall mean ratio of 1.03 was estimated.
Since the CI contained the neutral value 1, Aβ40 levels were not significantly different in AD vs. control subjects.
From studies using ELISA, a significantly higher overall mean ratio of 1.10 was obtained (CI = [1.03,
1.17]), indicating Aβ40 levels were higher in AD than in control subjects.
In contrast, results for studies using IMR indicated lower Aβ40 levels in AD patients relative to controls (ratio = 0.77, CI = [0.68,
0.87]).
Only one study was based on Simoa, and indicated no difference in Aβ40 levels between AD and control subjects (ratio = 1.17,
CI = [0.90,
1.52]).
Large heterogeneity, as indicated by a significant Q-test (P Q < .05),
was found in both the overall analysis as well as in subgroup analyses of studies using ELISA or IMR, which was also reflected in large prediction intervals (see Table
Forest plots for the analyses described above are displayed in Figure
Overall results for Aβ42 (3513 AD and 5642 controls), indicated no significant difference between AD and control subjects (ratio = 1.01,
CI = [0.94,
1.08]).
The results did not reach significant when restricting the analysis to studies using ELISA (ratio = 0.98, CI = [0.89,
1.08]) or Simoa (ratio = 0.90, CI = [0.78,
1.05]).
In comparison, Aβ42 was significantly higher in AD when restricting the analysis to studies using IMR (ratio = 1.15,
CI = [1.07,
1.24]).
Significant heterogeneity was found for both the overall analysis and the subgroup analyses, with all prediction intervals containing the neutral value of 1 (Table
Forest plots for Aβ42 are displayed in Figure
For Aβ42/40, no significant difference was observed for the overall analysis between AD (n =1818) and control (n=4023) (ratio = 1.12,
CI = [0.97,
1.30]) as well as in subgroup analysis of studies using ELISA (ratio = 0.98, CI = [0.88,
1.09]).
In contrast, Aβ42/40 levels were significantly higher in AD in studies using IMR (ratio = 1.88,
CI = [1.37,
2.58]).
For the one Simoa-based study, no significant difference in Aβ42/40 levels was found (ratio = 0.72, CI = [0.32,
1.59]).
Heterogeneity was significant for the overall analysis and the subgroup analyses of studies using ELISA and IMR, with very large heterogeneity when all studies were included (prediction ).
Significant heterogeneity was found for the overall analysis and the subgroup analysis of studies using Simoa but not for ELISA.
Lower bounds of the prediction intervals were above 1 for all NfL analyses (Table
Forest plots for NfL are displayed in Figure
T-tau levels were also significantly higher in AD (n =1591) relative to control subjects (n = 2454) (ratio = 1.52,
CI = [1.25,
1.84]).
Similar results was also observed in subgroup analyses using IMR (ratio = 2.29, CI = [1.74,
3.01]) and Simoa (ratio = 1.28,
CI = [1.18,
1.38]) although the overall mean ratio was markedly higher when using IMR.
In contrast, no significant difference was observed for studies using ELISA (ratio = 1.10,
CI = [0.81,
1.50]).
Heterogeneity was significant for the overall analysis as well as the subgroup analysis of ELISA and IMR studies.
Only for IMR studies, the lower bound of the prediction interval was above 1.
No significant heterogeneity was found for Simoa studies, which was reflected in a relatively narrow prediction interval (Table
Forest plots for t-tau are displayed in Figure

Subgroup analyses: Age differences, medical history of control group subjects
For all biomarkers, we performed two additional analyses.
First, we only included the studies in which mean ages were not significantly different between AD and control group.
As shown in Table
However, heterogeneity was significant for all biomarkers .
Forest plots of these subgroup analyses are included in Appendix B. Second, we only included the studies in which control group participants had undergone systematic psychiatric and physical health evaluation at study baseline.
Results showed that Aβ42, Aβ42/40, NfL and p-tau181 were significantly higher in AD subjects (Table
Heterogeneity was large for all biomarkers except NfL.
It should be noted that some of the analyses were based on a small number of studies and therefore have to be interpreted with caution.

Meta-analyses of biomarkers in extracellular vesicles
The studies which had measured biomarkers in extracellular vesicles only contained data for Aβ42, NfL, t-tau, and p-tau181.
As shown in Table
Heterogeneity was significant for all analyses, with very large prediction intervals especially for Aβ42 and p-tau181.
NfL was only measured in one study and the ratio was 1.31 (CI = [1.
For forest plots, please refer to Appendix C.
However, it should be noted that only a small number of studies were available for such analyses and thus, these results have to be interpreted carefully.

Publication Bias
Publication bias was assessed separately for each meta-analytical comparison.
For blood biomarkers, the Egger's test was significant for Aβ40 (p = .003),
and p-tau181 (p = .002),
indicating that publication bias was present for these biomarkers.
The test did not reveal signs of publication bias for the other biomarkers (Aβ42: p = .802;
Aβ42/40: p = .606;
NfL: p = .090,
t-tau: p = .217).
Note that the results for NfL were based on a small number of studies, for which the Egger's test is not well suited.
Thus, trim and fill analyses were applied in addition.
The respective funnel plots are included in Appendix D. The trim and fill method suggested publication bias for Aβ40, Aβ42/40, NfL, and p-tau181.
For Aβ40, the trim and fill method added 11 studies, which decreased the estimate from 1.03 to 0. Since the number of studies included in the meta-analyses of biomarkers in extracellular vesicles was small, we used only the trim and fill method to investigate publication bias for these analyses.
The trim and fill method suggested publication bias only for t-tau.
Adding one study decreased the overall mean ratio to 1.50, but did not affect significance (CI = [1.22,
1.84]).
Funnel plots are included in Appendix E.

Discussion
In this meta-analytic study we sought to evaluate the evidence for the diagnostic value of blood-based biomarkers for AD and the extent to which it is affected by choice of analytical platforms and study design factors.
We found that overall there was evidence for improved diagnostic performance of amyloid, tau and neurodegeneration blood biomarkers through novel analytical platforms.
Also, there was no evidence for stringent inclusion criteria (age matching, systematic exclusion of neurological and psychiatric diseases in controls) affecting the results.

Plasma Aβ
We found that the strongest separation of AD and controls in terms of Aβ came from using IMR based approaches to determine Aβ42/Aβ40 ratio.
In contrast, our combined result across studies for Aβ42 and Aβ40 alone did not demonstrate a significant difference between AD patients and controls.
The finding is consistent with a previous meta-analysis demonstrating large heterogeneity and overall negative results of the published literature
In our analysis the Aβ42 statistically non-significant result appears to have been driven by ELISA-and Simoa-based experiments as IMR studies demonstrated a significantly higher level in patients.
This result may be due to the known limitations of ELISA in detecting Aβ levels in plasma which has been shown to lose its sensitivity for detecting narrow differences between biological samples
ELISA performance in detecting plasma Aβ is also further affected by the high affinity of albumin and immunoglobulins in plasma to bind which are known as Aβ-binding proteins and thus that can interfere with accurate detection of Aβ
Endogenous immunoglobulins and autoantibodies can also interfere with performance of ELISAs
This may explain why studies using ELISA do not generally replicate the findings of CSF; that IMR-based studies show an increase in Aβ42 is intriguing given the consistently found reduction of CSF Aβ42and Aβ42/40 ratio in AD
Interestingly for Aβ40 we found significant but contradictory results for ELISA and IMR (higher and lower levels in patients respectively).
Others had found no significant change of Aβ40 in CSF as well as previous blood-based biomarker meta-analyses.
The lack of agreement between ELISA and IMR in our study may similarly reflect a lack of significant change in this biomarker.
The use of Aβ isoform ratios (Aβ42/40 and Aβ42/38) has been motivated by the observation that the shorter isoforms are less prone to plaque aggregation relative to Aβ42 and therefore their fluid levels reflect better the rate of Aβ production.
Methodologically they can serve as internal controls to harmonise the large variations in absolute Aβ42 concentrations in individual patients.
The clinical relevance of the Aβ42/Aβ40 ratio has been demonstrated by studies demonstrating its closer relationship with cerebral amyloid burden
In addition, studies in CSF have pointed to a role of the ratio in differentiating AD from other dementias

Tangle pathology
The evidence supporting the use of the best validated plasma biomarker of tangle pathology, p-tau181, is growing.
Our overall analysis showed significantly increased levels of the analyte in AD patients relative to controls with significant results obtained by Simoa-based studies.
These results build on recent data demonstrating the utility of this biomarker in differentiating AD from non-AD neurodegenerative processes
In addition, the first study demonstrated that plasma and CSF ptau-181 are correlated and that plasma ptau-181 levels track with disease progression starting from preclinical AD
The report by Thijssen et al. in turn provided early data on the correlation of plasma ptau-181 with both amyloid and tau burden on PET
While our meta-analysis results support the use of ptau-181 for screening and diagnosing AD, it may be that tau proteins phosphorylated at other sites than 181 prove to be higher yield and replace it in future.
For example, a study comparing p-tau181 and ptau-217 derived from CSF showed that ptau-217 outperforms ptau-181 in its sensitivity and specificity for both AD patients as well as cognitively unimpaired amyloid-positive individuals
Another recent report showed that CSF ptau-217 correlates stronger with tau PET, CSF and PET amyloid and differentiates more accurately AD from non-AD dementias
Despite these promising results, work to validate tests to detect ptau-217 in plasma continues (
and in the meantime ptau-181 remains the more extensively validated tangle pathology analyte in both CSF and plasma.

Neurodegeneration
We analysed the evidence for two analytes relevant to neurodegeneration: total tau and NfL.
While overall analysis showed higher total tau in AD versus controls, these results were driven by significant effects in IMR and Simoa but not ELISA.
The results for IMR-based studies were also notable however for their high heterogeneity which potentially limits the usefulness of plasma total tau.
In contast, the Simoa-based studies had low heterogeneity thus pointing to their likely higher utility relative to IMR in this context.
NfL appeared to be consistently different between groups across platforms, including ELISA.
The NfL results are consistent with a trend for rapid expansion in the use of this biomarker across neurodegenerative disorders with evidence for increases in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, multiple sclerosis to the extent that NfL is now a recognised outcome measure in therapeutic trials
In Alzheimer's disease NfL has been shown to be raised at the stage of preclinical AD (i.e.
amyloidpositive individuals) as well as Mild Cognitive Impairment among carriers of autosomally dominant AD mutations and to correlate with imaging markers of neurodegeneration as well as cognitive impairment
The relevance of NfL to cognitive decline in the earliest stages of disease is highlighted by a study demonstrating an association between its levels and cortical hypometabolism in areas vulnerable to AD
Overall, the less variable results obtained with NfL relative to total tau as well as the mounting evidence for its usefulness in tracking AD disease progression as well as other neurodegenerative disorders argues strongly for its use as a biomarker of neurodegeneration.
In addition to the main analyses we explored the effect to which design factors affect the strength of the results.
We did not find evidence that strict matching of controls by age impacts the direction or magnitude of the results.
However, across the majority of biomarkers (amyloid, NfL and p-tau181), the lack of stringent control of somatic and psychiatric morbidity among the control groups associated with weaker differentiation of AD from controls.
This could be interpreted in the light of the known link between significant physical health, cardiovascular in particular, morbidity with AD risk
In addition, mental health morbidity (e.g.
depression)
can also be part of the dementia prodrome
These results therefore suggest that the lack of exclusion criteria relevant to morbidity known to associate with AD may lead to the inclusion of significant preclinical AD pathology with resulting attenuation in biomarker sensitivity when differentiaton between AD and controls.
Furthermore, enriching the analytical samples by focusing on extracellular vesicles appeared to offer early evidence for stronger associations for the main biomarkers of interest (Aβ42, p-tau181, total tau, NfL).
Replication studies are required to determine the usefulness of this analytical approach to determine whether it should be preferred to testing plasma directly.

Limitations
Several limitations to this meta-analysis exist.
Firstly, it is inherent in all systematic searches that despite every attempt for exhaustiveness, some eligible studies may have been missed.
In addition, some studies reported in a format unsuitable for analyses (e.g.
median and range instead of mean and SD) which points to the need to establish a common way to report methods and results in order to enhance standardisation across the field.
For plasma NfL and some subgroup analyses, the number of included studies was small which warrants caution in interpreting the results.
It is notable that our results showed large unexplained heterogeneity for a number of primary analyses as well as secondary analyses which necessitates further work to identify the source of this variability and implement measures to limit it in future studies.
While we found promising data regarding exosome enrichment, significant work is needed to improve standardisation between methods.
Also a critical limitation is that it is yet unclear what proportion of exosomes are CNS-versus peripherally derived.
Finally, our study only focused on the differentiation of cases from controls in developed Alzheimer's dementia.
This associates with at least two issues.
Firstly, patients with syndrome-based AD diagnosis are known not to have an underlying AD pathology in up to a third of cases while conversely controls may have preclinical AD.
Secondly, by focusing on clinical cases we cannot draw conclusions about any changes of the various biomarkers specific to the preclinical and prodromal stages of the disease which may have implications for their utility as screening tools.

Conclusions
We demonstrate that the new analytical assays of IMR and Simoa have led to a significant improvement in the reliability of detection of key AD ATN analytes in blood.
Our evidence supports the use of Aβ42/40 using the IMR platform, p-tau181 (the best assay for it remains to be clarified) as well as total tau and NfL using the IMR and Simoa platforms.
While further work is required to validate the use of blood biomarkers as screening tools to evidence ATN status in clinical settings, the current meta-analysis points to this being a realistic aim.



Figure 1 .
Figure 1.
Flowchart of search results, screening and eligibility assessment of studies for the main (A) as well as the exosome-focused



Figure 2 .
Figure 2. Forest plot of Aβ40 studies.
Abbreviations: RE = random effect, ME = mixed effect, df =



Figure 3 .
Figure 3. Forest plot of Aβ42 studies.
Abbreviations: RE = random effect, ME = mixed effect, df =



Figure 4 .
Figure 4. Forest plot of Aβ42/40 studies.
Abbreviations: RE = random effect, ME = mixed effect, df



Figure 5 .
Figure 5. Forest plot of ptau-181 studies.
Abbreviations: RE = random effect, ME = mixed effect,



Figure 6 .
Figure 6.
Forest plot of neurofilament light (NfL) studies.
Abbreviations: RE = random effect, ME



Figure 7 .
Figure 7. Forest plot of total tau (t-tau) studies.
Abbreviations: RE = random effect, ME = mixed


interval [0.54, 2.23]) and when only IMR studies were included (prediction interval [0.88, 4.05]).Forest plots for Aβ42/40 are displayed in Figure4.


.58 (CI =[1.40, 1.78]).
Finally, for p-tau181, two studies were added and the overall mean ratio decreased to 1.69 (CI = [1.39,
2.05]).



Table 3 .
Subgroup analysis: Control group subjects assessed for neurological and systemic health.
Abbreviations: k = number of studies, s = number of samples, Ratio = ratio of mean biomarker concentration in AD vs. control group, CI = confidence interval, Q = Cochran Qstatistic, p S = p value assessing the significance of the Q statistic, PI = prediction interval.



Table 4 .
Meta-analysis of biomarkers measured in extracellular vesicles.
Abbreviations: k = number of studies, s = number of samples, Ratio = ratio of mean biomarker concentration in AD vs. control group, CI = confidence interval, Q = Cochran Q-statistic, p S = p value assessing the significance of the Q statistic, PI = prediction interval.