Corticomotor Plasticity Predicts Clinical Efficacy of Combined Neuromodulation and Cognitive Training in Alzheimer’s Disease
Interpretation: Combined rTMS and cognitive training may improve the cognitive status of AD patients
Objective: To investigate the efficacy of repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS) combined with cognitive training for treatment of cognitive symptoms in patients with Alzheimer's disease (AD).
A secondary objective was to analyze associations between brain plasticity and cognitive effects of treatment.
Methods: In this randomized, sham-controlled, multicenter clinical trial, 34 patients with AD were assigned to three experimental groups receiving 30 daily sessions of combinatory intervention.
Participants in the real/real group (n = 16) received 10 Hz repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS) delivered separately to each of six cortical regions, interleaved with computerized cognitive training.
Participants in the sham rTMS group (n = 18) received sham rTMS combined with either real (sham/real group, n = 10) or sham (sham/sham group, n = 8) cognitive training.
Effects of treatment on neuropsychological (primary outcome) and neurophysiological function were compared between the 3 treatment groups.
These, as well as imaging measures of brain atrophy, were compared at baseline to 14 healthy controls (HC).
Results: At baseline, patients with AD had worse cognition, cerebral atrophy, and TMS measures of cortico-motor reactivity, excitability, and plasticity than HC.
The real/real group showed significant cognitive improvement compared to the sham/sham, but not the real/sham group.
TMS-induced plasticity at baseline was predictive of postintervention changes in cognition, and was modified across treatment, in association with changes of cognition.

INTRODUCTION
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the most common neurodegenerative disease (Alzheimer's Association, 2012) with cognitive decline significantly affecting quality of life
Given that pharmacological agents
Importantly, AD is associated with alterations in synaptic function and mechanisms of neuroplasticity
TMS is a non-invasive technique to generate brief and relatively focal electric currents in the brain via electromagnetic induction.
When applied as single or paired pulses to the motor cortex, it provides a diagnostic tool to interrogate cortico-motor reactivity and inhibitory/excitatory intracortical circuits, respectively.
As a therapeutic tool, TMS is applied in trains of pulses, termed repetitive TMS (rTMS) to induce changes in excitability of the activated neural circuits that outlast the period of stimulation.
TMS can thus be used to modulate activity in brain areas implicated in the cognitive and behavioral dysfunctions of AD.
Furthermore, over the last 15 years, a low-intensity form of patterned rTMS, termed intermittent theta-burst stimulation (iTBS), has emerged as a means to induce NMDA receptor (NMDAR)-dependent longterm potentiation (LTP)-like plasticity
When applied over the motor cortex, the after-effects of iTBS are measured as the change in the amplitude of motor-evoked potentials (MEPs) elicited by suprathreshold single-pulse TMS, i.e., the change in cortico-motor reactivity, which is thought to reflect cortical plasticity
The aftereffects of rTMS and TBS protocols are state-dependent
Therefore, targeting neural networks with rTMS while engaging them, for example in cognitive exercises, has been suggested to lead to functional improvements
Cognitive training interventions designed to attenuate cognitive decline in dementia typically train basic functions with simple tasks, tapping, for example, into non-verbal and verbal memory, language, and visuo-spatial skills
Cognitive interventions alone have yielded inconsistent results to date
The concomitant application of these two approaches has shown therapeutic promise in a small industrysponsored open trial
A recent review emphasizes the need for larger studies, and further suggests investigation of treatment-related neurophysiological markers
Our study builds on and extends these preliminary studies in two important ways.
First, we included a control group of AD patients who received sham rTMS with real cognitive training, in order to elucidate effects of cognitive training alone.
Furthermore, we aimed to provide mechanistic insight into the intervention by characterizing the neurophysiology of participants using TMS assessments of cortical reactivity, inhibitory/excitatory intracortical circuits, and plasticity, that were assessed longitudinally and also compared at baseline to a group of healthy matched controls (HC).
Specifically, we hypothesized that such rTMS-cognitive training-dependent modulation of plasticity is associated with lasting changes in cognition.
Moreover, we hypothesized that cortical plasticity is reduced in patients with AD relative to HC, as has been shown in previous studies

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Subjects
In this proof-of-principle, randomized, double-blind, shamcontrolled study we examined 35 patients diagnosed with mild-moderate AD
Patients were randomized using concealed randomization practices (study-independent researcher) and a 2:1:1 group distribution to one of three groups:
(1) real cognitive training combined with real rTMS (real/real: n = 16), (2) sham cognitive training and sham stimulation over the same brain regions (sham/sham: n = 8), or (3) real cognitive training and sham rTMS (real/sham: n = 11) (see Figure
Except for the technicians applying the intervention, all experimenters and patients were blinded.
Findings from two trials, one in Boston (n = 21) and one in Rome (n = 13), were combined to increase the sample size and reach more reliable conclusions.
The eligibility criteria were the following: subjects diagnosed with mild to moderate Alzheimer's disease according to DSM-5 criteria and criteria established by the NIA-AA
The exclusion criteria were: unstable/chronic medical conditions; major structural/vascular abnormalities, agitation, psychiatric disorders, substance abuse, other progressive neurological disorders different from diseases causing cognitive impairment, or conditions considered a potential hazard for the application of rTMS
Patients treated with cholinesterase inhibitors or ginkgo-biloba were allowed to participate if the treatment had started at least 3 months prior to screening and remain stable for the duration of the study.
One participant from the real/sham group was excluded due to the incidental finding of a brain lesion.

Cognitive and Behavioral Measures
Cognitive and behavioral functions were assessed within 2 weeks before and 1 week after the therapeutic intervention using tests and inventories drawn from the National Alzheimer's Coordinating Center -Uniform Data Set (v1)
The cognitive subscale of the Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale (ADAS-Cog) was defined as the primary outcome and re-assessed at 1-month follow-up in the Boston and 6 weeks in the Rome sample.
The Geriatric Depression Scale (GDS) and the CDR were evaluated at baseline, and the Clinical Global Impression of Change (ADCS-CGIC) was administered after the intervention.
To minimize practice/learning effects, alternate forms were used and counterbalanced whenever possible.
The ADAS-Cog and ADCS-CGIC and CDR were administered by board-certified neuropsychologists/neurologists, while all other measures, including the Activities of Daily Living (ADCS-ADL) inventory were administered by trained psychometrists.
The same experimenter administered the neuropsychological tests at all time points.
Participants studied in Rome did not undergo assessment with ADCS-CGIC or GDS.

Motor Thresholds, Brain Reactivity, and Plasticity
Resting and active motor thresholds (rMT, aMT), motor cortical reactivity, inhibitory/excitatory intracortical circuits, and plasticity were evaluated with TMS combined with electromyography (EMG), at baseline and after the therapeutic intervention (Figure
The eXimia Navigated Brain Stimulation (NBS) system 4 (Nexstim, Finland) was used for single-and paired-pulse stimulation using a handheld figure-of-eight focal biphasic and monophasic coil, respectively.
The coils were held over the left motor cortex to elicit motor responses in the contralateral first dorsal interosseous (FDI) muscle.
Intensities during assessment of the rMT and aMT were expressed as a percentage of the maximum output of the stimulator.
The stimulation was performed positioning the virtual cathode of the coil centered over the site of the scalp to be stimulated and the holder oriented at a 45 • angle with respect to the approximate direction of the central sulcus (current flow in postero-anterior direction).
The rMT was defined as the minimum intensity of the magnetic field able to generate a motor evoked potential (MEP) of 50 µV in approximately 50% of 10 consecutive stimuli, i.e., generating 5 MEPs out of 10 trials
The aMT was defined as the minimum stimulus intensity that produced a liminal MEP (about 200 µV in 50% of 10 trials) during isometric contraction of the tested muscle.
After assessing rMT and aMT, MEP amplitudes were measured from the right FDI muscle using 30 × 22 mm gel surface electrodes (Ambu, United Kingdom; active over muscle belly, reference over proximal interphalangeal joint of the index finger, ground on the ulnar styloid process).
Stimulation intensity for all single-pulse TMS trials was set at 120% of rMT.
For paired-pulse TMS, test pulse intensity was set at 120% rMT, while the conditioning pulse intensity and inter-pulse interval (IPI) determined the type of measurement: 80% rMT with a 3-ms IPI to assess short-interval intracortical inhibition (SICI), 80% rMT with a 12-ms IPI to evaluate intracortical facilitation (ICF), and 120% rMT with an IPI of 100 ms to measure long-interval intracortical inhibition (LICI).
Intermittent TBS (iTBS) was applied at 80% of aMT.
Paired pulse measures were assessed in separate sets (50 pulse pairs with a jittered inter-trial interval of 5-6 s) and expressed as a ratio of the test-MEP to a block of 50 unconditioned pulses.
Baseline cortical reactivity (three sets of 30 single TMS pulses) was followed by a 600pulse regimen of iTBS (20 two-second trains of 50 Hz bursttriplets repeated every 200 ms; MagPro X100, MagVenture A/S, Denmark).
Cortical reactivity was reassessed at 5, 10, 20, and 30 min post-iTBS in sets of 30 single TMS pulses.
Cortico-motor plasticity was expressed as the percent change from baseline in cortical reactivity.
Maximum brain plasticity was defined as the largest of these measures taken at any of the time-points assessed.

Intervention: Cognitive Training and rTMS
Intervention consisted of daily (monday-to-friday) 1-h sessions of combined cognitive training (real or sham) synchronized with rTMS (real or sham) for 6 weeks (total of 30 sessions) using NeuroAD (Neuronix Medical, Yoqneam, Israel).
The NeuroAD system combines brief trains of 10 Hz rTMS targeting brain regions known to be affected in AD (i.e., frontal, temporal, and parietal regions)
Trains of rTMS (20 trains of 2 s, 10 Hz per region per day at 120% rMT) were applied using a handheld figure-of-eight focal coil (SuperRapid    stimulator, Magstim Co. Ltd., Whitland, United Kingdom) and were each followed by a cognitive task presented on a touch-screen monitor (20-40 s).
During each session, focal stimulation was applied to 3 of 6 predefined brain regions in a pseudo-randomized sequence, without counterbalancing the stimulation sequence between patients.
This strategy was devised to ensure the same amount of stimulation per targetregion, with each region stimulated 15 times over the course of the intervention.
Though rTMS was performed using a focal coil to only one region at a time, the combined effects of stimulating multiple regions over the course of each session could lead to similar effects to those of multifocal stimulation (i.e., concurrent stimulation to several brain regions).
The frameless stereotaxic neuronavigation system Brainsight (Rogue Research, Inc., Canada) was used to individually select the targets, guide coil placement, and measure scalp-brain distance, as a surrogate measure of cortical atrophy.
The following predefined cortical regions were individually targeted by transforming published group average coordinates into individual MRI space: right/left DLPFC (R/L DLPFC)
Sham rTMS was delivered with a sham TMS coil (Magstim) that imitated auditory and somatosensory sensations.
Regarding cognitive training, for each task, difficulty levels were adapted for each patient, according to performance (Table
The sham cognitive training consisted of a picture preference task using the same stimuli as in the real cognitive training.
Participants had to indicate for each picture whether they find it "nice" or "not nice."
The presentation of cognitive stimuli and rTMS were synchronized via the NeuroAD system.

Scalp-Brain Distance Measurements
Scalp-brain distance was defined as the distance between the outer edge of the cortical surface and the outer edge of the scalp and was measured for each target in the plane perpendicular to the scalp tangent (i.e., orthogonal to the plane of the TMS coil) on each individual's brain MRI for the six stimulated regions and the left motor cortex (site of TMS measures) using Brainsight (Rogue Research Inc., Canada).
These measures served as a surrogate indicator of regional brain atrophy

Data Analysis
Data were analyzed using SPSS Statistics 21.0 (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, United States) and SAS (version 9.3, SAS Institute, Cary, NC, United States).
Significance was set using a 95% confidence interval (α = 0.05).
Individual MEP amplitudes that were greater than 1.5 standard deviations from the mean were excluded.
Baseline motor cortical reactivity was defined as the mean MEP amplitude across all 90 trials.
To assess plastic changes after iTBS, MEPs from each post-iTBS time point were averaged and divided by baseline.
Additionally, the achieved degree of difficulty during cognitive training was assessed for its relationship with atrophy and stimulation intensity.
Group and post hoc analyses were calculated with nonparametric Kruskal-Wallis and Mann-Whitney U tests, respectively.
Correlations [bootstrapped with 10,000 resamples with bias-corrected confidence intervals] were calculated using Pearson's r tests for whole group analysis and Kendall's tau tests for subgroup analyses.
After finding no difference between the real/sham and sham/sham groups (see section "Results") both were combined into a single sham rTMS group to increase power.
Change in ADAS-Cog (ratio post/pre) was defined as primary outcome and the effect of depression on ADAS-Cog outcome was assessed with a mediation analysis.
The difference in ADAS-Cog in the real/real group was tested with a two-sided paired t-test (pre vs. post-treatment and pre-treatment vs. follow-up).
Multivariable linear models were built to test either associations between ADAS-Cog and other clinical, demographic, and physiological variables at baseline, or the prediction of the clinical response by said variables, and/or intervention parameters (real vs. sham rTMS and real vs.
sham cognitive stimulation).
Longitudinal mixed effects models were built to test associations between ADAS-Cog and physiological variables across repeated assessment moments, when adjusting for baseline clinical and demographic variables.
Initial models were built according to prior knowledge, and sequential regression models used to test the relevance of additional variables of interest.
Data transformations and polynomial models were used to test the better alternative to fit continuous predictors, and relevant interaction terms, namely interactions with active rTMS intervention, were tested.
Model assumptions were tested by analyses of residuals, and influence diagnostics were conducted using Cook's distance.

RESULTS

Baseline Comparisons
See Table
The AD groups did not differ in any of the baseline measures.
AD and HC did not differ in age, education, gender, and TMS-measures of rMT, aMT and motor-cortical reactivity.
However, depression scores as assessed with the GDS were significantly higher in AD (U = 71.5, z = -2.41,
p = 0.020, r = -0.41),
as was brain atrophy (scalpbrain distance) for the left IPL (U = 63.0,
z = -2.61,
p = 0.008, r = -0.45)
and averaged across seven brain regions (U = 58.5, z = -2.77,
p = 0.005, r = -0.47)
(Tables
Plasticity indices measured up to 30 min after iTBS were significantly different between AD patients and HC at T5 (U = 183, z = 2.13, p = 0.033, r = 0.37), T10 (U = 179, z = 1.98, p = 0.048, r = 0.35), and averaged over T5 to T30 (U = 181, z = 2.06, p = 0.040, r = 0.36) (Figure
Furthermore, the maximum plasticity change (U = 187.5,
z = 2.302, p = 0.020, r = 0.40) was significantly smaller in AD.
ICF was similar in AD and HC, while SICI and LICI were significantly reduced in AD (SICI: U = 56, z = -2.23,
p = 0.025, r = -0.40;
LICI: U = 42, z = -2.81,
p = 0.005, r = -0.50)
(Figure
After adjusting for a 5% False Discovery Rate (FDR), nonsignificant trends were observed for plasticity indices at T5 and T10, as well as overall and maximum plasticity change (p < 0.1), while differences in SICI and LICI remained significant (p < 0.05).
Furthermore, atrophy of the left IPL and average atrophy remained significantly larger in AD (p < 0.05).

Intervention Effects in Alzheimer Disease Patients
The largest score change in ADAS-Cog within 4-6 weeks after the end of intervention was significantly different between groups (H[2] = 10.16,
p = 0.006) (Figure
Post hoc tests revealed a significantly higher improvement in the real/real group as compared to the sham/sham (U = 115, z = 3.13, p = 0.001, r = 0.64) but not the real/sham group (U = 110, z = 1.56, p = 0.121, r = 0.31).
Immediately after the intervention, the real/real group improved their cognitive score on average by 2.18(±3.70)
points, while the real/sham group improved by 0.4(±4.14)
points and the sham/sham group showed a decline of 0.49(±2.48)
points.
During the following 4-6 weeks post-intervention, the real/real group continued to improve on average by an additional 1.69(±4.07)
points, that is, at the end of the follow-up period the real/real group improved on average by 3.87(±4.54)
points from baseline (Figure
Notably, the immediate change from pre to post-treatment in the real/real group reached statistically significant levels (t(15) = 2.408, p = 0.029, CI 95% [0.253, 4.16]) as well as the change from pre to follow-up (t(15) = 3.413, p = 0.004 CI
Neither of the sham groups (real/sham and sham/sham) showed a significant cognitive change from pre to post (Supplementary Table
Importantly, two-thirds of the patients in the real group continued to improve in ADAS-Cog even after the end of intervention.
Comparing across groups, a marginally significant difference was observed in ADCS-CGIC (real/real: 3.25 ± 0.72, sham/sham: 4.08 ± 1.02, real/sham: 4.40 ± 0.89; H[2] = 5.950, p = 0.051).
We thus decided to explore post-hoc results and found a significantly larger improvement for the real/real as compared to the real/sham group (U = 42, z = 2.21, p = 0.04, r = 0.57) (Figure
The score change in ADCS-ADL immediately after the end of the intervention was significantly different between groups (H[2] = 6.95, p = 0.031).
Post hoc tests showed that the real/real group (U = 18, z = -2.12,
p = 0.036, r = -0.46)
as well as the real/sham group (U = 53, z = 2.5, p = 0.011, r = 0.63) showed a significantly better outcome than the sham/sham group.
The real/real and real/sham groups did not differ significantly in ADL outcome (U = 89, z = 0.79, p = 0.461, r = 0.16).
As hypothesized, the two sham groups did not differ significantly with regard to their largest ADAS-Cog score change (U = 23, z = -1.56,
p = 0.122, r = 0.34) and their outcomes in ADCS-CGIC (U = 19, z = 0.76, p = 0.537, r = 0.23).
We therefore followed our strategy in accordance with the 2:1:1 group randomization and further compared the real/real group (n = 16) with the combined sham groups (n = 18) in order to assess rTMS-specific intervention effects and increase statistical power.
Moreover, the change in ADAS-Cog was correlated with clinical changes as indicated by CGIC (r = 0.473, p = 0.031, 95% CI 0.08 to 0.75).
Furthermore, a mediation analysis with bootstrapping (10,000 samples,
No major side effects were reported in any participants.

Association of Cognitive With Physiological and Other Measures
At baseline, ADAS-Cog (lower values indicate better cognitive function) was significantly correlated with rMT (r = -0.44,
p = 0.009, 95% CI -0.64 to -0.20), SICI (r = 0.564, p = 0.001, 95% CI 0.21 to 0.77) and marginally with LICI (r = 0.304, p = 0.096, 95% CI 0.03 to 0.71), as well as atrophy in the left IPL (r = 0.42, p = 0.013, 95% CI 0.09 to 0.70), and mean atrophy (r = 0.37, p = 0.033, 95% CI 0.00 to 0.68).
Atrophy in the motor cortex was positively correlated with rMT (r = 0.389, p = 0.023) across all participants.
Cortical reactivity and plasticity were not associated with cortico-motor atrophy (p s > 0.05).
The maximum difficulty level reached in region-specific tasks was significantly correlated with absolute TMS intensity for the left DLPFC (r = 0.66, p = 0.04) in the real/real group and with atrophy in the left (r = -0.707,
p = 0.003) and the right IPL (r = -0.534,
p = 0.04) (Table
In multivariable linear regression analyses with data from all participants at baseline, the association of ADAS-Cog with rMT and SICI was confirmed, and found also for aMT, mean plasticity indices averaged over T5-T30, maximum plasticity, and LICI (Table
None of these associations were confounded by mean atrophy.
However, the associations between baseline ADAS-Cog and plasticity measures, as well as LICI, were no longer significant when adjusting for diagnosis.
In additional linear regression analyses of ADAS-Cog ratio (post-intervention/baseline) as a measure of response to treatment in patients with AD, when adjusting for rTMS intervention, a significant predictor of response in all models, age, education, gender, and cognitive training were not significant predictors of response.
However, mean atrophy and atrophy over the left DLPFC, but not other cortical areas, were found to be significant predictors of response (Table
Importantly, in similar rTMS adjusted analyses, MEP amplitude, as well as plasticity at T5 and T10, mean plasticity from T5 to T30 and maximum plasticity, were all found to be significant predictors of response (Table
Interaction  ] and mean plasticity from 5 to 30 min post-iTBS (D).
However, in models adjusting for rTMS intervention (real vs. sham), mean plasticity (H), but not rMT (E), SICI (F), and LICI (G) was found to be a significant predictor of response.
terms with rTMS were not significant and none of these associations were confounded by cognitive stimulation.
However, plasticity at T5 and maximum plasticity became only marginally significant predictors of clinical response when adjusting for mean atrophy.
The effects for the remaining predictors were not significantly affected.
Even though change in neurophysiological parameters exploring plasticity from pre to post-treatment did not differ significantly between groups (H[2] = 0.464, p = 0.793) (Supplementary Table
These multivariable analyses were adjusted for rTMS, that was again a significant parameter in the models.
In separate rTMS-adjusted models, age, gender, education, cognitive stimulation and mean atrophy were not associated to ADAS-Cog, and the latter two variables were also not confounders in any of the subsequent models.
As found at baseline, rMT and aMT were significantly associated to ADAS-Cog, but the associations with SICI, LICI, and T5 and T10 plasticity measures were no longer significant in these longitudinal analyses.
However, the association between ADAS-Cog and both mean and maximum plasticity from T5 to T30 remained significant.
Importantly, these were also the only instances where an interaction term between the physiological measure and rTMS was also significant, showing not only that these associations between cognition and physiology persist across intervention, but also that they were modulated by active rTMS treatment (Table

DISCUSSION
The primary aim of the present study was to assess the efficacy of rTMS combined with cognitive training for the treatment of cognitive symptoms in AD patients.
Furthermore, we aimed to analyze if cortical plasticity was different in patients with AD versus HC as shown in previous studies, whether its modulation by the combined rTMS-training intervention was possible, and whether it might be associated with changes in cognitive function.
For the primary aim, in order to reach a suitable sample size, findings from two parallel trials utilizing the same recruitment criteria, interventions, and cognitive assessments (Boston and Rome) were combined.

Baseline Measures
At baseline, we found no significant difference in rMT and aMT between patients with AD and HC.
However, both were robust indicators of severity of cognitive dysfunction, even when controlling for brain atrophy.
Cortico-motor plasticity revealed significant differences between AD patients and HC, as could be expected from findings of a positive correlation between amyloid-β cerebrospinal fluid levels and long-term potentiation (LTP)-like effects induced by iTBS
Another study
We found significant differences for T5, T10, average plasticity (T5-30), and for maximum iTBS-induced plasticity, as well as significant linear associations between all of these plasticity measures and ADAS-Cog at baseline, when adjusting for several demographic and clinical factors, as well as atrophy.
Change in neurophysiological parameters exploring plasticity from pre to post-treatment did not differ significantly between AD groups.
The differential time-course of post-iTBS plasticity could be related to the fact that our patients were mostly medicated, while
And in an own study, we found that pharmacological treatment can also have a specific impact on plasticity measures in AD
We also found reduced SICI and LICI in AD patients, which were associated to baseline ADAS-Cog.
LICI has been shown to interact with short-latency afferent inhibition (SAI) in healthy subjects
SICI has been previously reported to be reduced in AD patients and to be related to disease severity
Atrophy over the primary motor cortex was not associated with cortico-motor reactivity and plasticity, and mean atrophy did not confound the associations between cognitive and motor measures.
Atrophy in AD was significantly larger, specifically for the left IPL, which is in accordance with previous findings stating that IPL is among the first brain regions to show atrophy

Clinical Effect
Overall training progression did not differ between the two groups who received active cognitive training, indicating that the addition of rTMS to cognitive training is crucial to achieve cognitive improvements and not progression in the training.
High-frequency rTMS protocols (such as the 10 Hz stimulation protocol used in the treatment phase of the present study) are established as a safe and effective method to increase brain excitability and have been applied in a wide range of patient populations in a similar way as in the present study
The degree of improvement in the real/real group is clinically meaningful
Previous studies using the same approach
Interestingly, substantial cognitive improvement occurred after the end of intervention, possibly reflecting time-prolonged modulation of neurophysiological processes underlying cognitive maintenance.
After combining the two sham groups, an improvement in the ADCS-CGIC in the real intervention group that was associated with cognitive improvement became significant, stressing the importance of the addition of rTMS.
Both the real/real and the real/sham group improved significantly more in ADL than the sham/sham group after the intervention.
In contrast to previous studies
Furthermore, we demonstrated that sham rTMS combined with real cognitive training (real/sham group) showed similar effects as the sham/sham group, emphasizing the importance of rTMS.
Though, we cannot establish whether rTMS in combination with cognitive training produces the same effect as rTMS on its own, we strongly believe that the combination is crucial
Added efficacy might arise from Hebbian mechanisms of synaptic reinforcement induced by the combined impact of cognitive training and rTMS on the same neural networks engaged in the different tasks.
This is supported by the demonstrated cortico-motor reactivity and plasticity effects in the participants studied in Boston.
Blinding is difficult to assess given the nature of this cohort.
Nonetheless, when asked to indicate group assignment among the participants studied in Boston, 6/10 patients (60%) in the real/real group and 6/11 patients in the sham groups (55%) thought they had received real intervention.
However, as no electrical surface electrodes were used in the sham protocol, we cannot entirely exclude nonneural effects.
Our patients progressed less in training tasks related to the left and right IPL the greater the cortical atrophy in these regions.
It is important to consider that greater atrophy would have resulted in relatively lower rTMS intensity at cortical level in IPL.
Furthermore, training gains were significantly correlated with absolute TMS intensity for the left DLPFC.
Therefore, considering that atrophy was a negative predictor of clinical response, future studies may base stimulation intensity on the modeling of current distribution
Notably, the activation of a broad range of brain areas known to be associated with AD pathology was thought to maximize cognitive effects.
Though we did not find clear benefits of cognitive training alone, we nevertheless observed numerical improvements across a range of parameters.
Optimizing and individualizing the cognitive training could possibly improve interaction effects with rTMS and enhance clinical outcomes.

Correlation of Physiological Measures With Cognitive Performance Across Treatment
Transcranial magnetic stimulation has been previously found to be precise enough to track disease-related neuroplastic changes of motor cortex output in early AD
Notably, in our study, MEP amplitude, as well as plasticity at T5 and T10, mean and maximum plasticity were all significant predictors of clinical response, even when adjusting for mean atrophy and other intervention parameters.
Furthermore, the association between ADAS-Cog and several plasticity measures, as well as motor thresholds, was preserved across the intervention resulting in significant cognitive improvement.
Importantly, in the case of plasticity measures, active rTMS intervention was a significant modulator of this association.
Thus, we found that measures of iTBS-induced plasticity were associated to cognitive function not only at baseline but also after intervention, in an rTMSdependent fashion.
During the intervention, rTMS was not applied to the motor cortex, and yet this was the cortical area from which plasticity measures were collected.
The observed correlations between cortico-motor plasticity and cognitive measures strongly suggest that alterations in plasticity may occur globally.
Further support for this assumption is suggested by the positive correlation found between maximum level achieved in training tasks and stimulation intensity.
A neuroimaging study has shown that memory training can drive non-motor brain activation patterns of patients with mild cognitive impairment toward normalization
Changes in motor cortical measures after stimulation of non-motor areas have been reported previously
These effects could arise through changes in overlapping subcortical glutamatergic and dopaminergic pathways

Study Limitations
This study did not assess the effects of rTMS alone, which would have necessitated adding a fourth study arm.
Though magnetic stimulation alone could affect cognition without additionally inducing brain activity
Given our main interest in the combined method, we actively decided against using resources for an additional study arm and to favor the inclusion of two rTMS sham groups (2:1:1 randomization).
The challenges in enrolling AD patients in such an intensive protocol (daily treatment for 6 weeks) account for the modest sample size.
Though the two study sites used slightly different criteria, we believe that the effects of a center bias on the primary outcome are minimal as results remained largely unchanged after adding the results from Rome to the results from Boston (Supplementary Results).
However, the patients in Rome did not undergo neurophysiological measures, which might have had an impact on compliance, tiredness at pre-and posttest and likelihood to adhere to the study plan.
Finally, although we chose a control cognitive task with minimal cognitive engagement in order to avoid having the control condition represent an "uncontrolled brain state, " it is possible that changes in brain state could have lead to unspecific improvements in the sense of an active control training.

CONCLUSION
We found that the combinatory treatment of rTMS and cognitive training resulted in significant cognitive improvement as assessed with the ADAS-Cog, while cognitive training alone did not lead to significant improvement compared to placebo treatment.
Confirming prior reports, we show abnormalities in the mechanisms of plasticity and cortical reactivity in patients with AD, and show for the first time that these can be modulated by a combined non-invasive stimulation and cognitive training paradigm resulting in behavioral, clinical and cognitive benefits.
This study supports the relevance of non-pharmacological combinatory interventions in individuals with AD and provides important groundwork for future studies to build upon.
Many questions remain to be answered, including how cognitive improvements translate into patients' daily lives and whether neurophysiological measures could act as potential biomarkers for interventions in AD.
Future research should assess a broader range of patients and aim to improve applicability in the clinical environment.



FIGURE 1 |
FIGURE 1 | CONSORT flowchart: Enrollment and study design.
(A) Flow diagram of the enrollment process and final study participants analyzed.
(B) Schematic representation of study design.


(A) Cognitive training tasks were designed to train the following functions: syntax, grammar, lexical meaning, categorization, action naming, object naming, spatial memory, and spatial attention.
Cognitive tasks were associated with the stimulation of specific brain areas: L IFG (Broca's area): determine whether sentences are grammatically correct; L STG (Wernicke's area): differentiate between words and pseudo words, or to assign pictures to one of two categories; R DLPFC: match written descriptions with pictures; L DLPFC: remember locations and colors of rectangles; R IPL: identify red or blue vertical rectangles within an array of stimuli; L IPL: identify a particular letter in a cluster of random letters.
Notably, stimulating several brain areas per session might in turn activate remotely associated hubs of the same networks, possibly leading to a more extensive modulation.
For each cognitive task, the difficulty level was adjusted individually and increased following successful completion of a previous level (≥80% correct answers).
An increase in difficulty level was either achieved by increasing stimulus-response time, or by increasing the number of displayed target and distracter stimuli.
(B) Difficulty levels (12 per task) achieved by the real/real and the real/sham group, scalp-brain distances, and stimulation intensity applied per TMS-targeted region.
Values are presented as mean standard deviation (SD).
(C) Correlations between maximum difficulty level achieved during cognitive training tasks per TMS-targeted region with stimulation intensity (real/real group) and with scalp-to-brain distance (real/real and real/sham group).
Neurophysiological measures include the Boston sample only (n = 21).
L IFG, left inferior frontal gyrus; L STG, left superior temporal gyrus; R and L DLPFC, right and left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex; R and L IPL, right and left inferior parietal lobule; SDB, scalp-to-brain distance; t, Kendall's tau.
P-values are one-tailed.



FIGURE 2 |
FIGURE 2 | (A) Plasticity change at T5, T10, and on average at T5-30 (T mean) expressed as the mean ratios of single-pulse TMS-measured MEP amplitudes pre-post iTBS before the intervention.
(B) Paired-pulse TMS-measures of short-interval intracortical inhibition (SICI), intracortical facilitation (ICF), and long-interval intracortical inhibition (LICI) in AD (before intervention) and HC.
(C) (including Italian sample): Best individual score change (ratio post/pre) in ADAS-Cog after real/real (light grey), sham/sham (medium grey), and after combined real cognitive training with sham rTMS (black).
(D) Average ADAS-Cog score at pre, post and follow-up in the three treatment groups.
(E) Average ADCS-CGIC scores.
A score of 4 (dotted line) is equivalent to no change from pre-to post-intervention, scores < 4 indicate improvement, scores > 4 indicate decline.
Indicated values correspond to mean ± standard error (SE).


In these analyses the difference for ADAS-Cog score change remained significant (U = 225, z = 2.78, p = 0.004, r = 0.48) and the change in ADCS-CGIC (sham n = 11, real/real n = 10) became significant (U = 87, z = 2.35, p = 0.024, r = 0.51).



FIGURE 3 |
FIGURE 3 | Relationship between TMS-driven measures and cognitive function (ADAS-Cog).
Relationship at baseline (A-D) in AD and HC, or clinical response over time (ADAS-Cog ratio) in AD patients (E-H) treated with real or sham rTMS.
Cortico-motor plasticity was expressed as the change of cortical reactivity from baseline to post-iTBS.
Circles reflect data for individuals and lines are unadjusted regression lines for the specified groups.
When adjusting for age, education and mean atrophy, significant associations were found between baseline ADAS-Cog and resting motor threshold [rMT -(A)], short-interval intracortical inhibition [SICI -(B)],long-interval intracortical inhibition [LICI -(C)] and mean plasticity from 5 to 30 min post-iTBS (D).
However, in models adjusting for rTMS intervention (real vs. sham), mean plasticity (H), but not rMT (E), SICI (F), and LICI (G) was found to be a significant predictor of response.



TABLE 1 |
Demographic, neuropsychological, morphometric, and neurophysiologic features of study participants (before intervention).



TABLE 2A |
Cognitive training and morphometric and technical parameters of interest.



TABLE 3 |
Parameter estimates and model fit statistics for multivariable linear models testing associations between TMS-driven measures of cortico-motor reactivity evaluated at baseline, and cognitive function (ADAS-Cog) also measured at baseline, or clinical response (ADAS-Cog ratio) in the sample from Boston (n = 21).



TABLE 4 |
Parameter estimates and model fit statistics for multivariable mixed effects longitudinal models testing associations between TMS-driven measures of corticomotor reactivity and cognitive function (ADAS-Cog), measured across time (pre and post-treatment), in the sample from Boston (n = 21).
One or more subjects were not included in this model due to being influential observations according to Cook's distance analysis.
ADAS-Cog, cognitive subscale of the Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale; ICF, intracortical facilitation; LICI, long-interval intracortical inhibition; MEP, motor evoked potential; rMT/aMT, resting/active motor threshold; rTMS, repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation; SICI, short-interval intracortical inhibition; T5/T10/T30, Time-points at 5 10 and 30 min post intermittent Theta Burst Stimulation.