BHA‐CS: A novel cognitive composite for Alzheimer's disease and related disorders
Introduction: Composite scores based on psychometrically rigorous cognitive assessments are well suited for early diagnosis and disease monitoring.
Methods: We developed and cross-validated the Brain Health Assessment-Cognitive Score (BHA-CS), based on a brief computerized battery, in 451 cognitively normal (CN) and 399 cognitively impaired (mild cognitive impairment [MCI] or dementia) older adults.
We investigated its long-term reliability and reliable change indices at longitudinal follow-up (N = 340), and the association with amyloid beta (A) burden in the CN subgroup with A positron emission tomography (N = 119).
The BHA-CS was accurate at detecting cognitive impairment and exhibited excellent long-term stability.
Reliable decline over one year was detected in 75% of participants with dementia, 44% with MCI, and 3% of CN.
Among CN, the A-positive group showed worse longitudinal performance on the BHA-CS compared to the A-negative group.
The BHA-CS is sensitive to cognitive decline in preclinical and prodromal neurodegenerative disease.

INTRODUCTION
With the growing prevalence of dementia globally, timely detection of neurodegenerative disease is critical for optimizing treatment disorders (ADRD).
Additionally, numerous studies have shown that the presence of neurodegenerative pathology, such as amyloid plaques in Alzheimer's disease (AD), precedes clinical manifestation of dementia,
Thus, cognitive measures capable of estimating longitudinal cognitive changes may be particularly sensitive to an underlying neurodegenerative etiology in preclinical stages of the disease.
ief measures of cognition that can be feasibly repeated at subsequent visits are well suited for the detection of meaningful cognitive change because they minimize time and other resource costs compared to traditional neuropsychological tests.
Of the variety of brief cognitive measures available, the most commonly used, the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE
At the same time, the MMSE is characterized by a particular strength in that it provides a composite score capturing performance across multiple cognitive domains, which enhances its predictive validity given the variability of cognitive deficits associated with neurodegenerative disease.
Moreover, the utility of the cognitive composite measures for clinical trials has been supported by the U.S.
Food and Drug Administration 10 due to their potential effectiveness in monitoring progression of symptoms over time and evaluating treatment effects.
veral other psychometrically sound composite scores have been developed for ADRD, including the cognitive subscale of the Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale (ADAS-Cog
These metrics are derived from a broader range of cognitive measures tapping into several cognitive domains, thus making them more sensitive to heterogeneity of presentations seen in ADRD.
However, most of these composites were developed based on traditional paper-and-pencil measures and require administration by highly trained clinicians or psychometricians, limiting their wide-scale application.
Additionally, concerns have been raised regarding the feasibility of such measures for repeated use due to the fact that these instruments rely on rather lengthy cognitive batteries.
Computerized cognitive measures offer advantages over existing measures because they can reduce error associated with administration variability, automate scoring and interpretation, provide easy access to alternate forms, and offer efficiency of staffing and cost.
Like their traditional counterparts, these measures must be comprised of constituent tasks that evaluate the spectrum of cognitive changes seen in typical and less typical neurodegenerative syndromes for sensitive detection of decline.
this study, we developed and validated the Brain Health Assessment-Cognitive Score (BHA-CS), a composite score based on a brief tablet-based battery that efficiently measures associative memory, executive function and speed, language generation, and visuospatial skills, and was previously shown to exhibit high accuracy for detecting mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and dementia.
comparison as it has been reported to be sensitive to cognitive changes in mild stages of cognitive decline.

METHODS

Participants
The

Measures and procedure

Cognitive tests
The BHA is programmed in the TabCAT software platform (UCSF, San Francisco, CA) and consists of four subtests: Favorites (associative memory), Match (executive functioning and processing speed), Line Orientation (visuospatial skills), and Animal Fluency (language). 17
Detailed task descriptions and Spanish adaptation are provided in the supporting information and memory.ucsf.edu/tabcat.
Testing time is 10 minutes.
The MoCA is a widely used cognitive screen assessing the following domains: visuoconstruction and executive functions, attention, language, abstraction, memory, and orientation, and also takes ≈10 minutes to administer.
The total score is calculated as a sum of points across domains with a maximum of 30 points.
All participants completed the BHA tests and the MoCA in a private examination room independent of diagnostic assessments.
For the BHA administration, participants were seated in a chair at a desk with a 9.7-inch iPad positioned horizontally in front of them, with the back of the tablet propped 1 inch up from the surface of the desk.
An administrator sat next to the participant.
The MoCA was administered in a standardized fashion in accordance with original instructions. 18

Neuroimaging and APOE genotyping
A imaging was based on PET with 18F-Florbetapir acquired at UCSF China Basin on a GE Discovery STE/VCT PET-CT scanner.
Data acquisition and processing was performed in accordance with the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative protocol
To determine A-PET positivity, we applied a 1.11 standardized uptake value ratio (SUVR) threshold derived from previous publications using identical acquisition parameters and pre-processing pipelines.
APOE genotyping was based on DNA analysis from peripheral blood samples as described previously.
APOE 4 status was dummy coded as "1 ″ for homozygotes and heterozygotes of 4 and "0 ″ otherwise.
There were no participants with 2/4 genotype in the sample.

Statistical analyses

BHA-CS construction and validation
The BHA-CS was defined as the sum of weighted demographically We used a repeated 3 × 5-fold cross-validation to estimate the out-of-sample accuracy of the BHA-CS model.
The key feature of repeated cross-validation procedures is that they test the effectiveness of the model derived from one part of the dataset (training set)
on the reserved part of the dataset (validation set).
In our analyses, the cross-validation algorithm divided the dataset into five equally sized random subsets with grossly proportional number of CN and cognitively impaired subjects in each subset and treated each of the subsets as a validation set while the other four were treated as a training set.
This procedure was repeated three times based on random permutations.
The results were based on the average overall accuracy and average sensitivity and specificity metrics per permutation.

Long-term test stability and reliable change indices
To examine long-term stability, we calculated correlation coefficients (Pearson's r) across two visits.
These analyses estimate overall reliability of the scores at 1-year follow-up.
Based on existing literature,
The purpose of RCI estimation is to evaluate whether a statistically significant change in test-retest scores has occurred beyond the effects of systematic or measurement errors, such as practice effects, low reliability of the test, or regression to the mean.
r the BHA-CS, upper and lower 90% RCI were calculated using a standardized regression-based approach,

Association with A𝜷 burden in healthy older adults
Linear mixed effect models using maximum likelihood estimation with analogous to the main one but included a dichotomized A status (positive vs negative) instead of a continuous SUVR as a predictor.
All analyses were performed in R (v3.6.0,
R Project for Statistical Computing) with two-tailed significance level set at P < .05.
We used the caret package (v6.0-84)
for cross-validation analysis, lme4 package (v1.1-21)
for estimation of linear mixed effects models, and ggplot2 (v3.1.1)
package for generating figures and plots.

RESULTS

Demographics
Baseline demographic characteristics of the BHA-CS validation sample are presented in used to evaluate long-term stability and associations with A burden, are provided in Tables S1-S3 in supporting information.
At follow-up, there were no significant differences between the CN and cognitively impaired groups on any of the demographic characteristics, including age, education, sex, or race/ethnicity (Table
Similarly, A+ and A-CN groups did not differ in age, sex, education, race, or prevalence of APOE 4 status at baseline or at follow-up (Table

BHA-CS validation
The results of the logistic regression analysis revealed statistically significant contributions of three of the four BHA subtests: Favorites, Match, and Animal Fluency (Table
Therefore, the composite metric was expressed as BHA-CS = ([a participants and 17% of cognitively impaired subjects had a BHA-CS score of -1.0 or above.
Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) analyses were consistent with previously reported results
Results of the cross-validation analysis revealed an overall accuracy of .85
(95% confidence interval [CI]: .82-.87), sensitivity of .88,
and specificity of .80.
When specificity was set at .85, sensitivity was .83.
Analogous preliminary results in the Spanish-speaking group, while limited by a small sample size, suggested that the BHA-CS was similarly accurate at detecting cognitive impairment among Spanish speakers with an overall accuracy of .83
(95% CI: .69-.93), sensitivity of .95,
and specificity of .71.
When specificity was set at .85, sensitivity was .81 in the Spanish-speaking sample.

Long-term stability and reliable change indices
Long-term stability at 1-year follow-up on the BHA-CS was excellent in the whole sample (r = .89,
95% CI: .85-.91) and weaker when restricted to the CN group (r = .70,
95% CI: .62-.77).
MoCA demonstrated poorer stability indices both in the whole sample (r = .75,
95% CI: .70-.80) and in the CN group only (r = .50,
95% CI: .40-.59).
Significant predictors of the BHA-CS follow-up score were baseline score and baseline age, such that lower baseline score and older age were associated with more decline, while sex, education, and retest interval were not significant (Table
The average practice effect on the BHA-CS was 0.2 (Table
Comparing BHA-CS reliable change indices, both MCI (t = -9.04,
P < .001)
and mild dementia (t = -5.83,
P = < .001)
groups showed greater rates of decline over time compared to CN.
Similar results were observed on the MoCA, although the effect sizes were smaller in both MCI (t = -2.80,
P = .007)
and mild dementia (t = -2.03,
P = .062)
compared to CN.
The frequency rates of reliable change estimates across diagnostic groups are presented in Table

Associations with A𝜷 burden in CN
No significant differences between A+ and A-groups were observed at baseline, second, or third follow-up visits on the MoCA scores (Table
On the BHA, A+ group had significantly lower scores than A-group at the third visit (Table
Results of the linear mixed effect models showed that greater A SUVR at baseline was associated with poorer performance on the BHA-CS over time (B = -0.957,
SE = 0.221, P < .001;
Table
Table
On the MoCA, neither the continuous (P = .630,
Table
Table

DISCUSSION
Psychometrically robust and sensitive measures of cognition are critical for early detection and monitoring of progression of neurodegenerative disease.
Cognitive outcomes measured by multidomain composite scores have been shown to be particularly well suited to serve this purpose and to be more sensitive to preclinical changes compared to single domain metrics.
The BHA-CS, a cognitive com- have been consistently shown to be affected early in a neurodegenerative process due to AD.
Specifically, we previously showed that performance on Match was strongly correlated with gray matter volumes in bilateral frontal, parietal, and subcortical regions, and white matter integrity in the corpus callosum.
Similarly, performance on Favorites localized to gray matter volumes in bilateral temporal, insular, and frontal regions with most significant associations with medial temporal lobes.
In contrast, performance on Line Orientation, which did not significantly contribute to the BHA-CS composite, narrowly localized to a cluster of gray matter in the right superior parietal lobe.
The BHA also demonstrated greater stability over 1-year period compared to the MoCA, which is consistent with past reports on suboptimal longitudinal reliability of the MoCA in older adults.
ngitudinal but not cross-sectional performance on the BHA-CS was sensitive to baseline A-PET in CN older adults.
These findings are consistent with previous reports on A-related cognitive decline during preclinical stages of AD.
Additionally, these findings provide preliminary support for future use of the BHA-CS in secondary prevention trials with disease-modifying agents given its potential to reliably detect treatment effects over time.
Our study has a number of limitations.
First, our sample was largely comprised of highly educated, white participants and may not be representative of the general populations.
At the same time, inclusion of Spanish-speaking participants in our sample provided preliminary support for validity of the BHA-CS in discriminating between cognitively intact and cognitively impaired individuals in ethnically diverse groups.
Second, our cross-validation procedure did not include a true external sample, which limits generalizability of these results.
Data collection for culturally, linguistically, and educationally diverse external samples is ongoing.
Also, our longitudinal sample of A+ CN participants was relatively small (N = 29), and so these findings merit replication in a larger sample.
Exploring associations with other neurodegenerative biomarkers (eg, tauPET, neurofilament light chain) will also be valuable in light of our findings on longitudinal sensitivity to decline in an etiologically diverse cognitively impaired group.
Finally, the longitudinal analyses were based on roughly annual visits using the same versions of the BHA tests, while real-life applications may require more frequent administrations using alternate forms, particularly in clinical trials.
In summary, the BHA-CS is a novel cognitive composite measure based on a brief and easy to administer computerized battery that is optimized for the detection of cognitive impairment in older adults.
Given its sensitivity to preclinical and prodromal stages of neurodegenerative disease, particularly AD, the BHA-CS represents a valuable alternative to traditional brief cognitive assessments for clinical and research applications.


and care plans.
Cognitive assessments play a key role in the accurate diagnosis and monitoring of Alzheimer's disease and related This is an open access article under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial License, which permits use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited and is not used for commercial purposes.
c ○ 2020 The Authors.
Alzheimer's & Dementia: Diagnosis, Assessment & Disease Monitoring published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of the Alzheimer's Association.


We also evaluated its long-term stability and estimated reliable change in cognitively normal (CN) older adults and individuals with MCI and dementia at 1-year follow-up.
Finally, we investigated longitudinal sensitivity of the BHA-CS to early AD biomarkers based on amyloid beta (A)-positron emission tomography (PET) in CN older adults over 3-year follow-up.
Across all analyses, we compared the performance of the BHA-CS to the reference brief assessment, the Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA 18 ).
We selected the MoCA as the reference for RESEARCH IN CONTEXT 1. Systematic review: We reviewed the literature on use of cognitive composite scores for early detection of neurodegenerative diseases using traditional sources (eg, PubMed).
While several composite metrics have been described, there are ongoing efforts to develop more psychometrically robust and sensitive composites for use in clinical practice and drug trials.



2 . 3 .
Interpretation: Our findings showed that a novel cognitive composite based on a brief computerized battery accurately detected cognitive decline across the spectrum of preclinical and early stage neurodegenerative disease.
Future directions: Additional validation of the composite score in culturally diverse populations is needed.


The BHA-CS was developed and cross-validated in a sample of 451 CN, 289 MCI, and 110 mild dementia participants who completed the BHA tests and the MoCA at baseline in English or Spanish.
Long-term stability and reliable change estimations were evaluated in the subset of participants who completed the BHA (265 CN, 59 MCI, 16 dementia) and the MoCA (251 CN, 50 MCI, 14 dementia) at baseline and at 1-year follow-up visits.
Finally, examination of the association between A burden and longitudinal changes on the BHA-CS and the MoCA was based on the subset of CN older adults who completed the BHA (N = 119; 90 A-, 29 A+) and the MoCA (N = 117; 89 A-, 28 A+) at two or more follow-up visits over the course of 3 years and also underwent A-PET imaging and apolipoprotein E (APOE) genotyping.


whereby the predicted follow-up performance score (derived from multiple regression using the baseline score, age, sex, education, and retest interval as predictors) is subtracted from the actual follow-up score, and the difference is standardized based on the standard error of the estimate of the regression equation.
Predictors were removed from the model in a stepwise fashion with only significant predictors included in the final model.
For the MoCA, 90% RCI were derived based on a formula of the difference between follow-up and baseline scores corrected for practice effects and the standardized error of difference 30 in light of well-documented ceiling effects of the measure and deviation from regression assumptions based on existing studies.


random intercepts were used to investigate the relationship between baseline A status and cognitive change in CN subjects.
The main model included continuous A SUVR values, time (years since baseline), and SUVR × time interaction to investigate changes on the BHA-CS and the MoCA.
The covariates included were baseline age (centered), sex, education, APOE 4, and the random effect of cognitive score intercepts.
We also examined the APOE 4 × time and age × time interactions to ensure that the changes on cognitive measures over time were not explained by APOE or age variables.
The supporting models were


The SUVR × time interaction estimates remained significant after inclusion of APOE 4 × time (B = -0.862,
SE = 0.231, P < .001)
and age × time (B = -0.948,
SE = 0.218, P < .001)
interaction terms in the model (TablesS5 and S6in supporting information).
Similar results were observed when a dichotomous A status × time interaction was tested with the main effect of A+ group showing poorer performance over time on the BHA-CS compared to the A-group (B = -0.250,
SE = 0.061, P < .001;



Figure 1
depicts trajectories of change over time as a function of baseline dichotomous A status while holding all other fixed effects constant on the BHA-CS and the MoCA (based on Table


posite measure optimized for the detection of cognitive impairment, is derived from brief tests of associative episodic memory, executive function and processing speed, and semantic fluency.
These domains F I G U R E 1 Predicted longitudinal performance on the Brain Health Assessment-Cognitive Score and the Montreal Cognitive Assessment in cognitively normal older adults by dichotomous amyloid beta status


While this region represents an important area for diagnosis of neurodegenerative syndromes, it may not have predicted unique variance in cognitive impairment status due to its overlapping neural basis with Match.
Our analyses indicated greater sensitivity of the BHA-CS to change over time in the prodromal (MCI) stage of neurodegenerative disease compared to the commonly used MoCA.
These results are particularly relevant to clinical settings, where robust cognitive change estimations may inform diagnostic and treatment decisions.
In particular, the BHA-CS captured reliable decline in more individuals with MCI (44%) compared to the MoCA (20%).


Baseline demographic characteristics and group differences (N = 850) Based on differences between MCI and dementia relative to CN and estimated from t-tests for continuous variables or Pearson's  2 tests for categorical



Table 1


where a is the intercept of the regression equation; b is Rates of reliable change at 1-year follow-up visits on the BHA-CS and the MoCA across diagnostic groups


Summary of the linear mixed effect models with baseline continuous amyloid beta × time interaction on the BHA-CS and the MoCA in CN (N = 119)