Efficacy of probiotics on cognition, and biomarkers of inflammation and oxidative stress in adults with Alzheimer's disease or mild cognitive impairment -a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials
Probiotics are live microbes that confer health benefits to the host.
Preliminary animal evidence supports the potential role of probiotics in ameliorating cognitive health, however, findings from clinical trials in Alzheimer's disease (AD) or mild cognitive impairment (MCI) subjects are controversial.
Thus, a meta-analysis is needed to clarify the efficacy of probiotics on cognition in AD or MCI patients.
EMBASE, PubMed, Web of Science and Cochrane library were systematically searched and manually screened for relevant published randomized controlled trials (RCTs).
Among the 890 citations identified, 5 studies involving 297 subjects met eligibility.
There was a significant improvement in cognition (SMD = 0.37; 95% CI, 0.14, 0.61; P = 0.002; I 2 = 24%), while a significant reduction in malondialdehyde (SMD = -0.60;
95% CI, -0.91, -0.28; P = 0.000; I 2 = 0.0%) and high-sensitivity Creactive protein (SMD = -0.57;
95% CI, -0.95, -0.20; P = 0.003; I 2 = 0.0%) post-intervention levels between the probiotics and control group.
This meta-analysis indicated that probiotics improved cognitive performance in AD or MCI patients, possibly through decreasing levels of inflammatory and oxidative biomarkers.
However, current evidence is insufficient, and more reliable evidence from large-scale, long-period, RCT is needed.

INTRODUCTION
The incidence of Alzheimer's disease (AD) is increasing globally and has reached the point of being a costly public health issue
AD, featured by impaired cognition and memory loss, is hidden onset and possesses a long incubation period
The World Alzheimer Report 2019
Remarkably, there will be one new case every 3 seconds, and the number is predicted to be 152 million persons by 2050
The total estimated worldwide cost of dementia was US$1 trillion and will rise to US$2 trillion by 2030
Unfortunately, there is currently no curative treatment for cognitive impairment and dementia
The gut microbiota (GM) consists of a vast bacterial community that resides primarily in the lower gut and AGING lives in a symbiotic relationship with the host
Emerging experimental and clinical evidence has demonstrated the close interconnection between the gastrointestinal tract and the brain, known as the gutbrain axis
Recently, the GM has been found to regulate brain development and behavior via the gutbrain axis, and this has been called the microbiota-gutbrain (MGB) axis
It has been found that dysfunction in behavior and cognition is associated with GM dysbiosis
Activation of gut inflammation has been regarded as a possible pathogenic cofactor in cognitive deterioration and dementia
Moreover, the most distinctive alterations in the GM of AD patients are decreased abundance of antiinflammatory bacterial species (e.g.
Bifidobacterium brevestrain A1) and increased abundance of proinflammatory flora phyla (e.g.
Firmicutes and Bacteroidetes)
And restoring GM homeostasis could slow down the progression of AD
Therefore, the GM has been proposed as a key player in the pathogenesis of AD and might be a new potential therapeutic target for the prevention and treatment of AD
Probiotics are live microbes that confer health benefits to the host when administered in adequate amounts, possibly through their anti-inflammatory or antioxidative effects
Recently, some probiotics have been shown to influence the central nervous system (CNS) and behavior via the MGB axis
Moreover, eleven preclinical studies have shown that neither single strains nor multi-strain probiotics were beneficial for improving cognitive function in animal models
These preclinical results have indicated that probiotics might be an effective dietary intervention to ameliorate age-associated cognitive deficits.
Nevertheless, findings from available clinical trials focusing on the effects of probiotics in patients with AD or MCI are inconsistent
And they found that probiotics showed efficacy in improving psychiatric disorder-related behaviors including anxiety, depression, autism spectrum disorder, and memory abilities
However, the evidence for the effects of psychobiotics on mental and neurological conditions/disorders remains limited.
Further studies of psychobiotics are needed in order to determine their effectiveness and mechanism as treatments for various psychiatric disorders.
Accordingly, this meta-analysis was the first to quantitatively examine the potential effect of probiotics on cognitive performance and inflammatory and oxidative biomarkers, which might be related to the underlying mechanisms in AD or MCI subjects.

RESULTS

Literature search and screening
A total of 883 records were obtained after the initial search of the electronic databases, and 7 studies were identified through manual searching of the reference lists of relevant published reviews (for a detailed description of the literature search and results, please see the supplementary materials).
Of these, 203 trials were removed as duplicates, and 667 publications were excluded after screening the title and abstract.
The remaining 20 articles were scrutinized with a full-text screening, of which 15 were excluded for reasons detailed in the PRISMA flow chart (Figure
Then, 5 studies were considered eligible and finally included in the quantitative meta-analysis.

Study characteristics
As shown in Table
All studies were randomized, double-blind and controlled trials.
Among which, three studies
Most studies included a higher ratio of women except for two studies (one
The intervention duration of the involved studies was all 12 weeks.
Two studies
The study from Azadeh Agahi et al.
All studies used a matched placebo that was indistinguishable from the probiotics in terms of packaging, form, appearance, size, taste, smell, and so forth.
With regard to the main findings, three studies
Similarly, the results regarding changes in various inflammatory and oxidative metabolites were inconsistent across studies.

Risk of bias assessment
Although all five included studies were RCT designs, one study
All studies described the blindness of the AGING participants and implementing personnel, whereas only two studies
No risk of incomplete outcome data was found for any of the recruited studies.
Overall, the assessment of bias generally reported a low to moderate risk of bias across all domains.
The risks of bias assessment across the recruited studies are summarized in Figure

Meta-analysis: Main results
Five studies included 154 subjects in the probiotics group and 143 subjects in the control group.
A fixedeffects model was selected for quantitative synthesis.
In general, the result of meta-analysis revealed a significant difference between the probiotics and control group regarding improvement in cognition (SMD = 0.37; 95% CI, 0.14, 0.61; P = 0.002; I 2 = 24%).
The forest plot of the meta-analysis is shown in Figure
Meanwhile, fixed-effects models were applied to metaanalyses of malondialdehyde (MDA), high-sensitivity C-reactive protein (hs-CRP), total glutathione (GSH) and nitric oxide (NO) on account of acceptable heterogeneity among studies, while a random-effects model was selected for analysis of total anti-oxidant capacity (TAC).
The results showed significant decrease in levels of MDA (SMD = -0.60;
95% CI, -0.91, -0.28; P = 0.000; I 2 = 0.0%; n = 3 studies; n = 82 subjects) and hs-CRP (SMD = -0.57;
95% CI, -0.95, -0.20; P = 0.003; I 2 = 0.0%, n = 2 studies, n = 57 subjects).
And no significant differences were observed in TAC (SMD = 0.04; 95% CI, -0.75, 0.83; P = 0.919; I 2 = 83.9%,
n = 3 studies; n = 82 subjects), GSH (SMD = 0.04; 95% CI, -0.28, 0.35; P = 0.822; I 2 = 44.1%;
n = 3 studies; n = 82 subjects), and NO (SMD = -0.16;
95% CI, -0.47, 0.15; P = 0.316; I 2 = 4.4%; n = 3 studies; n = 82 subjects) between the probiotics and control group.
The forest plots of these meta-analyses are shown in Figure

AGING

AGING

Subgroup analyses
A total of three subgroup analyses were conducted, and the results were summarized in Table
The heterogeneity obviously declined only in the subgroup analysis of "MMSE versus non-MMSE" after stratification by cognitive rating scales.
Additionally, the meta-analysis results from the subgroups for disease type (AD versus MCI) and strains of flora (multiple versus sole) were consistent with the overall pooled results, while there was no effect on cognition in the subset of studies with the non-MMSE rating scales (SMD = 0.16; 95% CI: -0.17, 0.50; P = 0.33; I 2 = 0.0%).

Publication bias assessment and sensitivity analysis
We quantitatively assessed the publication bias through Egger's test and Begg's test.
The results demonstrated no significant publication bias on cognition (Egger's test: P = 0.54, Begg's test: P = 0.81; see supplementary materials).
The sensitivity analysis was performed to test the reliability of the meta-analysis results by omitting studies one by one.
Systematically removing each trial did not significantly influence the overall effects of probiotics on cognition (see supplementary materials).
Thus, the findings between the probiotics and control groups regarding cognitive enhancement were considered reliable.
AGING

DISCUSSION
To the best of our knowledge, this study is the first meta-analysis to elucidate the pronounced beneficial effects of probiotics on improving cognition in individuals with AD or MCI, which might be attributed to the effective decrease in some inflammatory and oxidative related biomarkers (MDA and hs-CRP).
Over the past decades, many studies have focused on effective pharmaceutical strategies to control AD; however, none have yet yielded a satisfying therapy.
Recently, it has been demonstrated that modification of lifestyle factors such as dietary patterns plays an important role in alleviating cognitive decline
This indicates that it is imperative to explore potential dietary interventions that may ameliorate age-associated cognitive deficits.
Probiotics intervention could be a novel and feasible dietary strategy for managing dementia and other related diseases
Remarkably, our findings provide evidence that relatively low-cost, widely available, and well-tolerated probiotics could be potential candidates for the control or prevention of AD and MCI.
However, the specific underlying mechanisms remain unknown.
Although the exact pathogenesis of AD is not completely understood, accumulating evidence suggests that the oxidative stress and inflammatory pathways may play a critical role in the underlying mechanisms of cognitive deficits and AD
Increased neuroinflammation and oxidative stress are frequently observed complications in participants with MCI and AD
Amyloid-beta peptide (Aβ) oligomers has been considered as the major pathogenic factor associated to AD, which tend to accumulate extracellularly as amyloid deposits
Neuroinflammation in AD is thought to be triggered by Aβ and/or by the substances released by dying neurons, causing microglia activation
Activated microglia triggers the recruitment and proliferation of astrocytes that actively bolster the inflammatory response to extracellular Aβ deposits.
This neuroinflammatory component of AD is further characterized by a local cytokine (e.g.
TNF-α, IL-1β, IL-6) accumulation mediating acute-phase response, activation of the complement cascade and induction of inflammatory enzyme systems such as inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) and COX-2
Meanwhile, Aβ is also shown to trigger oxidative stress by increasing ROS production through damage in mitochondrial structure and function
All these factors, either alone or in concert, can contribute to neuronal dysfunction and death that occur in AD.
Accordingly, huge numbers of potential anti-inflammatory and antioxidative agents have been explored to develop effective therapeutic strategies for AD.
GM has been reported to play an important role in the pathogenesis of AD through the MGB axis
Probiotics are live microorganisms intended to provide health benefits, generally by improving or restoring the GM
Moreover, Athari Nik AGING Azm et al.
Kobayashi et al.
These results suggest that probiotics might exert health benefits through their anti-inflammatory and anti-oxidative effects.
Herein, we found that some inflammatory and oxidative biomarkers (hs-CRP and MDA) were significantly decreased by probiotics, which might be related to the underlying mechanisms of their beneficial effects in AD or MCI subjects.
Meanwhile, some inflammatory and oxidative biomarkers (TAC, GSH, and NO) were not significantly different in the meta-analysis.
Apart from diverse interventions conditions, such as strains of flora, total intervention duration, dosage, and so forth, it is worthwhile to infer that inflammatory and oxidative stress pathways are not specific to AD and MCI, but potentially play an important role in various kinds of diseases, especially age-related diseases
Additionally, the inflammatory and oxidative biomarkers enrolled in the current study were only a part of the pathophysiology in AD and MCI patients.
Therefore, more comprehensive inflammatory and oxidative metabolites need to be tested in future clinical trials in order to clarify the exact mechanism of the beneficial effect of probiotics on AD and MCI patients.
Furthermore, a systematic review reveals that neither single nor multi-strain probiotics are beneficial for improving cognitive function according to eleven animal studies
Many studies demonstrate that probiotics, such as Bifidobacterium and Lactobacillus strains, ameliorate cognitive and memory deficits in animal models of AD
In the current study, the strains used in the involved clinical trials were also from Bifidobacterium and Lactobacillus (Table
We found that sole or multi-strain probiotics were both beneficial for improving cognitive function, suggesting that Bifidobacterium and Lactobacillus strains would be the most potential candidates.
However, AD patients were insensitive to a mixture of six type of strains in the study from Azadeh Agahi et al.
Given the differences exist across species, the appropriate dosing of probiotics should be demonstrated for the specific target host
The definition of probiotics requires the administration of an "adequate amount" in order to obtain a health benefit.
However, the definition does not specify the size of this "adequate" dose
The commonly dose of probiotics used are ranging from 10 8 to 10 11 CFU in related studies.
Some researches
In contrast, there is no dose-response for probiotics in Clostridium difficile associated diarrhoea, necrotising enterocolitis, atopic dermatitis and slow intestinal transit
Compiled evidence indicates that the effective dose of probiotics is influenced by a multitude of variables, including health endpoint, the specific probiotic used, delivery vehicle and route of administration
Therefore, it seems difficult to epitomize one optimal dose for probiotic intervention.
At present, we failed to provide a dose-response of probiotics in ameliorating cognitive deficits for the information on the intervention dose of probiotics was not enough in the involved studies.
Nevertheless, the absence of evidence for a dose-effect does not imply evidence of absence of a dose-effect
More reliable evidence from various dosages especially outside the common concentration (10 8 ~ 10 11 CFU) of probiotics trials is needed.
Additionally, the safety of probiotics should also be considered.
People have been eating fermented foods for centuries without suffering any harmful side effects.
Probiotics are generally accepted in the medical community as a harmless and very efficient, natural remedy.
However, the United States Food and Drug Administration requires phase I safety studies for probiotics when the intended use of the product is as a drug.
Researchers
Moreover, Patricia L. Hibberd et al.
Among the five studies included in our present study, two
stomach aches, headaches, gastritis, erectile dysfunction).
These results indicate that probiotics are considered generally safe to consume, but may cause bacteria-host interactions and unwanted side effects in rare cases.
Accordingly, the Bifidobacterium and Lactobacillus strains used in the involved studies were safe and well tolerated, however, the specific strain still need phase I safety studies before using as a drug.

√ √
Note: √ represents containing this type of strain in the component of probiotics.
The main limitations are as follows: 1) First, the cognitive rating scales varied across the recruited studies.
The widely accepted cognitive rating scale, the MMSE, was selected in three studies
Remarkably, AD patients assessed by the MMSE
The main reason for this discrepancy may arise from the difference in the outcome indexes among studies; furthermore, the TYM test has been reported to be more sensitive in detecting dementia than the MMSE
In addition, Yun-Ha Hwang et al.
Cognitive domains of this combined one are incomprehensive enough compared to the MMSE or TYM.
The subgroup analysis showed that cognitive rating scales, i.e., "MMSE versus non-MMSE", could partly explain the source of heterogeneity, and the imbalanced assessment methods may have discounted the metaanalysis outcome.
2) Second, the inclusion criteria for AD patients were all in accordance with the NINCDS-ADRDA criteria.
However, the criteria for recruiting MCI subjects were different: Y. Kobayashi et al.
This may have generated low comparability of these two trials attributable to inconsistent inclusion criteria.
3) Third, three of the five clinical trials used in the cognitive meta-analysis are from the same region.
Though the participants' characteristics, intervention conditions, cognitive rating scales were varied from each other and the main findings were inconsistent.
There is still concern that the relatively low heterogeneity might be partially attributed to the clinical trials from the same region.
Additionally, two of the three studies also had concerns regarding allocation bias and evaluation bias.
These limitations might discount the outcomes of our meta-analysis.
4) Fourth, some other key variables, including the age, sex, and BMI of the samples, specific strain of the flora, dosage of probiotics, and drug form, may have exerted an influence on the results, but the relevant information obtained on the results was limited in this study.
Moreover, possible dose-response of probiotics in ameliorating cognitive deficits also should be further explored.
5) Last but not least, we concluded that the potential mechanism was partially related to the antiinflammatory and anti-oxidative property of probiotics in only 12 weeks study duration.
However, many clinical trials of AD drugs (i.e, β-amyloidantibody, β-secretase inhibitors, tau aggregation inhibitor), long-term interventions of several years have failed
The beneficial efficacy of probiotics for AD and MCI in only 12 weeks study duration might be attributed to multidirectional mechanism regulation, including alterations in the levels of certain neurotransmitters, increasing neuroprotective molecules, such as brain-derived neurotrophic factor, reduction of inflammation and so forth
In addition, there might be existence of sponsor bias in part of the included studies.
Therefore, longer study durations are needed to determine the overall net benefits of probiotics.
With a view to the above limitations, future RCTs that control these confounding factors are needed to clarify the moderators of probiotics effects on cognition.

CONCLUSIONS
The meta-analysis indicated that probiotics consumption enhanced cognition in subjects with AD or MCI, possibly through decreasing the levels of inflammatory and oxidative biomarkers.
However, the current RCT evidence is insufficient and limited, the results should be cautiously interpreted, and more reliable evidence from large-scale, long-period, randomized, controlled trials is needed.

AGING

METHODS

Literature search
A literature search was conducted according to the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) guidelines.
The preliminary search was performed through the EMBASE, PubMed, Web of Science and the Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials (CENTRAL) electronic databases without time restrictions, up to June 10, 2019.
A snowball search was manually carried out by searching reference lists from relevant published reviews and the retrieved papers.
We searched the first-group-term (AD or MCIrelated term) with "OR".
Then used the same way for the second-group-term (human-related term) search and the third-group-term (probiotic-related term) search, followed by combing the number of records generated from the three groups of search term with "AND".
The following terms were searched in "all fields" for each electronic database: (Alzheimer's disease OR dementia OR mild cognitive impairment OR cognitive dysfunction OR cognitive defect OR cognition OR memory OR mental capacity) AND (adult OR human) AND (probiotic OR yeast OR yoghurt OR fermented product OR lactobacillus OR bifidobacterium OR fermented dairy product OR synbiotics OR cultured milk products).
Articles were limited to randomized controlled trials (RCTs).

Study selection
Eligible studies had to meet the following criteria:
Studies were excluded if they met any one of the following criteria: (1) The publications were abstracts, reviews, conference papers, study protocols, crosssectional studies, nonhuman (in vitro and animal) studies or papers that did not report on any outcome of interest;
(2) No post-intervention or change from baseline on scale scores of cognition was reported, and these data could not be calculated based on the information in the article;
In this case, only the study with the larger sample size was included.
Articles were initially and independently screened for eligibility by two investigators based on titles and abstracts.
Duplicate and irrelevant papers were excluded.
For the relevant candidates, the full articles were retrieved, reviewed and the references of each document were checked to find out potential candidates.
Disagreements were resolved by discussion between the two researchers, or with a third reviewer.

Data extraction
Data were extracted independently by two authors (H-Y.D, M-L.C), using a predetermined form in accordance with the guidance of the Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of Interventions.
Parameters collected including basic information of the RCTs (first author, published year, and study design), characteristics of the participants (sample size, disease type, age, and sex ratio), intervention-related variables (type of strains, duration, and dosage), outcome assessments (cognitive outcomes, inflammatory and oxidative biomarkers) and the main findings of each included study.
To perform the meta-analysis, the following data of outcome assessments were extracted: the mean change score along with the associated variance (standard deviation [SD] or standard error of the mean [SEM]).
When change scores were not available, the scores (mean±SD or mean±SEM) and the number of participants at baseline and post-intervention were extracted.

Risk of bias assessment
All studies were independently assessed for risk of bias by two authors, with disagreements resolved by discussion to reach consensus.
The tool of the Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of Interventions was used, which included criteria for the following six aspects: random sequence generation, allocation concealment, blindness of participants and personnel, blindness of outcome assessment, incomplete outcome data, selective reporting, and other sources of bias.
The results of the risk of bias assessment were pooled into Revman 5.3, and a "summary of risk of bias assessment" table was generated.

Statistical analysis
The primary outcomes of this study were the standardized mean differences (SMDs) of change from baseline between probiotics and placebo group.
The SMD was tested by a Z statistic, and a two-tailed P < 0.05 was regarded as statistically significant.
The interstudy heterogeneity was examined by chi-square (χ2) statistics and I 2 statistics.
The heterogeneity among the different studies was considered high if P < 0.1 for the χ2 statistic or I 2 > 50% [77].
SMDs were calculated by AGING fixed-effects or random-effects models.
A sensitivity analysis was conducted to test the reliability of the findings using the leave-one-out method, while publication bias was assessed by Egger's test and Begg's test.
Subgroup analyses were performed to examine the possible source of heterogeneity within these studies, and the subtypes involved cognitive rating scales (Mini-Mental State Examination, MMSE, versus non-MMSE), type of disease (AD versus MCI) and strains of flora (multiple versus sole).
The statistical analyses of forest plots, sensitivity analysis, Egger's test, and Begg's test were performed in STATA software (version 12; StataCorp), while Revman 5.3.
was used to generate the summary of risk of bias assessment.

AGING

SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS

Details of searching strategy and screening process

Literature search
The specific searching strategy and results for each database were described as follows:

EMBASE

Sensitivity analysis (Leave-one-out influence analysis)

A Research Protocol to Guide the Meta-Analysis of Efficacy of Probiotics in Alzheimer's Disease or Mild Cognitive Impairment Patients Studies

INTRODUCTION

Rationale
The incidence of Alzheimer's disease (AD) is increasing globally and has reached the point of being a costly public health issue
Mild cognitive impairment (MCI) is a syndrome defined as cognitive deterioration that does not compromise daily functioning; however, amnestic MCI has a high risk of progression to AD and has been considered as a typical prodromal stage of AD
Unfortunately, there is currently no curative treatment for cognitive impairment and dementia
The gut microbiota (GM) consists of a vast bacterial community that resides primarily in the lower gut and lives in a symbiotic relationship with the host
Accumulating evidence has demonstrated the close interconnection between the gastrointestinal tract and the brain, known as the gut-brain axis
Recently, the GM has been found to regulate brain development and behavior via the gut-brain axis, and this has been called the microbiota-gut-brain axis (MGB)
It has been found that dysfunction in behavior and cognition are associated with GM dysbiosis
Moreover, decreased abundance of anti-inflammatory bacterial species such as Bifidobacterium breve strain A1 and increased abundance of pro-inflammatory flora phyla such as Firmicutes and Bacteroidetes are the most distinctive alterations in the GM observed in AD patients
Therefore, the GM has been proposed as a key player in the pathogenesis of AD and might be a new potential therapeutic target for the prevention and treatment of AD
Probiotics are live microbes that confer health benefits to the host when administered in adequate amounts
Recently, some probiotics have been shown to influence the central nervous system (CNS) and behavior via modulation of the MGB
Moreover, eleven preclinical studies have shown that neither single strains nor multi-strain probiotics were beneficial for improving cognitive function in animal models
These preclinical results have indicated that probiotics supplementation might be an effective dietary intervention to ameliorate ageassociated cognitive deficits.
Nevertheless, findings from available clinical trials focusing on the effects of probiotics in patients with AD or MCI are inconsistent
The evidence for the effects of psychobiotics on mental and neurological conditions/disorders remains limited.
Thus, a metaanalysis is needed to clarify the efficacy of probiotics on cognition in adults suffering from AD or MCI, as well as the possible underlying mechanisms.
Given the potential importance of such a meta-analysis, this protocol provides an in-depth description of the research objectives as well as the methodological and analytical approaches that will be used to identify, appraise, and synthesize the relevant studies.

Objectives
(1) Conduct a meta-analysis to clarify the efficacy of probiotics on cognition in adults suffering from AD or MCI.
(2) To examine the effect of probiotics on inflammatory and oxidative biomarkers in adults with AD or MCI.

METHODS

Study selection

Eligibility criteria
(1) Adult human participants who had a diagnosis of AD or MCI (aged over 18 y);
(2) The study was an RCT and published in peerreviewed journals in English;
(3) No constraint on dosage, strain, or form of probiotics AGING (either stand alone or in combination with other compounds) was applied; (4) Probiotic interventions had no significant difference in form, appearance, taste, and smell compared to the control interventions;
Exclusion criteria
(2) No post-intervention or change from baseline on scale scores of cognition was reported, and these data could not be calculated based on the information in the article;
In this case, only the study with the larger sample size was included.

Information sources
The preliminary search will be performed through electronic databases including the EMBASE, PubMed, Web of Science and the Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials (CENTRAL).
And a snowball search will be manually carried out by searching reference lists from relevant published reviews and the retrieved papers.

Search strategy
The search strategy was developed, finalized and adapted for each database with a combination of free text and controlled vocabulary keywords, including the following terms: (Alzheimer's disease OR dementia OR mild cognitive impairment OR cognitive dysfunction OR cognitive defect OR cognition OR memory OR mental capacity) AND (adult OR human) AND (probiotic OR yeast OR yoghurt OR fermented product OR lactobacillus OR bifidobacterium OR fermented dairy product OR synbiotics OR cultured milk products).
Predefined search strategy for each electronic databases are as follows:

EMBASE

Study records

Data management
All electronic databases citations retrieved using the above search strategy will be imported into Endnote (Endnote X6, Thomson Reuters, San Francisco, CA) to manage and delete duplicate records.
Studies retrieved from reference lists of published reviews and retrieved articles will be entered into Microsoft Excel spread sheet for de-duplication and screening.

Selection process
Screening will be performed by screening the titles and abstracts followed by the retrieval and screening of full text articles using the inclusion and exclusion criteria.
We will contact the study authors for full text articles with the maximum of three attempts for any articles that we are unable to retrieve.
Articles were initially and independently screened for eligibility by two investigators.
Any disagreements that arise between the reviewers will be resolved through discussion, or with a third reviewer.
Moreover, duplicate and non-eligible articles will be excluded and reasons for exclusion will be recorded.
A PRISMA flow chart will be used to trace the overall process.

Data collection process
Two reviewers will extract data from the selected studies independently and crosscheck all articles for accuracy.
Disagreements will be resolved by discussion between the reviewers or with a third reviewer.

Data items
We will extract data according to our predetermined form(as shown in Supplementary Table
To perform the metaanalysis, the following data form of outcome assessments are to be extracted: the mean change score along with the associated variance (standard deviation [SD] or standard error of the mean [SEM]).
When change scores are not available, the scores (mean ± SD or mean ± SEM) and the number of participants at baseline and post-intervention will be extracted.

Outcomes and prioritization

Primary outcomes
The primary outcomes of this study are the standardized mean differences (SMDs) of change from baseline between probiotics and placebo group, including pooled estimate of cognition, malondialdehyde (MDA), highsensitivity C-reactive protein (hs-CRP), total glutathione (GSH) and nitric oxide (NO).

Secondary outcomes
Where available, secondary outcomes for this review will include subgroups such as cognitive rating scales (MMSE versus non-MMSE), disease type (AD versus MCI), strains of flora (multiple versus sole).

Risk of bias in individual studies
An assessment of risk of bias will be incorporated into our analysis.
By assessing the quality of the studies that will be included in the meta-analysis, we can assess the strength of the body of evidence.
In particular, information relating to bias will be extracted from each study during the data extraction process.
This assessment will follow the same procedure with the data collection process where disagreements will be resolved by AGING discussion between the reviewers or with a third reviewer.
To facilitate the appraisal of possible risk of bias, paired reviewers will evaluate independently the risk of bias of included RCTs using the tool of the Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of Interventions, containing the following six criteria: random sequence generation, allocation concealment, blindness of participants and personnel, blindness of outcome assessment, incomplete outcome data, selective reporting, and other sources of bias.
Furthermore, to evaluate the risk of bias, reviewers will assess and rate each of the above items into three ratings: "low risk of bias" or "high risk of bias" or "uncertain-risk".
In particular, "low risk" indicates that further research is very unlikely to change the confidence of the estimates whereas "high risk" indicates that further research is very likely to change the estimate.
The results of the risk of bias assessment will be pooled into Revman 5.3, and generate a "summary of risk of bias assessment" table.

Data synthesis
We will use STATA software (version 12; StataCorp) to perform the statistical analyses.
The primary outcomes this study are the standardized mean differences (SMDs) of change from baseline between probiotics and placebo group.
The SMDs will be tested by a Z statistic, and a two-tailed P < 0.05 will be regarded as statistically significant.
To determine the extent of variation between the selected studies, tests of heterogeneity will be performed.
The inter-study heterogeneity was examined by chi-square (χ 2 ) statistics and I 2 statistics.
Higgins and Colleagues provided tentative benchmarks for I 2 where values below 25% might be considered as low, 50-75% as moderate and above 75% as high.
In our study, the heterogeneity among the different studies was considered high if P < 0.1 for the χ 2 statistic or I 2 > 50%
A random-effects model was used if significant heterogeneity was shown among trials.
Otherwise, the results were obtained from a fixed-effects model.
Subgroup analyses will be performed to examine the possible source of heterogeneity within these studies.

Meta-bias(es)
We will use STATA software (version 12; StataCorp) to perform sensitivity analysis and publication bias.
A sensitivity analysis will be conducted to test the reliability of the findings using the leave-one-out method, while publication bias will be assessed by Egger's test and Begg's test.



Figure 1 .
Figure 1.
PRISMA flow diagram of the literature search and abstraction process.



Figure 2 .
Figure 2. Summary of risk of bias assessment: judgments of the review authors on each risk of bias item for the included studies (n = 5).
One study was rated as "low risk of bias", and the other four were assessed as "moderate risk of bias."
No study was judged as "high risk of bias".



Figure 3 .
Figure 3. Forest plot showing the standardized mean difference (SMD) in cognitive enhancement, comparing the probiotics group versus the control group.
Weights were assigned according to the number of subjects and SD using STATA 12.
A fixed-effects model was applied to the meta-analysis.
The sizes of the data markers represent the weight of each study, and the diamond indicates the overall estimated effect.



Figure 4 .
Figure 4. Forest plot showing the effects in the probiotics group versus the control group on biomarkers of inflammation and oxidative stress.
(A) Meta-analysis of the effects of probiotics on total anti-oxidant capacity (TAC).
(B) Meta-analysis of the effects of probiotics on total glutathione (GSH).
(C) Meta-analysis of the effects of probiotics on malondialdehyde (MDA).
(D) Meta-analysis of the effects of probiotics on nitric oxide (NO).
(E) Meta-analysis of the effects of probiotics on high-sensitivity C-reactive protein (hs-CRP).
Weights were assigned according to the number of subjects and SD using STATA 12.
A random-effects model was applied to the meta-analysis of TAC, while other biomarkers used a fixed-effects model.
The sizes of data markers represent the weight of each study, and the diamonds indicate the overall estimated effect.
SMD, standardized mean difference.


[Mesh]) OR Dement*) OR mild cognitive impairment) OR MCI) OR ("Cognition"[Mesh] OR "Cognition Disorders"[Mesh])) OR ("Memory"[Mesh] OR "Memory Disorders"[Mesh])) OR "Cognitive Dysfunction"[Mesh]) OR cognitive defect) OR Mental capacity) OR Cognitive) OR cognitive performance) OR cognitive impair*) OR cognitive decline*) OR cognitive fail*)) AND ("Placebos"[Mesh])


funnel plot and test adj.
Kendall's Score (P-Q) = 2 Std.
Dev. of Score = 4.08 Number of Studies = 5 z = 0.49 Pr > |z| = 0.624 z = 0.24 (continuity corrected) Pr > |z| = 0.806 (continuity corrected)


"Alzheimer Disease"[Mesh]) OR Alzheimer*) OR AD) OR "Dementia"[Mesh]) OR Dement*) OR mild cognitive impairment) OR MCI) OR ("Cognition"[Mesh] OR "Cognition Disorders"[Mesh])) OR ("Memory"[Mesh] OR "Memory Disorders"[Mesh])) OR "Cognitive Dysfunction"[Mesh]) OR cognitive defect) OR Mental capacity) OR Cognitive) OR cognitive performance) OR cognitive impair*) OR cognitive decline*) OR cognitive fail*)) AND ("Placebos"[Mesh]) AND



Table 1 . Main characteristics of the included studies.


PRO, probiotics group; CON, control group; CFU, colony-forming units; AD, Alzheimer's disease; MCI, mild cognitive impairment; NINCDS-ADRDA criteria, National Institute of Neurological and Communicative Disorders and Stroke (NINCDS) and the Alzheimer's Disease and Related Disorders Association (ADRDA); MMSE, Mini-Mental State Examination; RBANS, Repeatable Battery for the Assessment of Neuropsychological Status; TAC, total anti-oxidant capacity; GSH, total glutathione; MDA, malondialdehyde; hs-CRP, high-sensitivity C-reactive protein; NO, nitric oxide; DSM-5, Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th edition; VLT, verbal learning test; ACPT, auditory continuous performance test; DST, digit span test; DW2009, Lactobacillus plantarum C29-fermented soybean.



Table 2 . Summary of meta-analysis and subgroup analyses on cognition. Outcome or Subgroup No. of trials Participants Estimated Effect Test of heterogeneity P 2 P 1 I 2 (%)



Table 3 . Components of the probiotics in each RCTs.



Search results: 111 items Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials (CENTRAL) Search strategy:


OR 'controlled clinical test' OR 'controlled clinical trial' OR rct OR random* OR control* OR trial*) AND 'human'/de AND ([adult]/lim OR [aged]/lim OR [middle aged]/lim OR [very elderly]/lim OR [young adult]/lim)