PHF-Core Tau as the Potential Initiating Event for Tau Pathology in Alzheimer’s Disease
Worldwide, around 50 million people have dementia.
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the most common type of dementia and one of the major causes of disability and dependency among the elderly worldwide.
Clinically, AD is characterized by impaired memory accompanied by other deficiencies in the cognitive domain.
Neuritic plaques (NPs) and neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs) are histopathological lesions that define brains with AD.
NFTs consist of abundant intracellular paired helical filaments (PHFs) whose main constituent is tau protein.
Tau undergoes posttranslational changes including hyperphosphorylation and truncation, both of which favor conformational changes in the protein.
The sequential pathological processing of tau is illustrated with the following specific markers: pT231, TG3, AT8, AT100, and Alz50.
Two proteolysis sites for tau have been described-truncation at glutamate 391 and at aspartate 421-and which can be demonstrated by reactivity with the antibodies 423 and TauC-3, respectively.
In this review, we describe the molecular changes in tau protein as pre-NFTs progress to extracellular NFTs and during which the formation of a minimal nucleus of the filament, as the PHF core, occurs.
We also analyzed the PHF core as the initiator of PHFs and tau phosphorylation as a protective neuronal mechanism against the assembly of the PHF core.

INTRODUCTION
The elderly population is increasing globally, and this leads to the increased prevalence of neurodegenerative diseases typical of this age group.
Moderate and severe Alzheimer's disease (AD) can be clinically diagnosed with a high degree of certainty.
However, at a preclinical or early stage, symptoms shared with other neurodegenerative diseases make the diagnosis of AD difficult.
Clinically, AD is characterized by progressive memory loss and impaired cognitive functions (judgment, behavior, and language).
Neuritic plaques (NPs) (Figure
At a macroscopic level, decreases in brain size (Figures
A substantial increase in ventricular volume and significant atrophy in the brain convolutions and the hippocampus are also observed (Figure
NFTs are associated with neuronal death in AD.
They consist of abundant intracellular paired helical filaments (PHFs) whose main constituent is tau protein.
To aggregate into PHFs, tau dissociates from microtubules, an event favored by specific modifications
In this review, we discuss the posttranslational mechanisms of the phosphorylation and truncation of tau protein that are associated with the formation of PHFs.
We conclude from our review that pharmacological therapy for AD should not be directed against phosphorylated tau.

NEURITIC PLAQUES
Neuritic plaques are made up of soluble or insoluble (Figure
NPs are bordered by filiform structures that are the dystrophic neurites, which are part of the dendrites and axons of neurons
Aβ is formed from the proteolytic processing of a transmembrane protein called the amyloid precursor protein (APP)
In AD, there is a reduction in the size of the brain associated with neuronal death caused by neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs).
The ventricles (v) and the grooves between the convolutions widen, and there is a considerable reduction in the thickness of the gray matter (large arrow) and white matter (small arrow).
APP can be processed in two ways: one physiological or nonamyloidogenic and the other pathological or amyloidogenic.
In the non-amyloidogenic pathway, APP is cleaved by α-secretase in its N-terminal ectodomain (sAPPα), leaving the C-terminal α-CTF fragment anchored in the membrane.
Subsequently, α-CTF is cut by the action of γ-secretase, giving rise to fragments p3 and AICD (APP intracellular domain).
In the amyloidogenic pathway, β-secretase initiates APP proteolysis by cutting the ectodomain called sAPPβ (soluble peptide APPβ).
The membrane-anchored fragment or β-CTF is subsequently cut by γ-secretase, generating Aβ.
While Aβ peptides 1-40 and 1-42 are the main constituents of the NPs, Aβ1-42 is the first to be deposited and has greater ease of adding and polymerizing under physiological conditions
Aβ undergoes post-translational modifications such as oxidation, phosphorylation, glycosylation, pyroglutamination, isomerization, or racemization.
These modifications may favor Aβ polymerization, toxicity, and inflammatory activity observed in cases of AD

NEUROFIBRILLARY TANGLES
The presence of NFTs in the hippocampus follows a stereotyped pattern described in six stages
In stages I and II, NFTs are observed in the transentorhinal cortex and the adjacent area of the entorhinal cortex II.
They are considered the preclinical stages in the absence of clinical symptoms.
In stages III and IV, NFTs have invaded mostly the entorhinal cortex II, subiculum, and CA1.
At these stages, the first clinical symptoms, or memory loss, begin.
Stages V and VI are characterized by a complete invasion of the hippocampus, layer IV of the entorhinal cortex, and the neocortex.
These latter stages correspond to an advanced phase of AD.
This pathological progression is important in the postmortem diagnosis of AD and characterization of the stages in its development.

TAU PROTEIN
Tau protein belongs to the family of microtubule-associated proteins (MAPs)
In humans, tau is encoded by a single-copy gene located on chromosome 17q21.3
This gene has 16 exons, of which exons 2, 3, 4A, 6, 8, 10, and 14 can be alternatively spliced (Figure
This processing generates six isoforms of tau in the central nervous system (CNS), ranging from 352 to 441 amino acids in length
Structurally, the tau molecule is highly elastic, without secondary structure
It presents two domains: an amino terminal domain named "projection domain, " composed of an acidic region and a proline-rich region.
The carboxyterminal domain consists of the "microtubule-binding domain, " which contains three (3R) or four tandem repeats (4R) of 31 or 32 amino acids and a C-terminal tail.
The additional repeat region is encoded by exon 10.
It is the repeat domain of tau that is vital for its ability to polymerize into filaments, and it is highly sensitive to phosphorylation
The tau isoforms differ in the presence of N-terminal inserts (0, 1, or 2) and the number of C-terminal repeats (3R or 4R).
During the fetal and early developmental stages, 3R tau isoforms are predominant, whereas both the 3R and 4R isoforms can be found in adult brains
The 4R isoform is about 40-fold more efficient at binding microtubules than the 3R isoform.
Thus, the 3R tau would allow greater cytoskeletal plasticity in the growing immature neurons of the fetal brain
It has been shown that the 4R/3R ratio in normal and AD brains are 1:1 and approximately 2:1, respectively
Alternative splicing of exon 10, which impacts on the expression of the 3R and 4R isoforms, could be related to the pathogenesis of tauopathies
It has been demonstrated that the  presence of these isoforms differs according to the type of tau deposit and corresponds to the morphological structure of NFTs
For example, AD is characterized by 95% PHFs and 5% straight filaments (SFs), whereas in Pick's disease the filaments are predominantly SFs.
Tau-positive neurons, which exhibit diffuse cytoplasmic tau without apparent fibrillary structures (pre-tangle neurons), appear to be 3R-negative/4Rpositive.
Intracellular NFTs with typical fibrillary structures contain equal amounts of 3R and 4R isoforms.
Structures that are 3R-positive/4R-negative would correspond to extracellular ghost tangles.
3R tau-positive lesions are abundant in the areas in which tau deposition begins early and increase with disease progression
In contrast, 4R tau-positive lesions appear in the regions in which tau deposition starts later.
In this sense, an orchestrated regulation would change the tau isoform as the AD progresses
It remains to be clarified how the synthesis of the different isoforms is regulated and exactly how the 3R and 4R tau isoforms affect the progression of AD.

POSTTRANSLATIONAL MODIFICATIONS INVOLVED IN THE GENESIS OF PHFs
Tau protein undergoes a number of posttranslational modifications: phosphorylation, truncation, acetylation, methylation, glycosylation, nitration, glycation, and SUMOylation.
The hyperphosphorylation and truncation of tau have been extensively studied in relation to the genesis of PHFs.

Tau Hyperphosphorylation
The concentration of phosphorylated tau is increased by two to threefold in AD compared with healthy controls
Tau protein has 85 feasible phosphorylation sites: 45 serine, 35 threonine, and five tyrosine residues.
Of these, 30 sites appear to be abnormally phosphorylated (Figure
Phosphorylation causes tau to lose affinity for β-tubulin, microtubule depolymerization, and pathological aggregation
Phosphorylation of the serine residues 235, 262, 293, 324, and 356 favors detachment of tau from tubulin
The main kinases involved in this process are the glycogen synthase kinase 3 beta (GSK-3β), cell division protein kinase 5 (CDK5), AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK), protein kinase A
The participation of these enzymes in neurodegeneration, however, remains to be established
The set of these two regional conformational changes favors the folding of the N-portion, causing the regional conformational change recognized by the Alz-50 antibody (epitopes 2-10 and 312-322) (F).
(G) In pre-neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs), there is a high activity of caspase-3, which acts once the tau protein is phosphorylated in pT231.

Tau Truncation
affinity for NFTs and dystrophic neurites
Meanwhile,
In contrast, the minimal nucleus, or PHF core, of the proteaseresistant filaments
This PHF core consists of a fragment of the tau protein with 92-95 amino acids, ending at glutamate 391 (Glu-391).
It is made up of three and a half tau domains, phase-shifted with respect to the tandem repeat domains, and is characterized by truncation at Glu-391 and, being highly insoluble, highly resistant to degradation by either formic acid or pronase
Isolation and subsequent characterization of the PHF core showed it to have a C-shaped sub-domain repeating within a helical structure
Recently, the molecular structure of these C-shaped sub-domains of the PHF core has been established by cryo-electron microscopy
It has been observed in vitro that the PHF-core tau is able to form PHFs
In AD brains, the PHF core co-locates with intact tau and phosphorylated tau, from pre-NFTs to extracellular NFTs
This structure is found in the different stages of the pathological processing of tau (intact, phosphorylated, and tau with conformational changes).
It has been suggested that the PHF core favors the capture of intact phosphorylated tau molecules, preventing the neuron from perceiving the truncation in Glu-391 and its apoptosis

CONFORMATIONAL CHANGES OF THE TAU PROTEIN

Regional Conformational Changes
Posttranslational pathological processing of the tau protein includes regional conformational changes dependent on phosphorylation
Some regional conformational changes are characterized by phosphorylated amino acid residues.
One of these conformational changes results from phosphorylation at position threonine 231 (Thr-231) and serine 235 (Ser-235), recognized by the TG-3 antibody
Meanwhile, the AT100 antibody also recognizes a regional conformational change dependent on the phosphorylation of amino acid residues 202 and 205 and, additionally, 212 and 214.
Previous studies, using recombinant tau, determined that the phosphorylation of residues 202 and 205 (recognized by the AT8 antibody) occurs before the phosphorylation of amino acids 212 and 214.
In contrast, if amino acids 212 and 214 are phosphorylated first, no regional conformational change occurs, and AT100 shows no reactivity
It has been observed that the epitopes recognized by the  antibody are very stable during the evolution of the NFT, similar to pT396 (phospho-tau at amino acid 396), because they are closer to the contiguous portion of the PHF core.

Structural Conformational Changes
There is a structural conformational change of tau that depends on an intact amino terminal (amino acids 2-10), and the third repeat .
This conformation can be seen using Alz50, an antibody that has been associated with the initial stage of the pathological processing of tau

SEQUENCE OF MOLECULAR EVENTS DURING THE AGGREGATION OF TAU PROTEIN IN PHF FORMATION
Pathological aggregation of the tau protein follows a series of structural steps ranging from the formation of a pre-NFT to the formation of an extracellular NFT (Figures
The pre-NFT, characterized by a diffuse granular form in the cytoplasm (Figure
This aggregation has no affinity for the TR dye as it is an assembly marker.
The next stage is characterized by the presence of small dense aggregates of tau or small tangles (Figure
These small packages converge and form a trabecula in the neuronal soma (Figure
This structure fills the neuronal body, forming an intracellular NFT, which displaces the cell nucleus from its original central position toward the periphery (Figure
Finally, these filaments are exposed as extracellular NFTs, which is only detected using the TR dye and the antibody 423 (truncation in Glu-391).
This stage is characterized by a loose fibrillar structure in which the cell membrane and the nucleus have been lost (Figure
At a molecular level, late events can be seen in NFTs, such as a structural conformational change or truncation in Asp-421 and Glu-391.
Truncation at Asp-421 occurs after the conformational change recognized by the antibody Alz-50 (when the tau protein is perfectly assembled in the filament) and culminates with the presence of truncation at
However, this model does not take into account of phosphorylation state.
The molecular events associated with tau phosphorylation follow a well-defined order (Figure
However, it is difficult to follow the phosphorylation of tau in the NFTs since, in these structures, the tau protein is found simultaneously in different states of expression and aggregation.
Thus, the earliest events are studied in the pre-NFTs (Figure
It has been suggested that the first step is the phosphorylation of the tau protein at Thr-231 (Figure
Subsequently, amino acid residues 202 and 205 become phosphorylated (epitopes recognized by the AT8 antibody) (Figure
This modification involves a second phase of phosphorylation at amino acids 212-214 and a second regional conformational change identified by the AT100 antibody (Figure
These changes lead to a structural conformational change recognized by the Alz50 antibody (Figure
The truncation at Asp-421 is observed immediately after phosphorylation at
This suggests that the presence of the truncated tau protein at Asp-421 favors filament polymerization

TEMPLATE TAU PROTEIN IN PHF
We have been investigating the relationship between the different species of phosphorylated and truncated tau protein and the mechanism whereby tau assembles into insoluble and stable PHFs over a period of several years.
We have been analyzing pre-tangle cells (Figure
On the basis of our morphomolecular analysis, we propose the following steps in PHF assembly (Figure
(1) The presence of a PHF core (297-391) is a highly toxic truncated tau species.
(2) A specific cascade of phosphorylation on the N-terminus of the tau protein (Figure
(3) Truncation of the C-terminus by caspase-3.
(4) Aggregation and oligomerization of all species of tau.
(5) Assembly of tau protein in PHFs.
The first event that occurs in the formation of PHFs, and with it the NFTs, would be represented by the appearance (via an unknown origin) of subunits of the PHF core (Figure
The toxicity of the truncated tau (92-95 amino acids) is associated with the high affinity of the intact tau and the phosphorylated tau to this small fragment (Figure
This would be reflected by the hyperphosphorylation of the tau molecule in a failed attempt to hide the PHF core and avoid the kidnapping of the molecules of intact tau.
Unfortunately, in AD, the protective mechanism that might be involved in phosphorylated tau protein would only favor that there are more molecules available for its sequestration and the formation of PHF, which represents, finally, a polymer made up of fragments of tau in an intracellular NFT (Figure
In extracellular NFTs, all phosphorylation is lost as a result of proteolysis, during which the PHF core becomes exposed (Figure
There are findings suggesting that phosphorylation of the tau protein may have a protective role and be non-toxic
This implies that NFTs serve as a protective structure.

FUTURE STUDY OF TAU PROTEIN
The complete functions of the tau protein remain to be elucidated.
Tau is a stabilizing microtubule-associated protein.
In the nucleus, this protein protects the DNA in situations of cellular stress; in the nucleolus, it favors the nucleolar function
Tau has been previously observed in non-neuronal organs such as the heart, skeletal muscle, lung, or skin and in different states of non-pathological phosphorylation
This suggests that tau phosphorylation may be involved in functions yet to be established.
Therapeutic approaches to prevent tau phosphorylation could cause problems in these organs.
Truncation at Glu-391 appears to be a good differential marker between AD and other neurodegenerative pathologies.

CONCLUSION
The aggregation and polymerization of the tau protein has been suggested to be a response to pathological events that occur early in neurons and the brain.
Tau phosphorylation and NFT formation seem to act as a protective event against the minimal nucleus of the filament (PHF core), which functions as a prion and is highly toxic.
Taking into account that NFTs are closely correlated with the cognitive deterioration of patients, it is vitally important to look for other proteins that can define the early onset of AD.
Whereas the development of drugs directed against the phosphorylation of the tau protein may involve certain risks, targeting the aggregation of tau proteins with compounds that fail to affect the normal association of tau with microtubules offers another therapeutic target
Continued donation of tissue for research will be of utmost importance since it will allow a better understanding of these pathological events and, ultimately, bring hope of discovering effective methods to both diagnose and cure AD.



FIGURE 1 |
FIGURE 1 | Histopathological lesions in Alzheimer's disease (AD) brain.
(A) Amyloid plaque stained using the BAM10 antibody (red channel), with associated dystrophic neurites (arrows), and nuclei stained with To-Pro (blue).
(B-F) Evolution of the aggregation of the tau protein recognized by different antibodies directed against phosphorylated and truncated tau proteins.
(B) Pre-neurofibrillary tangle (NFT) characterized by a diffuse granular staining in the neuronal soma (TauC-3, green channel; 423, red channel, arrows).
Perinuclear immunoreactivity is observed.
Lipofuscin is autofluorescent in the red channel (asterisk).
(C) Small tangles (bead-like structures, arrows) visualized using two antibodies directed against the phosphorylated tau protein (pT231, green channel; CP13, red channel).
(D,E) NFTs at different stages of aggregation.
(D) NFT with a fibrillar structure in the form of a trabecula around the nucleus (arrows).
(E) Compact NFT, where the PHFs have invaded the entire soma and displaced the nucleus from its original position, and visualised using pT231, which recognises a phospho-epitope within the mid domain (DA9).
(F) Extracellular NFTs, the last stage of aggregation of the tau protein.
In the neuronal soma, this structure is much looser, lacking a cell membrane and a nucleus.
It consists of the minimum core of the filament (PHF core) and reacts with antibody 423, which recognizes truncation at Glu-391 (green channel) and phospho-tau S396 (red channel).
Images obtained with a Leica SP8 confocal microscope.



FIGURE 2 |
FIGURE 2 | Double fluorescent staining of a case with Alzheimer's disease.
Amyloid plaque (A) and neurofibrillary tangle (NFT) (B) evidenced by the dye thioflavin S (TS, green channel) and thiazine red (TR, red channel).
Both markers co-locate, giving a yellow color in the merged channel.
TS and TR demonstrate the fibrillar state with the β-folded conformation of the amyloid β-peptide (Aβ) and the tau protein assembled into filaments.
Scale bar (A) 20 µm, (B) 10 µm.
Images obtained with a Leica SP8 confocal microscope.



FIGURE 3 |
FIGURE 3 | Coronal section of the brain.
(A) Control.
(B) Alzheimer's disease (AD).
Macroscopic morphological changes are observed.In AD, there is a reduction in the size of the brain associated with neuronal death caused by neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs).
The ventricles (v) and the grooves between the convolutions widen, and there is a considerable reduction in the thickness of the gray matter (large arrow) and white matter (small arrow).



FIGURE 4 |
FIGURE 4 | Immunofluorescence of amyloid plaques.
(A) Amyloid β-peptide (Aβ) deposit recognized by thiazine red (TR, red color), which is bordered by glial cells (GFAP, blue color) and by dystrophic neurites, recognized by the antibody that reacts with phosphorylated tau protein (TG-3, green color).
(B) Amyloid plaque is recognized by the TR dye (red color).
At the periphery, microglial cells are recognized by the Iba-1 antibody (green color) and the cell nuclei with To-Pro (blue color).
Images obtained with a Leica SP8 confocal microscope.



FIGURE 5 |
FIGURE 5 | Isoforms of the tau protein.
The tau protein gene is located on the long arm of chromosome 17, which generates six isoforms by alternative processing.
The longest isoform in the CNS is 441 amino acids and the shortest is 352 amino acids.
The length depends on the presence/absence of inserts in the amino terminal portion and the presence of three or four repeated domains.


FIGURE 6 | Scheme of the stages of molecular tau processing.
(A) Intact tau molecule shown.
(B) On intact tau protein occurs the first phosphorylation in Thr231.
This phosphorylation is decisive for the first conformational change evidenced by the TG-3 antibody (C).
(D) The amino acids 202 and 205 (AT8) are phosphorylated, which favors the phosphorylation in amino acids 212 and 214 (AT100).
It generates the second pathological conformational change in tau (E).The set of these two regional conformational changes favors the folding of the N-portion, causing the regional conformational change recognized by the Alz-50 antibody (epitopes 2-10 and 312-322) (F).
(G) In pre-neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs), there is a high activity of caspase-3, which acts once the tau protein is phosphorylated in pT231.



FIGURE 7 |
FIGURE 7 | Model for the assembly and processing of tau proteins in paired helical filaments (PHFs).
Neurons that have not yet been affected express the intact tau protein associated mainly with microtubules in axons.
Braak stages I-IV are the early stages prior to fibrillary inclusions.
Stages I and II represent the presence of a PHF core (circa 95-amino acid residue fragment).
Stage III is characterized by the cytoplasmic aggregation of the tau molecules, favored by the nuclear fragments of tau.
PHFs begin their formation with intact and tau molecules phosphorylated in the N-terminus.
This stage corresponds to the presence of the granular tau protein in the neuronal cytoplasm seen by confocal microscopy.
The PHF core is masked by intact and phosphorylated tau molecules.
In stage IV, the truncation between the amino acids Asp-421/Ser-422 appears.
This truncation is observed from the granular stages.
In stage V, intracellular PHFs and fibrils are initiated, phosphorylated in both their N-and C-terminal portions, which are recognized with antibody 423 (Glu-391 truncation).
The fibrillar nature is confirmed by the affinity of the thiazine red (TR) dye in stage VI.
The N-terminal portions are removed.
As the neurofibrillary tangle (NFT) becomes extracellular, the structures are highly insoluble and are exclusively immunoreactive with antibody 423, with only occasional epitopes of pS396 available.