Altered Directed Functional Connectivity of the Hippocampus in Mild Cognitive Impairment and Alzheimer’s Disease: A Resting-State fMRI Study
The hippocampus is generally reported as one of the regions most impacted by Alzheimer's disease (AD) and is closely associated with memory function and orientation.
Undirected functional connectivity (FC) alterations occur in patients with mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and AD, and these alterations have been the subject of many studies.
However, abnormal patterns of directed FC remain poorly understood.
In this study, to identify changes in directed FC between the hippocampus and other brain regions, Granger causality analysis (GCA) based on voxels was applied to resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging (rs-fMRI) data from 29 AD, 65 MCI, and 30 normal control (NC) subjects.
The results showed significant differences in the patterns of directed FC among the three groups.
There were fewer brain regions showing changes in directed FC with the hippocampus in the MCI group than the NC group, and these regions were mainly located in the temporal lobe, frontal lobe, and cingulate cortex.
However, regarding the abnormalities in directed FC in the AD group, the number of affected voxels was greater, the size of the clusters was larger, and the distribution was wider.
Most of the abnormal connections were unidirectional and showed hemispheric asymmetry.
In addition, we also investigated the correlations between the abnormal directional FCs and cognitive and clinical measurement scores in the three groups and found that some of them were significantly correlated.
This study revealed abnormalities in the transmission and reception of information in the hippocampus of MCI and AD patients and offer insight into the neurophysiological mechanisms underlying MCI and AD.

INTRODUCTION
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a common and progressive neurodegenerative disorder of the nervous system occurring in elderly individuals
AD is the most common form of dementia, which is characterized by memory impairment and cognitive function decline.
Mild cognitive impairment (MCI) is generally considered an intermediate disease state between normal aging and AD and is characterized by significant cognitive impairment in the absence of dementia.
MCI patients have a high risk of transitioning to AD.
Previous studies have shown that approximately 10-15% of MCI patients per year progress to AD, whereas only 1-2% of cognitively normal aged people develop AD
Dementia not only significantly affects the quality of life of elderly individuals but also entails heavy financial and psychological burdens for the family and society.
Unlike AD, the irreversible pathophysiological changes in dementia can be delayed or prevented with early diagnosis and treatment.
Therefore, it is crucial to develop accurate diagnostic methods and to study the pathological process underlying the transition from MCI to AD.
The hippocampus is generally considered one of the earliest affected brain regions in patients with AD
Various neuroimaging studies have demonstrated abnormal structure and function of the hippocampus in patients with AD and MCI.
β-Amyloid abnormalities and tau pathology in the preclinical stages of AD initially appear in the hippocampus
Longitudinal studies have shown significant volume loss in the hippocampus during the progression of AD, and there is a direct relationship with cognitive decline
Altered functional connectivity (FC) of the hippocampus in patients with MCI and AD has attracted increasing attention from researchers.
The results indicated that the intrinsic connectivity between the hippocampus and precuneus was significantly reduced, and hippocampal glucose metabolism was increased in the patient groups.
Functional connectivity only reflects the interactions between different brain regions, but effective connectivity is able to explore the direction and intensity of information flow in the interacting brain regions and offers a better understanding of the interaction patterns of different brain regions.
The most common methods for studying effective connectivity include structural equation models (SEMs), dynamic causal modeling (DCM), and Granger causality analysis (GCA).
The SEMs and DCM are based on theoretical assumptions and specify hypotheses in terms of different models or architectures
Unlike SEMs and DCM, GCA does not require theoretical assumptions about the existence and direction of influence between any two regions.
The need for theoretical assumptions also means that SEMs and DCM may lead to erroneous conclusions due to any misspecification.
Additionally, the models required for SEMs and DCM cannot represent networks with large numbers of nodes
Numerous studies have demonstrated the effectiveness of measuring the directed connectivity of fMRI time series with GCA
Those researchers found that the directed connections between areas in the four networks were significantly altered in aMCI patients compared with healthy controls.
An accuracy of 93.3% was eventually achieved.
A large number of studies have shown that FC between the hippocampus and other brain regions was abnormal in MCI and AD patients, and these abnormalities might be associated with the pathology of MCI and AD.
However, little research has examined the abnormal directed connectivity of the hippocampus in MCI and AD patients, and therefore, the alterations in the directed connectivity patterns of the hippocampus in MCI and AD patients are largely unknown.
In the current study, to identify the directed connectivity changes in the brain related to AD progression, we applied GCA to explore the resting-state-directed connectivity of the hippocampus in MCI and AD patients.
We used the hippocampus as the seed region and detected directed FC between the hippocampus and other brain regions using voxel wise GCA.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Participants
All of the data used in this study were obtained from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) database 1 .
The purpose of the ADNI is to study the pathogenesis and prevention of AD by analyzing a variety of types of medical imaging data.
The rs-fMRI data of 29 patients with AD (average age = 72.33 years; 18 females), 65 patients with MCI (average age = 71.8
years; 29 females), and 30 NC subjects (average age = 74.18
years; 19 females) (Table
All participants were right-handed and had no history of neurological or psychiatric disorders.
The patients with AD had a Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) score of 14-26, a Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR) of 0.5 or 1.0 and met the National Institute of Neurological and Communicative Disorders and Stroke and the Alzheimer's Disease and Related Disorders Association (NINCDS/ADRDA) criteria for probable AD.
The MCI patients had MMSE scores of 23-30 and CDR scores of 0.5.
The NC subjects were non-depressed, non-MCI, and nondemented and had MMSE scores of 24-30 and CDR scores of 0. To assess test-retest reliability, 19 patients with AD, 37 patients with MCI, and 19 NC subjects were scanned twice.
The mean interval between two scans was 3 months.

Data Acquisition and Preprocessing
All subjects underwent rs-fMRI in a 3T MR scanner (Siemens Trio 3-Tesla scanner, Siemens, Erlangen, Germany).
During the scan, participants were asked to relax with their eyes closed but not to fall asleep
Each scan consisted of 140 contiguous EPI functional volumes with the scan parameters set as follows: slice number = 48, slice thickness = 3.3 mm, repetition time (TR) = 3,000 ms, echo time (TE) = 30 ms, field of view = 192 × 192 mm, matrix = 64 × 64 mm, and flip angle = 80 • .
Preprocessing of the rs-fMRI data was performed using the Data Processing Assistant for Resting-State fMRI (DPARSF) toolbox
The preprocessing steps were applied as follows: the first 10 volumes of the time series data were discarded due to signal equilibrium and allow the participants to adapt to the scanning noise; slice timing was applied to compensate for the time difference between different slices in each volume; realignment for head movement compensation was applied using a six-parameter rigid-body spatial transformation; all images were normalized into the Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI) space; the resulting images were detrended to reduce the effects of low-frequency drift, smoothed using a Gaussian filter with FWHM = 4 mm, and bandpass filtered (0.01-0.08 Hz) to remove high frequency physiological noise; and finally, a Friston-24 parameter and parameters for the global mean signal, cerebrospinal fluid signal, and white matter signal were regressed out as nuisance covariates for the subsequent analysis

Definition of Seed Regions
In the rs-fMRI data analysis for each individual, the bilateral hippocampal ROIs were defined using free software in the rs-fMRI data analysis toolkit REST 3 .
The ROIs were extracted from the Anatomical Automatic Labeling (AAL) template
For each seed region, the BOLD time series of the voxels within the seed region were averaged to generate the reference time series for this seed region (Figure
2

Directed Brain Functional Connectivity
Multivariate GCA was applied to each voxel in the whole brain to obtain the directed brain FC from the seed points to other voxels in the whole brain and the reverse impact intensities from other voxels in the whole brain to the seed points.
The signed-path multivariate Granger causality coefficients of each pair of time series were calculated using REST-GCA software
The bivariate Granger causality of two time series X(t) and Y(t) can be formulated by a vector autoregressive model
(1)
where p is the model order, i.e., the maximum number of lagged

Statistical Analysis
Demographic and clinical data were analyzed using the Statistical Package for Social Sciences (SPSS 20.0) software.
Continuous variables are presented as the means and standard deviations (SD).
Categorical data are presented as numbers and percentages.
Group differences in sex were assessed with a two-tailed Pearson chi-square test, and the remaining variables were tested using one-way analyses of variance (ANOVA) with group (NC, MCI, AD) as the between-subjects factor.
All p-values of <0.05 were considered statistically significant.
The GCA FC maps were analyzed based on voxel wise comparisons across the whole brain, which was accomplished using the Statistical Analysis function in the REST software.
The calculated intensity values were normalized (Fisher z-transformation), and two-sample t-tests were applied to identify regions showing significant differences in directed FC between any two groups with age and sex removed as covariates.
The threshold for significant differences between groups was set to p < 0.05 with a minimum cluster size of 85 contiguous voxels
Spearman's correlation was used to assess the relationship between the GCA coefficients for the abnormal directional connections and MMSE, FAQ, and CDR in the three groups using SPSS 20.0 software.

Test-Retest Reliability
Consistent with previous research
The ICC values were calculated according to the following equation:
where MS λ is the between-subject mean square, MS ε is the residual mean square, MS π is the between-scan mean square, n is the number of subjects, and k is the number of repeated observations per subject.
Here, ICC values close to 1 indicate perfect agreement between the two scans, while ICC values close to 0 (or negative) indicate poor or no agreement.
In this study, we used a standard scale to classify reliability

RESULTS

Demographic and Clinical Data
The demographic and clinical data for each group are presented in Table
No significant differences were observed in sex or age among the three groups (p > 0.05).
However, the MMSE, CDR, and FAQ scores were significantly different (p < 0.001, Bonferroni correction) among the three groups.

Altered Hippocampal Directed Functional Connectivity: Pairwise Comparisons
We present the average GCA coefficients for the abnormal directional connections between the hippocampus and the whole brain within each group (NC, MCI, and AD).
The results are shown in Supplementary Tables
The pairwise comparisons of differences in hippocampal connectivity were obtained using the REST two-sample t-tests.
In the directed FC from the left hippocampus to the whole brain, the MCI group, compared with the NC group, showed significantly decreased connectivity to the right inferior temporal gyrus, right middle temporal gyrus, right parahippocampal gyrus, and part of the prefrontal cortex.
Enhanced connectivity was detected from the left hippocampus to the left inferior temporal gyrus, left anterior cingulate and paracingulate gyri, and right inferior frontal gyrus, triangular portion (Figure
Compared with the NC group, the AD group showed strengthened connectivity from the left hippocampus to the left inferior temporal gyrus and left precuneus and weakened connectivity from the left hippocampus to the right temporal pole: superior temporal gyrus, right caudate nucleus, right posterior cingulate gyrus, and right superior frontal gyrus (Figure
The difference focuses primarily on the connectivity from the left hippocampus to other brain regions.
The connectivity from the left hippocampus to the right middle temporal gyrus and the right cerebellum was decreased, whereas the left inferior temporal gyrus, left anterior cingulate and paracingulate gyri, and the middle frontal gyrus all showed enhanced directed FC to the left hippocampus to varying degrees.
Figure
The connectivity from the left hippocampus to the left inferior temporal gyrus was demonstrated to be enhanced in the AD group, which was similar to the findings in the MCI group.
However, the differences mainly occurred in the connectivity from other brain regions to the left hippocampus.
Figure
A large number of abnormal connections were identified, but this analysis mostly showed decreased directed connectivity.
Figure
There were few abnormal connections.
Figure
The differences are primarily found in the connectivity from the right hippocampus to other brain regions.
Figure
A large number of abnormal connections were noted, but these were mainly concentrated in regions that received information from the right hippocampus.
The red line denotes that the GCA value in the former group was higher than the latter group, and the blue line denotes that the GCA value in the former group was lower than the latter group.
The solid line indicates the directed functional connectivity from the hippocampus to other brain regions, and the dashed line indicates the directed functional connectivity from other brain regions to the hippocampus.

Relationships Between the Abnormal Directional Connections and Cognitive and Clinical Measurements
Simultaneously, in order to explore the potential relationship between the abnormal directional connections and cognitive and clinical measurements, we found some significant correlations between the GCA coefficients for the abnormal directional connections and MMSE, CDR, and FAQ in the three groups.
The results are shown in Supplementary Tables
For example, the GCA coefficients from the left hippocampus to left inferior temporal gyrus (r = -0.214,
p = 0.045) and to left precuneus (r = -0.300,
p = 0.025) were negatively correlated with MMSE in the three groups, and the GCA coefficient from the left hippocampus to left anterior cingulate and paracingulate gyri was positively correlated with CDR (r = 0.286, p = 0.006) and FAQ (r = 0.301, p = 0.004) in NC and MCI groups.
Moreover, the GCA coefficients from the right hippocampus to right middle frontal gyrus, from right superior frontal gyrus to the left hippocampus, and from left middle frontal gyrus to the right hippocampus were significantly correlated with MMSE, CDR, and FAQ in NC and AD groups (showed in Supplementary Tables

Test-Retest Reliability of the Abnormal Directional Connections Between the Three Groups
To further understand the reliability of the GCA differences among the three groups, we calculated the ICC values of the abnormal directional connections among the three groups and found fair average reliability of the abnormal directional connections (showed in Supplementary Figures
The red line denotes that the GCA value in the former group was higher than the latter group, and the blue line denotes that the GCA value in the former group was lower than the latter group.
The solid line indicates the directed functional connectivity from the hippocampus to other brain regions, and the dashed line indicates the directed functional connectivity from other brain regions to the hippocampus.
For instance, our study found that the interconnection between the left hippocampus and inferior temporal gyrus showed good reliability in NC and MCI groups.
Moreover, the directional FC from the left hippocampus to right middle temporal gyrus, left anterior cingulate and paracingulate gyri, left middle frontal gyrus, right superior frontal gyrus, and right inferior frontal gyrus, triangular portion showed low to good reliability in NC and MCI groups.

DISCUSSION
In the current study, we used the hippocampus (HIP) as connective node and applied the GCA coefficient to investigate the directed relationship between the HIP and the whole brain.
The results revealed alterations in the directed FCs from the HIP to the whole brain and from the whole brain to the HIP in patients with MCI and AD.
Furthermore, significant differences among the three groups were mainly found in the temporal lobe, frontal lobe, and cingulate cortex.
Within these regions, the main brain regions showing abnormalities included ITG, right PCUN, MTG, left STG, MFG, IFG, left ACG, and right INS.
Notably, most of these differences were significantly correlated with cognitive and clinical measurements in the three groups.

Abnormal Directed Connectivity Between the HIP and the Default Mode Network
Most of the above regions belong to the DMN, which is considered responsible for episodic memory formation and attention
The DMN is thought to be primarily responsible for internally focused thought processes, such as autobiographical memory and experience of the self.
Previous studies have consistently demonstrated that the DMN is the first network to be affected in AD, and decreased DMN FC is known to occur in AD patients
Specifically, our study found the directed FCs from the left HIP to left ITG and from the right HIP to right PCUN in MCI and AD patients were stronger than NCs.
Actually, the ITG is located at the end of the ventral visual stream
Furthermore, the PCUN is also critical to visuospatial imaging, retrieval of episodic memory and information processing of self-related information
Hence, this finding may indicate that these abnormal FCs might be associated with cognitive decline and visuospatial disability in MCI and AD patients.
Notably, according to the research by
This may be related to the fact that the directed FC from left ITG to the left HIP only weakens in AD patients, and may mean that ITG have not fully atrophy during the MCI group compared to the AD group.
Comparing with NCs, the directed FC between the HIP and MTG was significantly decreased in patients.
Interestingly, the directed FC from the left HIP to right MTG was significantly decreased in MCI patients only, and the directed FC from left MTG to right HIP was significantly decreased in AD patients only.
Many studies have shown that the MTG plays an important role in language function
Consistent with these findings,
Therefore, there may exist a compensation mechanism and the influence inconsistency of left and right MTG for the language function, in the process of developing from MCI to AD.
In addition, comparing with NCs, the directed FCs from the left HIP to right PHG were significantly decreased in MCI patients, and the directed FC from the right HIP to left STG was significantly decreased in AD patients.
The PHG plays an essential role in memory generation as a bridge between the HIP and cortex
These changes might be related to the clinical manifestation of cognitive impairment in AD patients with dementia.

Abnormal Directed Connectivity Between the HIP and the Executive Control Network
The directed FCs between the HIP and selected brain regions in the executive control network (ECN), such as SFG, MFG, and IFG, were abnormal.
Consistent with our finding, a body of research has demonstrated that functional brain activity within portions of the ECN was abnormal in patients with MCI and AD
Generally, the ECN is considered responsible for the extrinsic awareness that regulates the executive functions that control and mediate cognitive processes, including working memory, reasoning, flexibility, problem solving, and planning
Specifically, the directed FCs from the left HIP to right SFG and from left MFG to the right HIP were significantly decreased in MCI and AD patients.
In fact, the SFG
Furthermore,
Evidently, these changes in connectivity might explain why AD patients increasingly suffer from disruptions in visuospatial skills and memory impairment.
Notably, the directed FC from the left HIP to right IFGtriang was significantly increased in MCI patients only, whereas the significant increase of this directed FC was observed in the opposite direction in AD patients.
This may indicate that IFGtriang has a regulatory effect on cognitive control and memory retrieval in patients with AD.

Abnormal Directed Connectivity Between the HIP and the Salience Network
As the functional module that plays a vital role in communication, social behavior, and self-awareness
The SN is a large-scale paralimbic-limbic network anchored in the anterior insula and dorsal anterior cingulate cortex, with prominent subcortical nodes in the affect and reward processing systems
These results also indicated that the effective connections between the SN and other brain regions in MCI and AD patients may be different than those in NCs.
Hence, the disruption in the SN found in this study might be associated with cognitive decline in patients with MCI and AD.
Notably, the directed FC from the left HIP to left ACG was significantly enhanced in MCI patients but obviously weakened in AD patients.
Nevertheless, the directed FC from left ACG to the HIP was visibly increased in AD patients.
These findings indicate that a compensatory mechanism is present during the development of AD pathology.
In fact, according to research by Apps M A, the ACG plays an important role in monitoring the outcomes of decisions in uncertain or volatile environments and might be an advanced control structure responsible for behavior planning and the execution of executive network functions
More interestingly, the directed FC from the HIP to right INS in AD patients showed a consistent weakening trend compared with that in NCs.
Nevertheless, directed FC from right INS to the right HIP was significantly increased in patients with AD compared to those with MCI.
These findings may be similar to the compensatory mechanism described above and may be important because the INS is usually considered to play an important role in emotional regulation and the control of body balance.
Moreover,
Hence, the unusual interaction between the HIP and INS might be one reason why patients with AD showed changes in personality and behavior, cognitive decline, and executive dysfunction.

Abnormal Directed Connectivity Between the HIP and Other Brain Regions
The current study found the directed FC from right SMA to the left HIP was increased in MCI patients.
Consistent with these results, a previous study had reported the gradual loss of the sensorimotor cortex with the progression of AD
Moreover, the directed FC from the right HIP to left PCL decreased in MCI patients, and the directed FC from right PCL to the right HIP decreased in AD patients.
These changes might explain symptoms such as apraxia and executive function in late AD.
Notably, our study showed that the directed FCs between the HIP and other brain regions in patients with MCI had been disrupted to a certain degree but that there were only abnormal connections with few brain regions.
Nevertheless, in AD patients, the mass of affected voxels was larger, the number of widely distributed brain regions was larger, and the higher levels of statistical significance than MCI patients.
These results might mean that during the transition from MCI to AD, a large number of brain regions become impaired, the directed FCs between the HIP and a large number of brain regions become disrupted, and the direction and intensity of information flow becomes altered, which might lead to clinical manifestations such as memory deficits, cognitive decline, and executive dysfunction in AD patients.
Additionally, one of the interesting findings was that the abnormal brain regions associated with the left HIP in MCI patients were primarily from the brain regions which receive information from the left HIP, whereas the abnormal brain regions associated with the left HIP in the AD patients were primarily from the brain regions which transmit information to the left HIP.
This difference might be an imaging marker for the discrimination between MCI and AD and requires further study.
Moreover, the current study showed that almost all brain regions with abnormal connectivity presented with unilateral abnormalities, with some exceptions.
The abnormal FC was asymmetric in the two hemispheres, which was consistent with previous studies

Correlations Between Abnormal Directed Connectivity and Cognitive and Clinical Measurements
We performed correlation analyses between the GCA coefficients for the abnormal directional FCs and cognitive and clinical measurements (MMSE, CDR, and FAQ).
These three cognitive and clinical measurements provide a quantitative assessment of cognitive function and are widely used
The higher the MMSE scores indicate the higher the cognitive ability; the lower functional performance is associated with higher FAQ scores, and the higher CDR scores indicate the presence of dementia.
Overall, most of these abnormal directional FCs were significantly correlated with MMSE, CDR, and FAQ.
Specifically, the directed FC from the left HIP to left ITG and MMSE were significantly negatively correlated, which indicated that the lower the MMSE, the stronger the FC.
This is also consistent with our finding that this abnormal directed FC might be associated with cognitive decline in MCI and AD patients.
Moreover, the directed FCs from the left HIP to left MFG and from the right HIP to left STG were significantly negatively correlated with CDR and FAQ in the three groups.
This is not only consistent with the results of our discussion above, but also indicates that the patient's visual working memory function is gradually decreasing.
More consistently, the directed FC from the left HIP to left ACG was significantly positively correlated with CDR and FAQ in MCI patients, and was significantly negatively correlated with CDR and FAQ in AD patients.
This indicates that the compensatory mechanism occurs in the brain during disease progression.

Limitation
A limitation of this study is that the number of subjects used to assess the test-retest reliability of the abnormal directed FC is small, which may lead to potential instability of ICC values.
In this study, we performed cross-group merging on the retest subjects and performed ICC analysis.
We found fair average reliability of the abnormal directional FCs.
Nevertheless, some abnormal directional FCs still have low reliability.
This may be due to the small number of objects and the large between-subject mean square.
The results in need for further validation with a larger dataset.

CONCLUSION
In conclusion, this study reveals significant differences in directed FC between the hippocampus and other brain regions among NC, MCI, and AD subjects, and these differences were significantly correlated with cognitive and clinical measurements.
These results might indicate patterns of alterations in the transmission and reception of information with the evolution of the disease.
The analysis of abnormal directed connectivity might provide an additional target for the prevention and treatment of AD.
Moreover, selected alterations could be reliable and used as discriminant features to classify NC, MCI, and AD groups.
These possibilities require further study.


25 indicating poor reliability; 0.25 to 0.4 indicating low reliability; 0.4 to 0.6 indicating fair reliability; 0.6 to 0.75 indicating good reliability; and 0.75 to 1.0 indicating excellent reliability.



FIGURE 1 |
FIGURE 1 | Regions of interest, including the left hippocampus and right hippocampus.



FIGURE 2 |
FIGURE 2 | Directed functional connectivity showing significant differences in the left hippocampus and whole brain pairwise comparisons.
From the left hippocampus to whole brain, panel (A) represents the directed functional connectivity showing significant differences between the MCI and NC groups, panel (B) represents the directed functional connectivity showing significant differences between the AD and NC groups, and panel (C) represents the directed functional connectivity showing significant differences between the AD and MCI groups.
From whole brain to the left hippocampus, panel (D) represents the directed functional connectivity showing significant differences between the MCI and NC groups, panel (E) represents the directed functional connectivity showing significant differences between the AD and NC groups, and panel (F) represents the directed functional connectivity showing significant differences between the AD and MCI groups.
The red/yellow-colored brain regions indicate increased GCA values between groups.
The blue/green-colored brain regions indicate decreased GCA values between groups.



FIGURE 3 |
FIGURE 3 | Directed functional connectivity showing significant differences in the right hippocampus and whole brain pairwise comparisons.
From the right hippocampus to whole brain, panel (A) represents the directed functional connectivity showing significant differences between the MCI and NC groups, panel (B) represents the directed functional connectivity showing significant differences between the AD and NC groups, and panel (C) represents the directed functional connectivity showing significant differences between the AD and MCI groups.
From whole brain to the right hippocampus, panel (D) represents the directed functional connectivity showing significant differences between the MCI and NC groups, panel (E) represents the directed functional connectivity showing significant differences between the AD and NC groups, and panel (F) represents the directed functional connectivity showing significant differences between the AD and MCI groups.
The red/yellow-colored brain regions indicate increased GCA values between groups.
The blue/green-colored brain regions indicate decreased GCA values between groups.



FIGURE 4 |
FIGURE 4 | Differences in directed functional connectivity from the left hippocampus to the whole brain and from the whole brain to the left hippocampus between each pair of groups.
Panel (A) represents the comparison between the MCI and NC groups, panel (B) represents the comparison between the AD and NC groups, and panel (C) represents the comparison between the AD and MCI groups.
The red line denotes that the GCA value in the former group was higher than the latter group, and the blue line denotes that the GCA value in the former group was lower than the latter group.
The solid line indicates the directed functional connectivity from the hippocampus to other brain regions, and the dashed line indicates the directed functional connectivity from other brain regions to the hippocampus.



FIGURE 5 |
FIGURE 5 | Differences in directed functional connectivity from the right hippocampus to the whole brain and from the whole brain to the right hippocampus between each pair of groups.
Panel (A) represents the comparison between the MCI and NC groups, panel (B) represents the comparison between the AD and NC groups, and panel (C) represents the comparison between the AD and MCI groups.
The red line denotes that the GCA value in the former group was higher than the latter group, and the blue line denotes that the GCA value in the former group was lower than the latter group.
The solid line indicates the directed functional connectivity from the hippocampus to other brain regions, and the dashed line indicates the directed functional connectivity from other brain regions to the hippocampus.



TABLE 1 |
Demographic and clinical data.
Data represent the mean ± SD.
MMSE, Mini-Mental State Examination; CDR, Clinical Dementia Rating; FAQ, functional activities questionnaire.



Table 2



TABLE 2 |
Directed functional connectivity showing significant differences in the left hippocampus and the whole brain pairwise comparisons.



TABLE 3 |
Directed functional connectivity showing significant differences in the right hippocampus and the whole brain pairwise comparisons.