Impact of the Quebec Alzheimer Plan on the detection and management of Alzheimer disease and other neurocognitive disorders in primary health care: a retrospective study
N eurocognitive disorders are a major concern world wide.
Deficiencies in cognitive evaluation and delayed diagnosis result in only half of patients' being identifed. 2
Inappropriate referral of typical cases to specialists 3 results in increased wait times for referred patients.
People with neuro cognitive disorders also experience inadequate treatment and poor quality of care, including use of potentially inappropriate medication, and poor support for their caregivers,
7]
Worldwide, 32 national and subnational plans exist.
In the last 2 decades, several Canadian provinces have developed or are developing plans, and a national dementia strategy has been proposed. 12
A particularity of the Canadian plans is that they are rooted in primary health care, which follows the recommendations of Canadian guidelines on dementia care.
The first phase of Impact of the Quebec Alzheimer Plan on the detection and management of Alzheimer disease and other
the Quebec Alzheimer Plan
A detailed description of the plan is presented in Appendix 1 (available at www.cmajopen.ca/content/7/2/E391/suppl/DC1).
A particularity of the Quebec Alzheimer Plan is that it includes an evaluation strategy.
To date, only the French and UK plans included an evaluation plan; neither focuses on pri mary health care.
0]
It is thus not clear whether plans based in pri mary health care improve the care provided to patients with neurocognitive disorders.
Our team was mandated by the Quebec Ministry of Health and Social Services to conduct an evaluation to inform a provincewide scaleup.
Our study aimed to provide an earlyphase evaluation and to determine whether the detection and management of neurocognitive dis orders among older patients in primary health care improved after implementation of the Quebec Alzheimer Plan.

Methods

Design
We used a retrospective review of independent, randomly selected patient charts before and after implementation of the Quebec Alzheimer Plan to measure the plan's impact.
We selected this design over a traditional pre-post evaluation as it mimics more closely a randomized controlled trial.
The chart review was performed in 13 of the 42 FMGs that participated in the first phase of the plan.
We selected these 13 FMGs because they were part of public health organizations, which allowed access to charts for research purposes, and they included enough patients to meet sample size requirements (Appendix 2, available at www.cmajopen.ca/content/7/2/E391/
suppl/DC1).
Two 9month periods were considered: a period preceding implementation of the plan (Oct. 1, 2011, to July 1, 2012) and a period following implementation (Oct. 1, 2014, to July 1, 2015).
For 6 recently created FMGs, the pre period was Oct. 1, 2012, to July 1, 2013 (Appendix 3, available at www. cmajopen.ca/content/7/2/E391/suppl/DC1).
We chose these identical calendar periods to control for seasonal effects and to avoid summer vacation.
This study used a participatory research approach 23,24 whereby decisionmakers, clinicians, patient/caregiver repre sentatives and researchers were involved as coinvestigators during every phase of the study.

Study populations and outcomes
We obtained chart data for 2 samples: patients aged 75 years or more, and patients aged 75 years or more with neurocogni tive disorders.
We selected the cutoff of 75 years to ensure a sufficient number of eligible charts of patients with neurocog nitive disorders, given the high prevalence of dementia in this population.
For both populations, only patients with a visit to the FMG during the relevant study period were eligible.
To ensure independence and avoid overlap, only charts not assessed in the pre period were selected in the post period.
The population of patients aged 75 or more served to obtain data on outcome indicators around the detection of neurocognitive disorders: documentation of cognitive status (note regarding normal cognition, concerns of possible decline by clinician or caregiver, results from cognitive test scores or dementia diagnosis), documented diagnosis of a neu rocognitive disorder (dementia, mild cognitive impairment or unspecified neurocognitive disorder), cognitive testing, refer ral to a memory clinic and justification for referral.
Referrals were considered justified if there was an uncertain or differen tial diagnosis, the presence of depression or behavioural issues, family request or genetic testing.
Blank referrals and those including a cognitive status test score without further evaluation were considered unjustified.
e collected additional data for patients with neurocogni tive disorders to examine indicators of the management and quality of followup care.
Indicators were the number of con tacts with the FMG (in person or by telephone), a quality of followup score, use of antipsychotic medication, use of memantine or cholinesterase inhibitors prescribed by the FMG, number of referrals to a memory clinic following diag nosis and justification for referral.
Antipsychotic medication included medications belonging to the phenothiazine, butyro phenone, thioxanthene or atypical antipsychotic classification as per the American Hospital Formulary Service Pharmacologic-Therapeutic Classification through Health Canada Drug Prod uct Database online query.
e based our quality of followup indicators on validated tools,
These indicators consisted of documented assess ments in 10 domains: cognitive testing, functional status, behavioural and psychological symptoms of dementia, weight, caregiver needs, driving status, home care needs, community service needs (e.g., Alzheimer Society), absence of anticholin ergic medication and management of dementia medications.
For the identification of anticholinergic medication, we used the Beers criteria, based on the Anatomical Therapeutic Chemical classification system.
The score was based on the validated Assessing Care of Vulnerable Elders3 approach
We assessed patients' eligibility for each indicator over the study period (e.g., patients who no longer drove would not need a driving evaluation).
We measured site and patientlevel characteristics.

Data collection
Administrative lists of patients aged 75 years or more were extracted and anonymized.
Charts were randomly selected from the lists.
We first identified charts of patients aged 75 years or more.
For patients in this age group with neuro cognitive disorders, we also used an existing vulnerability code in the administrative lists to narrow the search for neurocog nitive disorders.
Data were collected from the charts and then entered into a secure Webbased database.
We tested and refined the database and a detailed 23page instruction man ual through a pilot study.

Research
Stringent qualitycontrol measures were put in place during data collection.
A senior research nurse trained and monitored a group of 12 research nurses and assistants to conduct the chart review.
She performed ongoing qualitycontrol checks for each chart and followed up with the team regarding incon sistencies or data entry errors.
The statistician involved in the study also conducted qualitycontrol analyses to uncover irreg ularities.
Problematic entries were reassessed and errors cor rected if needed.
Because of this close monitoring, there were no missing data for any of the variables studied.

Statistical analysis
To determine whether the detection and management of neu rocognitive disorders changed after the Quebec Alzheimer Plan was implemented, we analyzed the association between study period (before and after implementation) and the study out comes, adjusting for patient characteristics (age, sex and num ber of medications).
The number of medications is considered a suitable proxy for the level of comorbidity given the incomplete data in the charts on active chronic diseases and the high corre lation between the number of medications and number of con ditions.
We fitted a linear and logistic mixedeffects model for continuous and binary outcomes, respectively.
As patients within sites were likely more similar than patients across sites, we adjusted the models for the clustered nature of the data by including a site identifier associated with each patient as a ran dom effect in the model.
The value of the intraclass correlation coefficient was obtained for each outcome.
We used the SAS procedures PROC MIXED and PROC GLIMMIX (SAS 9.3, SAS Institute) to model the associations.

Ethics approval
The study was approved by the Research Ethics Board of the Centre intégré universitaire de santé et de services sociaux of WestCentral Montréal and the ethics committees affiliated with each FMG.
Institutional authorization was obtained from each regional health organization where applicable.

Results
Of the 13 FMGs, 7 (54%) were universityaffiliated, and 6 (46%) were in urban locations (Appendix 3).
The median number of registered patients per site was 16 696 (interquar tile range 9080-26 408).
The median number of fulltime equivalent physicians was 18 (interquartile range 15-20).
Of 3568 potential charts, 1195 (33.5%) were excluded (Figure
Data for 1919 patients aged 75 years or more and 945 patients aged 75 or more with neurocognitive disorders

Potential charts n = 3568
Excluded n = 1195 Among patients with neurocognitive disorders, the mean number of contacts with an FMG increased significantly after plan implementation, from 7.9 (SD 10.2) to 9.9 (SD 9.7) (adjusted mean difference 1.57, 95% CI 0.30-2.84)
(Table
A significant increase in the mean quality of followup score was observed, from 48.0 (SD 20.0) to 54.6 (SD 18.8) (adjusted mean difference 6.58, 95% CI 3.92-9.23).
All except 2 (cognitive testing and no anticholinergic medications) of the 10 indicators in the quality followup score improved after plan implementation.
A significant decrease in the number of patients receiving antipsychotic medication was observed, from 117 (25.7%) before imple mentation to 98 (20.0%) after implementation (OR 0.66, 95% CI 0.47-0.95).
Last, no change was detected in the proportion of patients referred to a memory clinic following diagnosis (40/338 [11

Research

Interpretation
Our results showed that, following implementation of the Quebec Alzheimer Plan, the detection of neurocognitive dis orders in patients aged 75 years or more improved, as reflected by increased documentation of cognitive status.
Moreover, the intensity and quality of management of patients in this age group with neurocognitive disorders also improved, with an increase in the number of contacts with FMGs and the quality of followup score and a decrease in antipsychotic medication use.
The increased documentation of cognitive status among patients aged 75 or more suggests that family physicians were more aware of the importance of diagnosing neurocognitive disorders in their patients.
This was similar to results in one of the few other plans evaluated, the UK National Dementia Strategy.
However, contrary to the specialistcentred UK strategy, we observed this improvement in documentation of cognitive status without an increase in the number of referrals to memory clinics.
This suggests that the primary care focus of the Quebec Alzheimer Plan may have empowered family physicians to diagnose neurocognitive disorders without overly relying on specialists.
In older patients with neurocognitive disorders, we observed an increase in the number of contacts (facetoface or via telephone or email) with FMGs.
This is similar to what was found with a collaborative care model in the United States.
The Quebec Alzheimer Plan also resulted in better management of patients with neurocognitive disorders, as measured by the quality of followup score.
Similar findings were observed in other intervention studies that looked at compliance with a list of indicators of quality of dementia care.
Vickrey and colleagues
Presence of depression 1 ( †Excluding patients who refused the evaluation.
‡Excluding patients referred before the study period.
§Defined in accordance with Canadian guidelines.
roportions of subgroups.
**There could be more than 1 reason for referral.
† †Documented reasons not mentioned in Canadian guidelines.
‡Excluding patients who refused the evaluation.
§Excluding patients for whom the evaluation was not feasible.
¶Excluding patients for whom the evaluation was not applicable.
**Excluding patients who did not take medication or did not had a follow-up visit after the prescription.
† †Excluding patients who received their prescription before the study period or did not take medication.
‡ ‡Excluding patients referred before the study period.
§ §Proportions of subgroups.
¶ ¶There could be more than 1 reason for referral.

OPEN Research

Research
intervention group (64% v. 33%).
Reuben and colleagues
Direct comparison of quality scores is, however, diffi cult given differences in the indicators used.
However, simi lar to these 2 studies, our study showed that clinicians per formed more functional status assessments and evaluation of behavioural and psychological symptoms of dementia follow ing implementation of the Quebec Alzheimer Plan.
Like Vickrey and colleagues,
We found an improvement in documentation of management of dementia medications, whereas Reuben and colleagues
There was a decrease in the number of patients receiving antipsychotics after imple mentation of the Quebec Alzheimer Plan.
This may have been due to training of family physicians, but after plan implementation these rates still remained in the range of what has been found in Canada without an intervention,
An intervention specifically focused on deprescribing antipsychotics could be added to the Que bec Alzheimer Plan.
Some indicators of the quality of followupevaluation of caregiver needs, of driving status and of community service needswere performed in less than 50% of patients with neurocognitive disorders, even after plan implementation.
Evaluation of caregiver needs and of driving ability is difficult, and clinicians may not feel ade quately equipped to perform these evaluations.
Clinicians are also not usually fully aware of existing community ser vices.
For these indicators, several targeted interventions at the clinical or organizational levels could be added to the plan.

Limitations
Although we could not conduct a randomized controlled trial, using randomly selected independent charts in both study periods allowed us to more closely mimic a randomized con trolled trial than other quasiexperimental designs.
The ran dom selection of charts in the 2 periods ensured representa tive samples of the target population.
We used a pre-post design, the best possible design given that implementation of the Quebec Alzheimer Plan was a natural experiment.
In addition, the chart review allowed us to capture not only in person physician visits but also contacts with nurses, a key aspect of FMGs, as well as telephone calls.
The monitoring of data collection yielded highquality data (no missing data).
Although we could not account for potential temporal trends, our qualitative assessments (results not shown) provided sup port that no other interventions were ongoing during the study period that could have contributed to the observed changes.
Chart reviews measure only what is documented in patients' files.
However, it has been shown that increased quality of documentation is predictive of increased quality of care.
Finally, we chose a post period early after plan imple mentation because of the need for rapid knowledge transfer to the Quebec Ministry of Health and Social Services before provincewide scaleup.
The observed differences are thus a conservative estimation.

Conclusion
Our study contributes important knowledge on the early phase evaluation of a dementia action plan centred in primary health care.
The findings will be used to scale up the Quebec Alzheimer Plan and to develop the Canadian federal dementia strategy.
Our results suggest that it is feasible and beneficial to anchor dementia plans in primary health care and that a plan centred in primary care can improve the capacity of family physicians in FMGs to provide dementia care.
It seems essen tial that policymakers, health care managers and clinicians be more confident in the capacity of family physicians to care for patients with neurocognitive disorders.


= confidence interval, ICC = intraclass correlation coefficient, OR = odds ratio.
*Model estimates adjusted for age, sex and number of medications.



Table 3 )
. The corresponding numbers of patients with neurocognitive disorders were 255 (26.2%) and 208 (22.0%) (OR 1.25, 95% CI 0.98-1.60);
this difference did not reach statistical significance.
No change was detected in the proportion of patients aged 75 or more who underwent cog nitive testing between the 2 periods (137/940 [14.6%] before implementation and 166/972 [17.1%] after implementation) (OR 1.21, 95% CI 0.92-1.60)
or were referred to a memory clinic (22/886 [2.5%] and 19/901 [2.1%], respectively) (OR 0.84, 95% CI 0.42-1.68).
Most of the referrals before and after implementation were justified (14/22 [64%] and 16/19 [84%], respectively).



Table 1 : Characteristics of patients aged 75 years or more before and after implementation of the Quebec Alzheimer Plan
.8%] before implementation v. 29/340 [8.5%] after implementation [OR 0.66, 95% CI 0.37-1.16]).



Table 2 : Characteristics of patients aged 75 years or more with neurocognitive disorders before and after implementation of the Quebec Alzheimer Plan



Table 3 : Mixed-effects model results for patients aged 75 years or more before and after implementation of the Quebec Alzheimer Plan*



Table 4 : Mixed-effects model results for patients aged 75 years or more with neurocognitive disorders before and after implementation of the Quebec Alzheimer Plan*