Spotlight on Ferroptosis: Iron-Dependent Cell Death in Alzheimer’s Disease
Alzheimer's disease is an emerging global epidemic that is becoming increasingly unsustainable.
Most of the clinical trials have been centered around targeting β-amyloid and have met with limited success.
There is a great impetus to identify alternative drug targets.
Iron appears to be the common theme prevalent across neurodegenerative diseases.
Iron has been shown to promote aggregation and pathogenicity of the characteristic aberrant proteins, β-amyloid, tau, α-synuclein, and TDP43, in these diseases.
Further support for the involvement of iron in pathogenesis is provided by the recent discovery of a new form of cell death, ferroptosis.
Arising from iron-dependent lipid peroxidation, ferroptosis is augmented in conditions of cysteine deficiency and glutathione peroxidase-4 inactivation.
Here, we review clinical trials that provide the rationale for targeting ferroptosis to delay the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease (AD), potentially of relevance to other neurodegenerative diseases.

INTRODUCTION
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is increasing at an alarming rate and is an emerging epidemic.
Current incidence world-wide is ∼50 million and expected to triple by 2050.
The economic costs of AD, the most common cause of dementia, are $260 billion and projected to reach $1167 billion by 2050 (Alzheimer's Disease International, 2019).
Thus, there is a great impetus to develop treatments to delay AD pathogenesis.
AD is classically defined by β-amyloid plaques and neurofibrillary tangles.
Many clinical trials directed at lowering β-amyloid have met with limited success.
One reason for the failures could be that 50% of AD patients exhibit α-synuclein pathology, while 30% show TDP43 pathology
We suggest sole targeting of β-amyloid or tau may not be fruitful in AD as contributions from α-synuclein and TDP43 significantly modify disease pathogenesis-alternative disease-modifying targets are crucial.
Iron dyshomeostasis appears to be a common theme, unifying neurodegenerative diseases including AD, Lewy Body disease, and frontotemporal dementia (FTD).
Iron has been shown to promote the aggregation and pathogenicity of β-amyloid
We hypothesize that iron dyshomeostasis is widespread in neurodegenerative diseases and ensuing mechanisms underlying iron toxicity may provide novel disease targets.
This unified and unique approach-targeting iron dyshomeostasis-is likely to benefit dementia patients, the majority of which are affected by AD, but also orphan diseases e.g., FTD.
Here, we review the evidence from clinical trials concerning the rationale of targeting ferroptosis for AD.

IMPORTANCE OF IRON HOMEOSTASIS
Iron is an essential metal for neurons, required for mitochondria respiration as well as other processes e.g., myelination and neurotransmitter synthesis
Iron can exist in oxidized and reduced states, ferric iron (Fe 3+ ), and ferrous iron (Fe 2+ ), respectively.
Ferrous iron predominantly contributes to the cellular labile iron pool (LIP), participating in key metabolic reactions but also toxic reactions that can lead to oxidative stress and eventually cell death.
Excessive build-up of LIP is avoided by sequestration of iron, in a bioavailable yet non-toxic form, by ferritin
Ferritin works in concert with ferroportin, the only known cellular iron exporter, aided by the ferroxidase, ceruloplasmin, to regulate LIP
Tight regulation of iron metabolism is pivotal to ensure neuronal homeostasis-both iron excess and deficiency are associated with neurodegeneration

LABILE IRON POOL AND ITS ROLE IN FERROPTOSIS
Increased LIP can lead to the generation of reactive oxygen species via Fenton reaction, eventually resulting in catastrophic membrane rupture
Coincident depletion of glutathione (GSH) or inactivation of glutathione peroxidase-4 (GPX4) leads to a newly characterized form of cell death, coined ferroptosis
Neuron-specific GPX4 depletion has been shown to lead to neurodegeneration, highlighting this pathway as a future therapeutic target
GPX4 is a master regulator of ferroptosis by functioning as a lipid repair enzyme and detoxifying lipid hydroperoxides, utilizing GSH as an essential cofactor.
GSH synthesis/levels are reliant on cellular cysteine availability.
Cysteine is imported into cells in its oxidized form, cystine, in exchange for glutamate by the cystine/glutamate antiporter (system X - c ). Increased extracellular glutamate in concert with glutaminolysis may contribute to detrimental excitotoxicity
System X - c -inhibition attenuates GSH levels, inactivates GPX4, and enhances lipid peroxidation
Polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs), especially arachidonic acid, in membrane lipids are preferentially oxidized during ferroptosis.
Arachidonic acid is activated by Acyl-CoA Synthetase Long-Chain Family Member 4 (ACSL4) for incorporation into phosphatidylethanolamines (and membranes).
Oxidized phosphatidylethanolamines are proximate executors of ferroptosis and hence ACSL4 expression modulates ferroptosis susceptibility
Notably, long-term use of pioglitazone, recently characterized to be an ACSL4 inhibitor, is associated with attenuated risk of dementia in type 2 diabetes mellitus patients
While iron enhances lipid peroxidation via the non-enzymatic Fenton reaction, lipid peroxidation can also be catalyzed by specific non-heme, iron-containing lipoxygenases, such lipoxygenases also confer vulnerability to ferroptosis
GPX4-ablation in mice and cells revealed downstream 12/15-lipoxygenase-derived lipid peroxidation, trigger apoptosis-inducing factor-mediated cell death, and subsequent oxidative stress
Moreover, neuron-specific ablation of GPX4 in the forebrain (cerebral cortex and hippocampus) was associated with an increase in markers associated with ferroptosis including increased lipid peroxidation, extracellular-regulated kinase (ERK) 4 and neuroinflammation
The susceptibility of AD vulnerable neuronal populations to ferroptosis is suggestive of its role in AD.
During ferroptosis, cytosolic ferritin may undergo lysosomal breakdown (ferritinophagy) to further contribute to LIP-ferritinophagy appears to augment cysteine deficiencyinduced ferroptosis
While total cellular iron levels may be unchanged, an augmented LIP renders cells more susceptible to ferroptosis.
The increased influx of iron into the mitochondria induces the accumulation of reactive oxygen species and lipid peroxidation.
Lipid peroxidation is enhanced in cysteine deprivation via hyperpolarized mitochondrial membrane potential
The distinguishing features of ferroptosis are evident cytologically, in the form of condensed mitochondrial membrane and mitochondrial volume shrinkage
Interestingly, genetic factors including TDP43, amyloid precursor protein (APP), APOE may play a pivotal role in modifying mitochondrial functionality.
Suppressing localization of TDP43 in the mitochondria inhibited TDP43-mediated neurotoxicity
Electron microscopic analysis of FTD and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis patients with TDP43 pathology revealed prominent mitochondrial impairment, including abnormal and/or depleted cristae, concordant with ultrastructural changes observed in both cellular and animal models of TDP43 proteinopathy
Mechanistically, TDP43 expression attenuated mitochondrial membrane potential, suppressed mitochondrial complex I activity, and impaired mitochondrial ATP synthesis.
Moreover, downregulation of LonP1 (mitochondrial protease) augmented TDP43 levels which exacerbated TDP43-induced mitochondrial damage and neurodegeneration
Mitochondria isolated from AD brains show increased accumulation of APP and β-amyloid associated with reduced ability of mitochondria to import nuclear-encoded proteins and impaired cytochrome c oxidase activity
Tau mutant mice and triple transgenic mice harboring APP and tau mutations demonstrated impaired mitochondrial respiration, increased production of reactive oxygen species, and augmented oxidative stress
APOEε4 genotype is a major susceptibility risk locus particularly in AD, associated with enhanced mitochondrial fusion and decreased fission
APOE4 has been found to negatively modify effects of iron on brain functionality before the manifestation of cognitive impairment
Combining the different lines of evidence, a pivotal involvement of proteinopathies is indicated in inducing iron dyshomeostasis, lipid peroxidation, and mitochondrial damage which are reminiscent of changes consistent with ferroptosis.
This proposition awaits experimental validation to elucidate a direct role of the misfolded proteins in ferroptosis in the context of neurodegenerative diseases.

EVIDENCE FOR FERROPTOSIS IN AD Iron Chelators
A 2-year Phase II clinical trial reported desferrioxamine, an iron chelator, attenuates cognitive decline in AD
However, desferrioxamine treatment was not further pursued owing to its lack of blood-brain-barrier (BBB) penetrance.
Intranasal deferoxamine overcomes this problem and shown to improve cognition in a mouse AD model
Iron chelation attenuated oxidative stress, lowered β-amyloid load, and tau hyperphosphorylation (by inhibition of cyclin-dependent kinase-5 and glycogen synthase kinase activity;
Deferiprone is an orally active, brain penetrant iron-chelator, approved for use in β-thalassemia, currently, undergoing a Phase II clinical trial in mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and AD (Deferiprone to Delay Dementia-clinicaltrials.gov identifier: NCT03235686;
This trial was preceded by Phase II clinical trials on Parkinson's disease (PD) which showed reduced brain iron assessed by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) ferritin and concomitant ameliorated motor deficits (Table
Although chelating the LIP in the brain is a tempting strategy, many challenges warrant mention.
Since iron is an essential cofactor in multi-fold cellular processes, iron-chelation can have off-target effects and potentially cause untoward effects.
The most frequent side-effects are gastrointestinal discomfort including nausea, abdominal pain, vomiting, and diarrhea, which range from mild to moderate
The most severe adverse effect experienced by patients on iron-chelator therapy is neutropenia (8.5%) and agranulocytosis (0.9%; Borgna-Pignatti and Marsella, 2015).
Regular weekly monitoring of blood counts (especially of white blood cells) in patients taking deferiprone is essential to monitor side-effects particularly neutropenia and agranulocytosis, and the dosage titrated accordingly.
Moreover, periodic hepatic and renal functions should be evaluated, as these organs are major sites of iron metabolism.

Antioxidants
Vitamin E
Vitamin E is the most potent biological lipophilic chain-breaking antioxidant
All react with free radicals to yield a non-radical product and a vitamin E radical with a delocalized and stabilized unpaired electron.
The latter then reacts with another free radical or is regenerated by vitamin C
Vitamin E neutralizes peroxyl radicals and terminates lipid peroxidation, especially of PUFAs
PUFAs are particularly susceptible to peroxidation due to their high degree of unsaturation and are greatly enriched (25-30% of total fatty acids;
Long-term PUFA-supplementation during midlife is associated with decreased AD risk in pre-symptomatic
By protecting cellular membranes against lipid peroxidation, vitamin E can be considered a disruptor of ferroptosis.
Vitamin E in plasma, serum, and CSF are reduced in AD (de
Vitamin E (α-tocopherol) supplementation delayed functional decline and reduced caregiver burden in mild to moderate AD (Table
Epidemiological studies using older cohorts from the Netherlands and the Cache County (Utah, USA) concluded vitamin E intake is associated with a lower risk of developing AD
A Rotterdam study and Canadian health and aging
Conversely, numerous studies have reported vitamin E does not reduce AD risk or slow AD pathogenesis
Why has vitamin E shown mixed results in clinical trials?
While vitamin E supplementation could simply restore vitamin levels in AD, baseline vitamin E levels are often not checked.
Also, vitamin E bioavailability can be variable due to differential gut absorption from competing nutrients e.g., plant sterols; variable brain levels arising from different vitamin E forms with varying pharmacokinetics and circulating high-density lipoproteins levels, the latter transports and mediates brain import of vitamin E. Differential responses of AD patients to vitamin E supplementation has led to stratification of individuals into respondents and non-respondents in one study
Vitamin E effectively lowered oxidative stress and maintained cognitive status in respondents.
Surprisingly, non-respondents experienced a sharp decline in cognition, to levels even lower than patients receiving a placebo
Further investigations are required to successfully exploit vitamin E supplementation.

N-Acetylcysteine
GSH is diminished in the hippocampus and frontal cortex in AD
Restoration of brain GSH with oral supplementation is ineffective as GSH rapidly hydrolyzes and insufficiently BBB-penetrant
Similarly, L-cysteine (rate-limiting substrate for GSH synthesis) is inadequate due to extensive metabolism
However, N-acetylcysteine, a precursor of L-cysteine, can efficaciously cross the BBB into the brain
N-acetylcysteine mediates restoration of brain GSH levels and GPX4 activity in an AD mouse model, counteracting lipid peroxidation
A small trial showed 6-months N-acetylcysteine treatment did not improve Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) scores or daily living
Midpoint evaluation did show a trend towards a beneficial effect on the MMSE score though (p = 0.056), particularly on the letter fluency task (Table
N-acetylcysteine therapy may be more robust by increasing bioavailability, e.g., by using N-acetylcysteine amide
This N-acetylcysteine derivative has augmented permeability through cellular and mitochondrial membranes, as shown in the PD mouse model
Interestingly, MCI and AD subjects supplemented with combined N-acetylcysteine, α-tocopherol, folate, vitamin B12, methionine, acetyl-L-carnitine demonstrated either stable or improved cognitive performance and mood/behavior

Selenium
Selenium is decreased in the hippocampal, temporal, and cortical regions in AD, consistent with attenuated antioxidant capacity and augmented oxidative stress
Selenium, as selenocysteine, is essential for GPX4 synthesis.
Six-months of consumption of Brazil nuts (high selenium) by MCI subjects replenished selenium levels (Table
Sodium selenate (over 24-weeks) lessened brain deterioration as  assessed by diffusion tensor MRI, but did not impact cognitive performance
Interestingly, on stratification into responders and non-responders based on the elevation of CSF levels, MMSE scores did not deteriorate in responders compared to non-responders
Conversely, in the PREADVISE clinical trial, selenomethionine did not reduce the incidence of dementia in cognitively healthy males, aged >60 years
Furthermore, the incidence of dementia on follow-up was low, possibly attributable to selection bias as participants were more educated than the general population and exhibited greater cognitive reserve.
The absence of biomarkers for target engagement of supplements renders the translation of basic scientific findings into robust prevention trials difficult.

TARGETING FERROPTOSIS-THE FUTURE OF AD?
Despite rigorous clinical testing of pharmaceutical agents in AD, only four have been licensed: anticholinesterase inhibitors (donepezil, galantamine, and rivastigmine) that increase synaptic acetylcholine to aid learning and memory; and an NMDA-receptor antagonist (memantine).
Interestingly, the neuroprotective effects of memantine were reported to be mediated by enhancing the astroglial system X - c activity
The increased glutamate export appears to activate inhibitory metabotropic glutamate receptors to attenuate cognitive impairment from hyperactivation of thalamocortical glutamatergic transmission
However, the beneficial effects may result from inhibition of ferroptosis arising from the concomitant increased intracellular cystine/GSH (see above).
Animals fed with excess iron demonstrate increased lipid peroxidation, BBB breakdown, altered mitochondrial dynamics, β-amyloid deposition, tau hyperphosphorylation, and loss of dendritic spine density-reminiscent of AD pathology
Combinatorial therapy with deferiprone and N-acetylcysteine, exerted greater neuroprotection from iron-induced toxicity than monotherapy, including restored dendritic spine density, mitochondrial balance and ameliorated AD pathology
Furthermore, the concept of targeting ferroptosis is supported by evidence of iron dyshomeostasis, altered system X - c dynamics (diminished GSH/GPX4 activity) and enhanced lipid peroxidation in AD
The challenges of conclusively identifying ferroptosis in vivo and post-mortem brain samples are hindered by the lack of specific markers for cells undergoing ferroptosis.
It is important to state that different cell death patterns happen in parallel contributing to disease pathology.
For example, it is known that ferroptosis and other types of cell deaths (necroptosis and apoptosis) occur concurrently following ischemic and traumatic brain injury
The Unlike clinical trials targeting β-amyloid, ferroptosismodulating clinical trials have been exploratory and dose optimization still required as well as replication on a larger scale
Concomitant identification of biomarkers for ferroptosis is also required for more rigorous inclusion/exclusion into clinical trials and robust evaluation/formal testing of novel therapies targeting the ferroptotic cascade.
Many outstanding questions remain though-what are the individual contributions from microglia, astrocytes, oligodendrocytes, and neurons to ferroptosis?
Is iron and its proteins differentially expressed in glia and neurons?
What is the role of other transition metals, zinc, and copper, in ferroptosis and possible interactions with iron?
Mitochondria is the major site of energy production but coincidently for iron metabolism also.
Mitochondrial dysfunction is thought to occur early in AD pathogenesis
Damaged mitochondria are cleared by mitophagy to maintain mitochondrial homeostasis and shown to inhibit AD pathology in animal AD models
Furthermore, mitochondria depletion by Parkinmediated mitophagy inhibited cysteine-deprivation induced ferroptosis
How iron metabolism relates to mitophagy, is mitophagy related to ferroptosis or a distinct phenomenon in AD remains to be addressed.
Neuroinflammation is a major characteristic of AD and represents a useful therapeutic target
Although crosstalk exists between neuroinflammation and iron metabolism
Our discussion so far has focused on the cellular LIP, but 95% of functional iron in the body is in heme.
Heme from hemoglobin breakdown can be a redox-active iron source, to induce/enhance lipid peroxidation and ferroptosis
AD is characterized by perturbed BBB permeability
It will be pivotal to delineate the relationship between plasma and brain heme/iron homeostasis, and peripheral contributions to ferroptosis at different stages of the disease.
Such knowledge will potentially identify peripheral ferroptosis biomarkers needed for future anti-ferroptosis trials to formally test ferroptosis contributions to AD and possibly other neurodegenerative diseases.

CONCLUSION
Iron dyshomeostasis, impaired antioxidant defense, and lipid peroxidation are features of ferroptosis that could offer successful therapeutic targets in AD.
Research on ferroptosis in the context of AD and other neurodegenerative diseases is still in its infancy.
Exploration of the mechanism of ferroptosis and its role in AD has the potential to propose novel therapeutic approaches for, hitherto absent, highly effective treatments against AD and possibly, other neurodegenerative diseases.



FIGURE 1 |
FIGURE 1 | Overview of ferroptosis in Alzheimer's disease (AD).
During the process of ferroptosis, autophagy of ferritin (ferritinophagy) contributes to an increased labile iron pool, leading to elevated lipid peroxidation and oxidation of polyunsaturated fatty acids.
This is aggravated by inhibition of the cystine/glutamate antiporter (system X - c ), rendering the cell-deficient of cysteine, which has a domino effect of lowering glutathione (GSH) levels and impairs the activity of a selenium-dependent lipid repair enzyme, glutathione peroxidase-4 (GPX4) -a master regulator of ferroptosis.
Combinatorial therapies targeted at maintaining iron homeostasis and restoring GSH levels/GPX4 will help to lower iron-induced lipid peroxidation and inhibit ferroptosis in AD.



TABLE 1 |
Clinical trials involving iron-chelators in Alzheimer's disease (AD) and Parkinson's disease (PD).



TABLE 2 |
Clinical trials involving Vitamin E in Alzheimer's disease (AD), amnestic mild-cognitive impairment (MCI) and cognitively normal.



TABLE 3 |
Clinical trials involving N-acetylcysteine in Alzheimer's disease (AD) and mild-cognitive impairment (MCI).



TABLE 4 |
Clinical trials involving Selenium in Alzheimer's disease (AD) and mild-cognitive impairment (MCI).