Diabetes and Alzheimer's disease: A link not as simple as it seems
Type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) is associated with an increased risk to develop Alzheimer disease (AD), however, the underlying mechanisms for this association are still unclear.
In this review we will provide a critical overview of the major findings coming from clinical studies and animal models.

Introduction
The majority of Alzheimer's disease (AD) cases have a sporadic origin, although the genetic background determines strongly the risk of AD, even for sporadic cases
Very little is currently known about the triggering factors of this destructive neurodegenerative disorder
Besides ageing, metabolic disorders including type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) has also been associated with an increased risk to develop dementia
Given the vast increase of incidence of AD and metabolic disorders in the aged population
In this review we will critically analyze the major findings coming from clinical and preclinical studies.
Diabetes and Alzheimer's disease: What can we learn from clinical studies?
Diabetes is a very complex metabolic disorder characterized by a rise in blood glucose levels due to an altered insulin production by pancreatic cells (Type 1) or an impaired insulin response (Type 2)
The chronic hyperglycemia and insulin resistance found in diabetic patients is commonly associated with vascular complications which eventually lead to alterations in the kidney (nephropathy), retina (retinopathy) and peripheral nerves (neuropathy), among other problems
Not surprisingly, besides the abnormalities in peripheral organs, diabetic patients also show structural and functional changes in the central nervous system.
In fact, several studies suggest that there is an increased risk to develop cognitive impairments in patients with diabetes
Type 1 diabetic patients display defects in information processing, psychomotor efficiency, attention, and cognitive flexibility
The effect of type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) in cognition is more controversial: the Maastricht study showed that patients with T2DM performed worse in different cognitive domains including memory, processing speed and executive function, compared to individuals with normal glucose metabolism
In contrast, the New Mexico elder Health Survey could not find a significant reduction in the cognitive function in patients with T2DM compared with participants with normal glucose tolerance.
Different population-based cohorts studies have also suggested an increased risk to develop dementia in T2DM patients
The Rotterdam study was the pioneer report showing almost a two-fold increase risk of dementia, mainly AD and vascular dementia, in patients with T2DM
Since then, many other studies worldwide have consistently shown an increased risk to develop dementia in the T2DM population
The Rochester study monitored 1,455 subjects with adult onset diabetes mellitus and they showed a 1.6 fold increased risk of all types of dementia
The Honolulu-Asia aging study showed that diabetes increased the risk of AD 1.8 fold in a population-based cohort of more than 2500 Japanese-American men
Nowadays, despite more than 2000 pubmed papers published on AD and diabetes, the underlying link between these two disorders is still unclear.
The major mechanisms suggested are: hyperglycemia, vascular abnormalities, altered amyloidosis and impaired insulin signaling.
However, the observations coming from clinical studies are highly controversial and have failed to elucidate clear pathways responsible for the increased risk of dementia in T2DM patients.
In this review we will make a critical analysis of the different mechanisms suggested in the literature.

a) Alterations in glucose metabolism
Diabetes is linked to peripheral hyperglycemia.
However, how the rise in blood glucose affects brain function is currently unknown
The Maastricht study also reported a correlation between blood glucose levels and a lower processing speed and executive function in patients using cross-sectional data from more than 2500 participants.
However, the same study could not find an association between hyperglycemia and impaired memory function
Scott et al.
In line with the latter results, an intensive glycemic therapeutic strategy in patients with T2DM had no positive effects in cognitive outcomes
On the other hand, T2DM patients with mild cognitive impairment (MCI) showed a general reduction in brain [ 18 F]-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) uptake in gray and white matter
Insulin resistance has also been associated with a reduced cerebral glucose metabolic rate in frontal, temporal-parietal, and cingulate regions in patients with T2DM
Interestingly, brain hypometabolism (observed by FDG uptake) is associated with an increased risk for AD and can be observed years before the dementia onset in the same brain regions affected in T2DM patients
Thus, the reduced cerebral glucose metabolic rate observed in diabetic patients could be a predisposing factor for AD and MCI
b) Vascular and structural brain abnormalities T2DM is linked to alterations in cerebral microvasculature, including amyloid angiopathy
The disorder is also associated with increased number of brain infarcts
T2DM is an important risk factor for ischemic stroke
Other studies have associated chronic hyperglycemia with cerebral microvascular remodeling

Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) studies revealed loss in brain volume in patients
with T2DM
Particularly, brain atrophy was detected in hippocampal and cortical brain regions, which can influence the development of AD pathology
However, the loss of brain volume does not imply neurodegeneration, and can be due to different pathological processes including loss of glial cells, axons, or white matter shrinkage
In fact, diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) (a MRI technique that detects alterations in white matter tissue) has revealed white matter abnormalities in T2DM patients that correlates with cognitive dysfunction
Moreover, reduced functional connectivity has also been observed in patients with T2DM

c) Impaired insulin signaling in the brain
Another important mechanism suggested to link dementia and cognitive dysfunction to T2DM is insulin resistance.
For years, the brain was considered an insulininsensitive organ, as brain glucose metabolism is largely regulated in an insulinindependent manner
Yet, in the last decades, strong evidences have demonstrated an important role of insulin in the central nervous system (CNS), mainly affecting feeding and cognitive behavior
Mouse experiments suggest that most of the insulin present in the brain is transported from the periphery across the blood brain barrier (BBB) by a receptor-mediated process that can be saturated
Wallum et al. demonstrated in the late 80' that intravenous insulin infusions increased the levels of insulin in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) of eight healthy men
However, the effect of chronic peripheral hyperinsulinemia and insulin resistance in the brain insulin pathway is still not clear.
Liu et al. showed a significant decrease of the PI3K/AKT pathway in the autopsied frontal cortices from T2DM patients compared to heathy controls, suggesting the presence of central insulin resistance associated with diabetes
On the other hand, post-mortem studies have also shown disturbances in the brain insulin signaling in AD patients.
However, these findings are still controversial
i.e.: some groups reported reduced mRNA levels of brain insulin, and insulin receptor (IR) in AD brains compared to controls
The most convincing change in the insulin pathway observed in AD patients is a reduction of insulin receptor substrate (IRS) levels, accompanied by an increased IRS-1 serine phosphorylation (marker of insulin resistance)
Nevertheless, physiological brain aging is also associated with changes in central brain insulin
In fact, Frolich et al. reported a reduction of brain insulin levels in AD patients that was equal to age-matched controls
Considering the role of insulin in cognition, dysregulation of the brain insulin pathway could be responsible for the cognitive impairments found in AD and T2DM patients.
Supporting this hypothesis, pilot clinical trials with intranasal brain insulin delivery have shown improvements in verbal memory and story recall in patients with MCI and AD
Intranasal insulin delivery was used to avoid the systemic side effects of insulin and no major aversive effects were reported

d) Altered amyloidosis and Tau phosphorylation
Several in vitro studies have proposed a link between impaired insulin signaling and the amyloid cascade, which could explain the increased risk for AD in diabetic patients.
Firstly, one of the proteins potentially involved in Aβ clearance and degradation is the insulin degrading enzyme (IDE), a metalloprotease that also degrades insulin
Postmortem analysis from AD patients suggests lower levels of IDE in the brain
In addition, insulin can also regulate Tau phosphorylation via de PI3K/AKT pathway.
AKT activation inhibits the glycogen synthase kinase 3β (GSK 3β), which is the major kinase involved in Tau phosphorylation
Diabetes and impaired glucose metabolism have also been associated with accumulation of glycated Tau or amyloid-beta.
Glycation might enhance aggregation of these proteins
However, the link between altered insulin signaling and amyloidosis in vivo, is still highly controversial.
On the one hand, postmortem analysis from the Hisayama study suggested a correlation between hyperglycemia and hyperinsulinemia with an increased amyloid load, but no link with neurofibrillary tangles
On the other hand, the Baltimore longitudinal study showed no significant correlation between amyloid load (assessed in vivo using Pittsburgh Compound B (C-PiB) positron emission tomography (PET) studies) and either glucose intolerance or insulin resistance
In addition, Roberts et al. also reported no differences in the C-PiB retention ratio between diabetic and non-diabetic patients
Other post-mortem studies even suggest a reduced AD-type pathology in T2DM patients
Altogether, most of the current evidence suggest that T2DM does not accelerate the development of the core neuropathological features of AD: amyloid plaques and neurofibrillary tangles

What can we learn from animal models?
During the last decades, many groups have tried to investigate the mechanisms underlying the link between diabetes and dementia, using animal models.
As T2DM is usually associated with obesity and other comorbidities, the most widely used models for T2DM are obese animals.
Obesity and T2DM can be triggered by either genetic manipulations such as disruptions in leptin (ob/ob mice) or leptin receptor (db/db mice or Zucker rats)
Another commonly used method for the induction of diabetes is the streptozotozin (STZ) injection, which kills the pancreatic β-cells triggering defects in insulin production and glucose metabolism similar to the ones observed in diabetic patients
These models usually display hyperglycemia, glucose intolerance and insulin resistance
However, the composition and duration of the diet exposure differ from one study to another, making it difficult to achieve general conclusions.
In addition, metabolic responses to high fat diet feeding can be very heterogeneous even within the same mouse strain
Given the number of the different models used, the outcomes from these studies are highly variable.
Hence, similarly to the situation in humans, the effect of T2DM-like alterations on brain function remains unclear and controversial.
Several potential underlying factors have been discussed in the literature.
Here, we will summarize what we consider the most important ones.
a) Hyperglycemia Chronic hyperglycemia is associated with increased levels of reactive oxygen species (ROS), which is not only responsible for the β-cells deterioration and development of insulin resistance, but also affects brain functions
The brain is particularly vulnerable to oxidative damage due to its high oxygen consumption
Different studies in rodents have shown that high fat diet treatment increased oxidative stress in the brain
Another group also demonstrated a deleterious effect of acute hyperglycemia (induced by a single STZ injection) in a rat model of lacunar stroke
However, hyperglycemia is usually accompanied by other comorbidies including insulin resistance, obesity, systemic inflammation, etc.
Therefore, it is very difficult to dissect out the specific effect of hyperglycemia itself on brain function.
To circumvent this problem, the group from Prof. Holtzman used glycemic clamps in a transgenic mouse model for AD, and measured changes of brain metabolites using in vivo microdialysis
This study elegantly showed that acute peripheral hyperglycemia raises hippocampal interstitial fluid (ISF) glucose and amyloid beta levels.
Authors claimed that the increase in Aβ presumably happened as a consequence of a glucose-induced increased in neuronal activity.

b) Central insulin resistance in T2DM and AD animal models
In the last decades, several groups have tried to elucidate whether the peripheral insulin resistance found in diabetic patients, also affects the central insulin pathway using animal models.
Yet, the outcomes from these studies is still under discussion.
Some groups claimed a clear link between peripheral and central insulin resistance.
Ho et al. for instance revealed alterations in the brain insulin pathway upon dietinduced hyperinsulinemia, including reduced insulin receptor phosphorylation and activation of the downstream pathway and decreased IDE levels
Arnold et al. also reported insulin insensitivity in the frontal cortex from C57BL/6J young mice after 17 days of diet treatment
Another study even suggested that a single intraperitoneal insulin injection is able to rescue amyloidosis and cognitive impairments induced by the high fat diet treatment in 3xTg-AD mice
In contrast, our group has shown that 10 months of high fat diet treatment did not affect hippocampal insulin sensitivity or the downstream insulin pathway
Supporting our observations, the group from Prof. Holtzman also reported no changes in brain ISF or CFS insulin levels in response to peripheral hyperinsulinemia induced with hyperinsulinemic-euglycemic clamps
AD itself has been suggested a risk factor for diabetes and metabolic alterations as well
This is mainly based on work in mouse models for AD.
Different groups have reported peripheral insulin resistance and signs of T2DM including obesity, hyperglycemia and hyperinsulinemia in such aged models
However, it is not clear whether these mice develop central insulin resistance (i.e.
whether their brains becomes insensitive to insulin).
On the one hand, Ho et al. proposed that Tg2576 and 3xTg-AD models develop central insulin signaling dysregulation prior to peripheral insulin resistance
In contrast, Stanley et al. showed by direct central insulin delivery, that the brain from old APP/PS1 mice is still responsive to insulin even in the presence of aberrant amyloidosis

c) Diabetes mellitus and amyloidosis
To study the potential link between T2DM and amyloidosis in vivo, most of the groups used transgenic AD models that already show amyloid plaques aggregation and analyzed whether a high fat diet treatment altered the levels of amyloid in the brain.
The conclusions from these studies are highly variable depending on the animal model used or the type of diet treatment
However, even when using the same mouse model (3xTg-AD) and the same diet composition (60% Kcal from fat), one group reported an increase of amyloid beta levels
Some studies also showed different outcomes depending on the duration of the diet.
i.e.: Vandal et al. reported increased levels of soluble Aβ40 and Aβ42 in the cerebral cortex after 9 but not 4 months of diet treatment
Busquets et al. even suggested de novo plaques aggregation in a C57BL/6J wild type background
In contrast, in our group we used an APP knock-in model which does not develop amyloid plaques, but contained the Swedish mutation that cause AD in humans.
In this model, we could not trigger amyloid alterations even after 16 months of high fat diet treatment
In summary, in the last years it has been commonly accepted that metabolic disorders such as obesity and insulin resistance have a detrimental effect on brain amyloidosis.
However, the in vivo data in human and mice do not support consistently this hypothesis
In addition, as discussed above, clinical studies also support a lack of correlation between metabolic disturbances and an increased amyloid load

d) Others
Besides the mechanisms mentioned here, there are several other alterations occurring in both, T2DM and AD, that may also be important to link the two disorders.
For example, mitochondrial dysfunction as a consequence of increased oxidative stress has been suggested to be a key contributing factor to diabetes and AD pathology
Moreria et al. showed brain mitochondrial dysfunction in old diabetic rats
However, another group reported no defects in brain mitochondria after 1 year of high fat diet treatment in Wister rats
Interestingly, Carvalho et al. found similar mitochondrial alterations in the brain from WT mice fed with high sucrose water, and 3xTg-AD mice
In addition, a mitochondria-targeted antioxidant drug (mitoQ) prevents loss of spatial memory in 3xTg-AD mice
Neuroinflammation also plays an essential role in the pathogenesis of AD and might also be affected in T2DM.
Obesity, an important risk factor for T2DM and AD
In fact, Buckman et al. showed that high fat diet treatment induced recruitment of peripheral immune cells into the CNS
Other studies have also reported an increased gliosis and increased levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines upon high fat diet treatment in rodent models
However, our group could not detect changes in pro-inflammatory cytokines or gliosis after 18 months of high fat diet treatment in an APP knock-in model
Finally, misfolded amyloid aggregation is another common pathology in diabetes and AD: amyloid-beta aggregates in the brain from AD patients, while islet amyloid polypeptide (IAPP) accumulates in pancreatic cells from T2DM patients.
Moreno-Gonzalez et al. proposed that IAPP present in diabetic patients may act as a seed promoting the misfolding and aggregation of the amyloid-beta peptides
In fact, it has been shown that both aggregates colocalized in brain parenchyma deposits

Conclusions and future directions
Epidemiological studies have provided evidence for a link between diabetes and an increased risk to develop dementia.
However, in spite of several proposed mechanisms for this association, we are not able to make final conclusions with regard to what specific metabolic alterations could be responsible for this increased predisposition to dementia.
The high heterogeneity between the different cases of AD and T2DM, and the effects of aging on the CNS and peripheral organs, make it very complicated to dissect the specific mechanisms responsible for a general association observed in populationbased cohort studies.
Given the fact that both disorders are highly heterogeneous, it is likely that the link between the two is a consequence of a combination of different molecular, cellular and systemic factors which are difficult to unravel.
Caution when proposing specific mechanisms or treatments seems indicated.