Effect of apolipoprotein E4 on clinical, neuroimaging, and biomarker measures in noncarrier participants in the Dominantly Inherited Alzheimer Network
The apolipoprotein E ε4 allele (APOE4) is the major genetic risk factor for sporadic Alzheimer Disease (AD).
APOE4 may have effects on cognition and brain atrophy years before the onset of symptomatic AD.
We analyzed the effects of APOE4 in a unique cohort of young adults who had undergone comprehensive assessments as part of the Dominantly Inherited Alzheimer Network (DIAN), an international longitudinal study of individuals from families with Autosomal Dominant AD.
We analyzed the effect of an APOE4 allele on cognitive measures, volumetric MRI, amyloid deposition, glucose metabolism and on cerebrospinal fluid levels of AD biomarkers in 162 participants that did not carry the mutant gene (non-carriers).
APOE4+ and APOE4mutation non-carriers had similar performance on cognitive measures.
Amyloid deposition began

Introduction
Alzheimer disease (AD), the most common age-related progressive neurodegenerative disorder, typically becomes symptomatic in people older than age 65 (late onset AD, LOAD); less commonly, symptom onset may be earlier.
People with the much less common autosomal dominant form of AD (ADAD 1 ) typically develop symptoms at an early age, generally before age 60 and as early as the third decade of life (e.g.,
The Dominantly Inherited Alzheimer Network observational study (DIAN-OBS) began in 2008 with funding from the National Institute of Aging (NIA).
This international multicenter study supports the collection of longitudinal clinical, cognitive and biomarker data and tissue from over 500 ADAD families worldwide
Importantly, family members are enrolled in ADAD whether or not they carry the ADAD-causing mutation.
Only 17% of DIAN participants do know their mutation status, so many mutation noncarriers (NCs) participate in the study and undergo the same evaluations as mutation carriers, providing a unique cohort in which clinical, cognitive and biomarker assessments are available in cognitively normal young adults.
Although the details of the pathogenic cascade that lead to AD are still under investigation, many studies have demonstrated a consistent pattern of changes in molecular biomarkers in both sporadic AD and ADAD; these changes may begin 20-25 years before the onset of symptoms.
The DIAN study has been useful in this regard
The results of most, but not all, studies have been consistent with the amyloid hypothesis, demonstrating a temporal sequence with initial changes in the levels of amyloid beta peptide in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), followed by changes in positron emission tomography (PET) amyloid imaging, then alterations in hippocampal volume, glucose metabolism and CSF tau, and then subtle cognitive changes.
Symptomatic onset occurs ~20 years after the first detection of changes in amyloid
Some studies have suggested that cognitive performance early in life, decades before changes in amyloid biomarkers, can predict subsequent risk for symptomatic AD in late life.
For example, the Nun Study
The ε4 allele of apolipoprotein E (APOE4) remains the major genetic risk factor for sporadic AD
Individuals homozygous for the ε4 allele have a greater than 10-fold higher risk of developing AD than those without an ε4 allele, although this effect is stronger in Caucasians than in Hispanics or African Americans
APOE has two other isoforms: APOE3 and APOE2; the APOE2 allele may reduce the risk of AD
The ε4 allele is associated with higher risk of both early-onset and late-onset sporadic AD, agerelated cognitive impairment, and with cardiovascular disease and type 2 diabetes
The APOE4 allele can also accelerate development of cortical Aβ deposition and decreases in CSF Aβ 42 levels in individuals who have ADAD
The aim of this study was to look at the effect of APOE4 genotype on clinical, cognitive and biomarker measures in the young cohort recruited for the DIAN-OBS study, specifically focusing on those participants who did not carry an ADAD-causing mutation.
We hypothesized that in these young NC DIAN-OBS participants, the presence of an APOE4 allele would affect brain structure and AD biomarkers in individuals many years prior to the possible development of AD symptoms.

Material and Methods

Participants
All participants in the DIAN-OBS study have a parent or consanguineous relative with a known mutation causing symptomatic AD.
Participants enrolled in the DIAN-OBS participate in all assessments whether or not they carry the ADAD-causing mutation that affects their family.
Participants are enrolled in the DIAN-OBS study at 1 of 20 current international study sites and undergo uniform longitudinal assessments including clinical, cognitive, genetic, neuroimaging and fluid biomarker measures
For this analysis, we included baseline assessments from 162 DIAN-OBS participants who had study visits between February 9, 2009 and June 21, 2016 and who met the inclusion criteria, which included 1) confirmed as not having an ADAD causing mutation (NC), 2) normal cognition, defined as having a Clinical Dementia rating (CDR) of 0, 3) having one or zero APOE4 alleles and 4) having clinical and cognitive testing, and 5) completed biomarker studies including PET amyloid imaging with [ 11 C]Pittsburgh Compound B Pittsburgh Compound B (PET-PiB), glucose imaging with [ 18 F] Fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG-PET), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) levels of AD biomarkers amyloid beta peptide 42 (Aβ 42 ), total tau and phosphorylated tau (ptau 181 ) from the time-locked semiannual data freeze (DIAN datafreeze 11).
All participants provided informed consent for study participation; the study was approved by the Washington University Human Research Protection Office.

Clinical assessments
The Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR)
Family and medical history and physical and neurological examinations were completed on all participants.
Clinicians completing the CDR and clinical assessment were blinded as to mutation status.
All participants included in this analysis had a global CDR rating of 0, indicating no cognitive impairment, at the assessment within 1 year of the completion of cognitive, imaging and biomarker measures.
Assessments in the DIAN-OBS study are performed every 3 years for participants with normal cognition; data presented here are from the baseline (initial) assessment.

Neuropsychological testing
All participants completed a battery of neuropsychological tests as previously described
Measures included tests of semantic memory (category fluency for animals and vegetables and letter fluency), episodic memory (word list recall immediate and delayed, Wechsler Memory Scale (WMS-R) logical memory immediate and delayed), and associative learning (pair binding, with scores reported for correct identification of intact pairs, new pairs and mixed pairs) and tests of processing speed and executive function (Trailmaking Test Parts A and B, Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale-Revised (WAIS-R) Digit Symbol Substitution) and the Mini-Mental State Exam (MMSE).

Brain imaging
Structural brain imaging with MRI: The Alzheimer Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) structural MRI protocol
Every site underwent quality control assessment to insure acquisition conformity.
A 3-Tesla scanner was used to acquire T1-weighted images (1.1×1.1×1.2 mm voxels).
Images were screened by the ADNI imaging core for protocol compliance and artifacts.
All MRI sessions were processed using FreeSurfer 5.3 to define cortical and subcortical regions of interest (ROIs).
Regional volumes were corrected for head size using a regression approach
These ROIs were used for the processing of PET imaging data.
We selected the total hippocampal volume for statistical analyses as this region has been shown before to be sensitive to AD pathophysiology
Metabolic and amyloid imaging with PET: Brain metabolism was analyzed FDG-PET and amyloid was imaged with [ 11 C]Pittsburgh Compound B Pittsburgh Compound B (PiB).
To account for differences in spatial resolution across PET scanners, a scanner specific filter was applied to achieve a common spatial resolution (8 mm).
Both FDG and PiB were processed using the Freesurfer derived ROIs
Data for both modalities was converted to regional standardized uptake value ratios (SUVRs) using the cerebellar cortex as a reference.
A regional spread function technique
Global amyloid deposition was summarized using the average of regions previously shown to be sensitive to AD pathology
Additionally, we examined PiB SUVRs, FDG SUVRs and cortical thickness in the precuneus as this region has been shown to be consistently affected in AD

Biochemical analysis
Cerebrospinal fluid was collected by lumbar puncture in the morning after overnight fasting using standard protocols
Levels of Aβ 42 , total tau and tau phosphorylated at threonine 181 (ptau 181 ) were measured using a multiplex bead-based immunoassay (AlzBio3, Fujirebio, Ghent, Belgium).

Statistical analysis
We conducted a cross-sectional mixed effects analysis of covariance (ANCOVA) at participant baseline visit to test if clinical, cognitive, imaging, and biomarker variables were different between the APOE4and APOE4+ groups as well as males and females.
Family of origin was the random effect.
Age was a covariate in the analyses since it is known to be a risk factor for non-carriers.
Age was centered in all analyses to the mean of all participants.
All tests were conducted at the 95% confidence level (alpha=0.05)
using PROC MIXED in SAS 9.4.
Raw P values, not corrected for multiple comparisons are provided; given the 23 comparisons performed, no findings were significant when corrected for multiple comparisons.

Results

Demographic characteristics
A total of 162 participants met eligibility criteria.
Measures were obtained during a 2-4-day visit to a DIAN-OBS site.
In a few cases, PET imaging was not performed during the visit; we excluded any PET data from the analysis if obtained more than 1 year from the other measures.
The participants ranged in age from 19 to 69 years; mean age for all participants was 38.77 ± 11.68 years.
Overall, there were 60.5 % females and 39.5% males.
The most common APOE genotype was APOE3/3; most of the participants who had an APOE4 allele were heterozygotes.
Because of the limited number of participants with each specific APOE genotype, analyses were conducted comparing those with one APOE4 allele (APOE4+, 31.0% of the sample) to those who did not have an APOE4 allele (APOE4-, 69.0% of the sample).
As shown in Table
There was a similar distribution of males and females in both groups and a similar distribution of ADAD-causing mutations (overall 66.7% were from families with a PSEN1 mutation; 21.6% from families with an APP mutation and 11.7% from families with a PSEN2 mutation).
Note that participants included in this analysis did not themselves carry the ADAD-causing mutation.

Effect of APOE4 alone on cognitive performance, imaging or biomarker measures
Results of the cognitive, imaging and biomarker measures are shown in Table
APOE4participants performed slightly but significantly better than APOE4+ participants on the MMSE and on one test of associative memory (identification of new/novel pairs on the pair-binding test) and on one of three tests of semantic fluency (category fluency vegetables) but not on two other similar tests (category fluency for animals and a letter fluency test).
There were no significant differences between APOE4+ and APOE4participants on volumetric MRI measures for the two regions most affected early in Alzheimer disease (precuneus and hippocampus) or in amyloid deposition (measured by binding to [ 11 C]Pittsburgh Compound B Pittsburgh Compound B (PiB)) or on glucose metabolism in the precuneus.
There were no differences between APOE4+ and APOE4participants in levels of CSF biomarkers of AD pathology (Table

Effect of APOE4 and age on cognitive performance
Since the participants in this cross-sectional study included a broad age range (19-69 years), we included age as a covariate in the analysis.
Age did not have an effect on most of the cognitive test scores, with the exception of two speeded tasks, (WAIS-R Digit symbol (Wechsler 1981) and Tralmaking A), where increasing age was associated with slightly poorer scores.
Age did not have an effect on category or letter fluency in our sample.
The only significant interactions between age and APOE4 status on cognitive testing was on the pair binding associative learning tasks (pair binding-mixed).
When we looked more closely at the effect of age and APOE4 status, as shown in Figure
There were no other significant interactions for age with cognitive performance.

Age-related changes in brain structure and amyloid deposition in APOE4 carriers and noncarriers
Age was associated with an increase in amyloid deposition in precuneus and in the averaged global amyloid deposition regions (raw P= 0.0022 and P=0.0232 respectively) and with a decline in glucose metabolism in the precuneus (P= 0.0346).
As shown in Figure
The slopes began to diverge around 30-40 years of age, but this effect disappeared when we repeated the analysis without including those over the age of 50, so the older members of the cohort are driving this finding.
There was no significant interaction between age and APOE4 for glucose metabolism.
As expected, age was related to MRI volumetric measures, with an age associated decrease in precuneus thickness (P=0.0022) and hippocampal volume (P=0.0232).
There was a significant interaction between age and presence of an APOE4 allele for hippocampal volume (P=0.0280),
but this interaction did not achieve statistical significance for precuneus thickness (P=0.0567,
See Figure
Somewhat surprisingly, the trend was for a stronger effect of age on precuneus thickness and hippocampal volume in the APOE4group.

Age effects on CSF biomarkers
As expected, there was an effect of age on CSF total tau (P=.0044) in all participants, but there was no effect of age on CSF Aβ 42 or on levels of phosphorylated tau, and no interactions between age and APOE4 status.
As shown in Figure

Discussion
This study provides a cross-sectional analysis of a robust data set from a unique cohort of 162 cognitively normal adults ranging in age from 19-69 that enables analysis of the effects of one APOE4 allele on cognitive testing, brain structure and function and biomarkers for Alzheimer disease.
This is the first study to include cognitive, fluid and imaging biomarkers in a young cohort.
We found that cognitive performance, brain structure and glucose metabolism were very similar between young APOE4+ and APOE4individuals.
We did not see an effect of APOE4 on fluid biomarkers, but did observe an increase in amyloid deposition with age as measured by PET imaging.
The lack of an effect of APOE4 on cognitive performance is consistent with several other reports
These findings in young adults are in contrast to studies in older adults, where the presence of an APOE4 allele has been associated with poorer cognitive performance even in the absence of dementia or mild cognitive impairment (reviewed in
The association of age with performance on speeded tasks (Trail Making A and B) was consistent with prior studies
The interaction between age and the presence of an APOE4 allele on an associative learning task (pair binding score for mixed pairs) is difficult to interpret given the abnormal distribution of test scores (Figure
We did not see differences in brain structure between APOE4+ and APOE4individuals, but our analysis was limited to hippocampal volume and thickness of the precuneus and did not include participants under the age of 19.
As expected, increasing age did have an effect on brain structure, with decreases in hippocampal volume and precuneus thickness with age.
We did not find more rapid atrophy of brain structures in the APOE4+ participants, but instead found the age-related decline in hippocampal volume was more pronounced in the APOE4group (Figure
This is in contrast to many studies suggesting more rapid atrophy of these structures in APOE4+ participants
The average age of cognitively normal participants in those studies was older than the cohort studied here and could have included participants with very mild or not yet symptomatic Alzheimer disease, so it is possible that APOE4 related atrophy begins later in the AD pathogenic cascade.
Our findings are consistent with a prior report showing that noncarriers of APOE4 have more pronounced age-related atrophy
This may also be consistent with the idea that APOE4 may have an antagonistic pleiotropic effect, with benefits on brain structure early in life.
In the largest study to date on the effects of APOE alleles on brain structure and cognition in children
Some but not all studies have found a significant decrease in glucose metabolism in young adults who carry an APOE4 allele.
Reiman et al, found that glucose metabolism was reduced in frontal, temporal and parietal lobes and in the cingulate cortex in cognitively normal young adults with an APOE4 allele
We observed an association of glucose metabolism with age in the precuneus, but there was no interaction of APOE4 status with glucose metabolism or with age.
This may reflect differences in the cohort or in the areas sampled but we note one other study has also found that APOE4 does not affect glucose metabolism in cognitively normal adults across the lifespan
We did not see differences between APOE4+ and APOE4participants in amyloid deposition in the precuneus or in pooled cortical regions, but we did observe a correlation between amyloid deposition and age and an increased slope of amyloid accumulation with age in APOE4+ participants (Figure
Amyloid deposition in precuneus and in cortex overall was stable with age for APOE4 noncarriers while APOE4 carriers had increasing amyloid deposition with age, consistent with prior reports in older cohorts
Our findings suggest that APOE4 effects on amyloid accumulation may begin relatively early in life, perhaps around age 30-40, consistent with other reports that included a younger cohort
A meta-analysis of 55 studies also suggested that amyloid accumulation in APOE4+ participants might begin slightly before age 40, although less than 5% of participants in the pooled studies were under the age of 40
Our findings differ somewhat from the recent report by
The study reported here has a larger sample size (162 young participants here vs 76 in the Gonneaud study) and used [ 11 C] Pittsburgh Compound B Pittsburgh Compound B (PiB) rather than florbetapir.
The suggestion of an interaction between age and APOE4 differs from the findings of Jack et al. who observed no interaction between age and APOE4 when looking at amyloidosis in a cohort aged 50-89
These results must be interpreted with caution, however, as the increase in amyloid deposition in the APOE4+ group is not observed when participants over the age of 50 (n=26) are excluded from the analysis, so this finding is driven by the older participants.
We did not see effects of APOE4 genotype on any of the CSF measures of AD pathology, but did observe a slight increase in CSF tau with increasing age, consistent with some prior studies
Age did not have a significant effect on CSF levels of ptau or Aβ 42 , in contrast to some prior studies
We did not observe an interaction between age and APOE4 status for CSF levels of Aβ 42 (Figure
This study has several limitations.
Due to sample size considrations, no measures achieved significance when corrected for multiple comparisons so findings must be considered exploratory.
The participants studied here all have family members with an ADAD mutation, so may not reflect the general population.
The study is cross-sectional, so lacks longitudinal data.
The goal of this exploratory study was to assess all available measures.
It will be important to re-assess these findings as longitudinal data becomes available from this cohort.
Our findings overall support the growing literature on the preclinical stages of Alzheimer disease.
The exploratory findings here are in line with growing evidence that cerebral amyloid accumulation may begin in middle age, perhaps as early as age 30-40 and that the presence of an APOE4 allele may accelerate amyloid deposition
Changes in CSF Aβ 42 are thought to precede amyloid deposition, but we did not detect an age or APOE dependent effect on CSF Aβ 42 .
We did not see effects of APOE4 on cognitive performance or brain atrophy, making it more likely that the effects of APOE4 early in disease are associated with amyloid metabolism or deposition.
This highlights the need for larger longitudinal studies that include imaging and fluid biomarkers in both young and older adults.
Scores on the mixed item subtest (number of 12 mixed pairs correctly identified) plotted against age.
Each circle represents scores from a single participant, with APOE4participants in (blue circles and line) and APOE4+ participants (red circles and lines),, with age at time of testing on the horizontal axis.
The best fit for each group is shown in the solid lines.

Demographic features and genotype
The table provides basic demographic information for the sample.
Although the participants included here did not have an ADAD-causing mutation, the ADAD-causing mutation in the family is reported as this was included as a random effect in the statistical analysis to account for within and among family variability as families are clustered by mutation.



Figure 1 .
Figure 1.
Changes in performance on pair-binding associative learning task by age and APOE4 status.



Figure 2 .
Figure 2. Interactions between age and APOE status for amyloid deposition and volumetric MRI.
Amyloid plaque load as measured by PET-PiB in the precuneus (A) and in an average of six cortical regions (B) plotted over time versus age for APOE4-(blue circles and line) and APOE4+ (red circles and line) participants.
Panel C shows thickness of the precuneus (mm) plotted against age and Panel D shows hippocampal volume (mm 3 ) plotted against age.



Figure 3 .
Figure 3. Panel A. CSF total tau levels plotted against age at time of CSF sampling for APOE4+ participants (red circles and line) and APOE4participants (blue circles and line).
Panel B, CSF Aβ 42 levels plotted against age at time of CSF sampling for APOE4+ participants (red circles and line) and APOE4-participants (blue circles and line).



Table 1 :



Table 2 . Clinical, cognitive and imaging features by APOE4 group.
Sample sizes vary by variable because for a variety of reasons not all data were available for every participant .
Raw P values shown are from the cross-sectional mixed effects analysis of covariance (ANCOVA) to test if clinical, cognitive, imaging, and biomarker variables were different between the APOE4and APOE4+ groups, with centered age as a covariate.
Values shown in BOLD are those that achieved significance (P<0.05) in this exploratory study; note that these are raw P values that were not corrected for multiple comparisons; no findings were significant when corrected for the 23 comparisons performed.
For cognitive testing, higher scores indicate better performance except for the timed tasks, Trailmaking A and Trailmaking B, where lower scores indicate better performance.