Predicting Alzheimer's disease severity by means of TMS–EEG coregistration
Clinical manifestations of Alzheimer's disease (AD) are associated with a breakdown in large-scale communication, such that AD may be considered as a "disconnection syndrome."
An established method to test effective connectivity is the combination of transcranial magnetic stimulation with electroencephalography (TMSeEEG) because the TMS-induced cortical response propagates to distant anatomically connected regions.
To investigate whether prefrontal connectivity alterations may predict disease severity, we explored the relationship of dorsolateral prefrontal cortex connectivity (derived from TMSeEEG) with cognitive decline (measured with Mini Mental State Examination and a faceename association memory task) in 26 patients with AD.
The amplitude of TMSeEEG evoked component P30, which was found to be generated in the right superior parietal cortex, predicted Mini Mental State Examination and faceename memory scores: higher P30 amplitudes predicted poorer cognitive and memory performances.
The present results indicate that advancing disease severity might be associated with effective connectivity increase involving long-distance frontoparietal connections, which might represent a maladaptive pathogenic mechanism reflecting a damaged excitatoryeinhibitory balance between anterior and posterior regions.

Introduction
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a common progressive neurodegenerative disorder that disturbs several cognitive functions with the core difficulties involving episodic memory
Converging neuroimaging and electrophysiological results have demonstrated that the clinical manifestations of AD are not associated only with regional gray matter dysfunction but also with a breakdown in the communication between brain regions because of compromised large-scale connections, leading scientists to consider AD as a "disconnection syndrome"
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), positron emission tomography (PET), and electroencephalography (EEG) have primarily indicated alterations in frontoparietal connectivity, together with weakened interhemispheric interactions
Loss of connectivity is not an "all at once" phenomenon in a brain affected by AD
In the prodromal and early stages of AD, resting-state functional MRI (fMRI) studies have consistently found a weakened connectivity in posterior brain regions
Looking at the full spectrum of AD pathology, abnormalities first affect the medial temporal lobe, the posterior cingulate cortex, and the precuneus
Therefore, prefrontal cortex represents a crucial target area to investigate how connectivity is altered at different stages of AD severity once clinical signs are overt, as these regions are affected in a late stage of the disease
However, only a few works have investigated how connectivity alterations further change over time once AD symptoms are manifested.
A longitudinal resting-state fMRI study by
However, when considering long-term changes, connectivity was found to decrease in all regions.
Moreover, the functional implication of prefrontal connectivity alterations is still unclear.
Although several authors have suggested that the enhanced prefrontal connectivity reflects a compensatory effect
According to the "compensatory hypothesis," patients with AD recruit additional frontal regions to compensate for the impaired posterior connectivity and for the resulting loss of cognitive functioning.
An alternative explanation put forward by
The prefrontal cortex, specifically the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC), is critically involved in episodic memory
Crucially, episodic memory impairment is the core hallmark of AD cognitive profile, with trouble putting names to faces representing a distinct clinical manifestation and one of the most disabling symptoms.
Accordingly, faceename associative memory tasks, which provide highly sensitive indices of episodic and semantic memory performance, are exploited to capture episodic memory difficulties in AD and can contribute to characterize different stages of disease severity
Neuroimaging studies have revealed that in faceename associations, memory requires both highly specialized cortical areas in the occipitotemporal cortex and other brain regions associated with higher cognitive functions, including the DLPFC
Brain connectivity, and more specifically effective connectivity, can be tested by means of the combination of transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) with EEG (TMSeEEG).
This method allows one to measure cortical excitability and effective connectivity in brain networks by measuring cortical signals evoked by TMS in the target area and their propagation to connected regions (i.e., TMS-evoked potentials [TEPs])
TEPs offer an opportunity to probe the causal influence that one region exerts on another because the activation induced by the TMS pulse in the stimulated area spreads to directly or indirectly connected areas.
This spread is measured through EEG as amplitude and latency of TEPs generated in remote regions
Compared to fMRI-based effective connectivity, TEPs-based effective connectivity has high temporal resolution and low spatial resolution (as determined by EEG properties); its estimation does not require strong a priori assumptions and complex causal models, such as Granger causality.
TMSeEEG is an attractive technique because it is noninvasive, painless, and easily accessible
Furthermore, being performed in a resting-state condition, TMSeEEG seems particularly suitable for patients with AD, even at the severe stages of the disease, as it is less demanding for the patient and relatively independent from his/her active collaboration.
A few studies have already demonstrated the feasibility of TMSeEEG in AD
However, only a very small number of patients have been studied or the target has been the motor cortex, with only marginal relevance in AD clinical manifestations.
The aim of the present study was to determine how prefrontal connectivity alterations are related to AD clinical symptoms and may predict disease severity in overt AD through a cross-sectional design.
We explored the relationship between the excitability and effective connectivity of the DLPFC (as derived from TMSeEEG) and cognitive decline
Exclusion criteria were the presence of medical, neurological, or psychiatric disorders that might interfere with the study or the presence of any contraindication for TMS
All participants gave their written informed consent before the experiment.
All the procedures conformed to the Declaration of Helsinki for research involving human subjects and were approved by the ethics committee of the IRCCS Centro San Giovanni di Dio Fatebenefratelli of Brescia (Italy).
Data from 8 participants were excluded from the final sample because of technical problems during TMSeEEG recording.
The final sample thus consisted of 26 participants.
A subset of 20 patients performed also a faceename association memory task (FNAT).
Demographic data from the final sample are reported in Table

Clinical and neuropsychological assessment
The clinical and neuropsychological assessment, administered by trained neuropsychologists, tested general cognitive abilities (MMSE), memory (Rey Auditory Verbal Learning test; recall of ReyeOsterrieth Complex figure; Story Recall from Rivermead Behavioral Memory test), attentional and executive functions (Trail Making test, part A and B), language (Picture naming task; Battery for Analysis of Aphasic Deficits), and praxis (ReyeOsterrieth Complex figure).
All the tests were administered and scored according to standard procedures
In addition, functional abilities were evaluated using basic and instrumental activity of daily living (BADL and IADL) scales
The results of the assessments are reported in Table

Faceename association memory task
The FNAT is an experimental computerized procedure for assessing episodic associative memory
FNAT included 2 phases: encoding and recognition.
The stimuli were displayed on a 15-inch screen 60 cm in front of the patient with the Presentation software (Version 14.9, www.neurobs.
com).
During the encoding phase, 60 unfamiliar faces paired with a set of 60 unfamiliar first names (30 males, 30 females) were randomly presented.
Patients were required to indicate whether the faces belonged to a man or a woman and then were required to encode the faceename associations.
In the recognition phase, administered 10 minutes later, previously seen faces were again randomly presented together with 4 proper names (the correct, one novel, and 2 previously presented names).
Patients were asked to indicate the correct name for each displayed face.
For a detailed description of the task, see
FNAT scores are reported in Table

TMS protocol
TMS was delivered with the Magstim Super Rapid (biphasic) stimulator through a standard 70-mm figure-of-eight coil.
Two hundred TMS pulses were delivered over the left DLPFC at random intervals of 2e4 seconds and with stimulus intensity of 110% of the resting motor threshold (rMT).
To define rMT, the coil was placed tangentially on the scalp over the left primary motor cortex with the handle pointing backward at about 45 angle from the midsagittal axis of the participant's head.
rMT was measured as the lowest stimulus intensity required to elicit a motor-evoked potential of at least 50 mV in the relaxed right first dorsal interosseous for 5 of 10 consecutive trials
The mean rMT was 54.7 percent of the maximal stimulator output (sd ¼ 8.0).
To stimulate the left DLPFC, the coil was positioned tangentially over the scalp at about 45 angle away from the midline, resulting in a posterioreanterior current flow, and targeting the F3 electrode location (according to the International 10e20 System).
The coil was held in place by an expert experimenter and monitored throughout the procedure.
TMS pulses were delivered during a resting-state condition, with participants comfortably sitting and looking ahead toward a fixation point.

EEG recording
TMS-compatible EEG equipment (BrainAmp, Brain Products GmbH, Munich, Germany) recorded scalp potentials from 19 (Fp1, Fp2, F7, F3, Fz, F4, F8, T7, C3, Cz, C4, T8, P7, P3, Pz, P4, P8, O1, O2) TMS-compatible sintered Ag/AgCl electrodes (EasyCap, Brain Products).
The signal was referenced online with respect to the nose, and the ground electrode was at AFz. Horizontal and vertical eye movements were detected with electrodes placed at the left and right canthi and above and below the right eye, respectively.
The impedance between the skin and each electrode was kept below 5 kU.
A continuous recording mode without the use of any sample-and-hold circuit was adopted.
The recorded signal was band-pass-filtered at 0.01e1000 Hz and digitized at a sampling rate of 5000 Hz.

TMSeEEG analysis
The EEG signals were processed and analyzed offline using EEGLAB
Continuous data were interpolated in the time range from À2 to 10 ms with respect to the TMS pulse and then filtered with a 0.1-Hz highpass filter.
Epochs were created around the TMS pulse, starting from 200 ms before it and ending 500 ms poststimulus.
Signal components corresponding to ocular artifacts (blinks and saccades) were identified and discarded by performing Independent Component Analysis (ICA) with the Infomax ICA algorithm.
After ICA, the remaining measurement noise was removed with the SOUND algorithm
For the purpose of SOUND, the same spherical 3-layer model and the same regularization parameter (l ¼ 0.01) as applied in the original work
Because TMSeEEG data are likely to contain nonstationary disturbances, the collected data were cleaned with SOUND in 1-ms-long nonoverlapping windows.
For estimating the noise covariance matrix at each time window, the 5 samples per trial per each 1-ms window were used.
In 5 patients, data were contaminated by TMS-evoked muscle artifacts; then, a method combining signal-space projection and source-informed reconstruction
One muscle-artifact component was removed from each dataset.
The muscle-artifact components were identified based on each component's timeefrequency behavior and the corresponding signal power as explained in
Following signal-space projection and source-informed reconstruction, data were filtered with a 70-Hz low-pass filter, visually inspected to discard epochs containing residual artifacts, rereferenced to the average of the mastoids and then baseline-corrected using the time interval from À100 to À2 ms.
TEP amplitudes were determined by taking the maximal peak from the electrode exhibiting the highest amplitude in the following time windows: 15e25 ms (positive peak over F3), 25e35 ms (positive peak over Cz), 45e55 ms (positive peak over Cz), and 60e80 ms (positive peak over P4).
Later components were not analyzed because components at latencies of 100e200 ms may be related to an auditory-evoked response associated with the sound of the TMS coil discharge
To characterize how the elicited brain activity spread from the stimulated spot to other areas, we localized each TEP component with sLORETA (sLORETA, Pascual-Marqui, 2002), a distributed source-imaging method.
Briefly, sLORETA calculates the standardized neuronal current source density distribution consistent with the scalp topography in the cortical gray matter and the hippocampus of the template of the Montreal Neurological Institute 152 (MNI152)
sLORETA estimates the underlying sources under the assumption that the neighboring voxels should have a maximally similar electrical activity; the result is a blurred, widespread solution in which the voxel with maximum current density is identified as the center of the source of the signal.
Importantly, a previous systematic comparison study has shown that sLORETA can provide reasonably reliable source-current estimates when the traditional 10e20 system is used

Statistical analysis
To investigate how TMSeEEG can predict disease severity, a linear regression was carried out for each TEP component, its amplitude value being the independent variable and the MMSE score the dependent variable.
To detect the presence of outliers, Grubbs's test was performed and if significant (a < 0.05), outlier values were removed.
Outlier calculation identified only a significant value among P70 amplitude values (12.6 mV, p < 0.05).
To quantify the diagnostic ability of TEP components to discriminate between different stages of disease severity (mild vs. moderate AD), receiver operating characteristic curves were computed for the TEP components that showed a significant regression equation.
The area under the curve index ([AUC]; 0.5<AUC>1, with 1 indicating perfect accuracy) was provided as a measure of diagnostic performance, whereas sensitivity and specificity indices were provided to better evaluate the reliability of TEP components as biomarkers for distinguishing between mild and moderate AD.
To do so, patients were classified in accordance with the National Health and Care Excellence guidance (2011) as mild AD if their MMSE score was greater or equal to 21 (N ¼ 13; MMSE score ¼ 22.8 AE 2.0; age ¼ 75.9 AE 5.6), and as moderate AD if their MMSE score was equal or less than 20 (N ¼ 13; MMSE score ¼ 18.9 AE 1.0; age ¼ 77.2 AE 4.0).
In support of the adopted cutoff, MMSE score has been found to discriminate well between all CDR stages with scores of 21e25 and 11e20 corresponding to mild and moderate dementia severity, respectively
To compare mild and moderate AD patients in demographic, clinical, and neuropsychological data, appropriate statistical tests, that is, t-test for continuous variables and c 2 for dichotomous variables, have been performed and are reported in Table
Moreover, to study the relationship between each TEP component and episodic memory dysfunction, a linear regression was calculated to predict FNAT performance (dependent variable) from TEP amplitudes (independent variable).
Statistical analyses were conducted with IBM SPSS Statistics, Version 20.0 (IBM Corp., Armonk, NY).

Results
TMS to the left DLPFC elicited a complex pattern of activity both at the site of stimulation and at other areas.
The grand-average waveform (Fig.
The propagation of the evoked activity was traced by means of the scalp distribution of the EEG signals (Fig.
The first detected component, peaking approximately at 20 ms (P20, localized in left anterior cingulate), was followed by the activation of the contralateral right superior parietal lobule at 30 ms (P30).
The propagation of the signal induced a third component at 50 ms (P50, left superior frontal gyrus), followed by another positive peak at 70 ms (P70, left inferior frontal gyrus).
The spatiotemporal evolution of the signal is shown in Fig.
Importantly, the P30 amplitude was predictive of the MMSE score in patients with AD as revealed by the significant linear regression (F (1,21) ¼ 5.19, p ¼ 0.03, R 2 ¼ 0.20) (Fig.
No other significant regression relationship was found.
Receiver operating characteristic analysis (Fig.
Considering a P30 amplitude value of 3.13 mV as a cutoff score, specificity and sensitivity indexes were 0.63 and 0.92, respectively.
As shown in Fig.
For the other TEP components, no significant relationship with FNAT was found.

Discussion
The aim of the present study was to investigate how prefrontal TMS-evoked activity is associated with disease severity in a sample of mild and moderate AD patients.
We found that the amplitude of P30, an early positive EEG response localized by sLORETA algorithm to the right superior parietal lobule, is augmented with more severe cognitive deterioration (lower MMSE score) and that this increase predicts disease severity.
In addition, P30 predicted performance in FNAT; a greater amplitude was associated with poorer memory performance.
Despite being elicited by left DLPFC stimulation, P30 did not represent a direct local response of the prefrontal cortex.
Source localization results suggested that P30 is generated by the activation of the right superior parietal cortex, possibly due to direct corticocortical signal transmission from the stimulated area.
Indeed, the TEP represents the activation of the stimulated area followed by a spatiotemporal propagating pattern of activation (i.e., from the targeted region to other cortical areas that are the later sources of the response) via intrahemispheric and interhemispheric anatomical connections
Moreover, there is clear evidence of strong connections between prefrontal and parietal areas
Although TEPs do not demonstrate whether the effect of DLPFC stimulation on posterior parietal cortex is through direct connections or is The fact that P30 was increased with lower MMSE scores suggests an inverse association between prefrontal-to-parietal connectivity and cognitive decline: as disease severity advances, left DLPFC connectivity becomes stronger.
This finding is substantiated by fMRI studies that indicated hyperconnectivity of prefrontal areas in AD
Investigating functional connectivity between core regions underlying episodic memory performance, Zhang et al.
It is also interesting to note that the AD-associated alterations of effective connectivity of left DLPFC seem to be selective.
P50 and P70, which were localized in other areas of the prefrontal cortex, showed no significant relationship with AD severity.
It has been shown that the left DLPFC is part of several networks such as frontoparietal and default-mode networks.
It has also been shown that stimulation of DLPFC can activate both of these networks
The selective association of P30, with no other effects on the TEP responses within the 100 ms after TMS, may indicate that only specific networks are relevant for the cognitive and memory decline associated with different illness stages.
The results of this study do not allow to disentangle which is the network primarily involved in the worsening of AD symptoms but they pave the way for further studies.
Cutting-edge TMSeEEG technical improvements will permit to tailor more precisely and individually the stimulation site based on patients' brain scans, thus identifying the target network.
Previous results from TMSeEEG coregistration studies targeting the motor cortex in patients with AD, although partially contrasting, have highlighted a consistent alteration of P30 response.
Ferreri et al.
The authors speculated that higher local activity may reflect plastic reorganization of the sensorimotor system and might serve as a compensatory mechanism able to preserve motor functioning in this sample of patients
Conversely, a previous study showed that P30 amplitude was reduced in early stages of AD, corresponding to a widespread disruption of the sensorimotor system
Moreover, P30 was related with disease severity in mildstage AD, with decreasing amplitudes for more impaired cognitive functioning
It has been suggested that gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA A ) postsynaptic receptors are involved in the generation and modulation of P30
Three classes of receptors (GABA A , GABA B , and GABA C /GABA A -r) mediate the inhibitory actions of GABA (the major inhibitory neurotransmitter in the brain); GABA A regulates most of the fast inhibitory neurotransmission
Therefore, P30 might be considered as a signature of corticocortical GABA A inhibitory circuits, and its increased amplitude might indicate that the moderate stage of AD severity is associated with a boost of inhibitory mechanisms.
However, these results were obtained by stimulating the motor cortex, which does not necessarily parallel changes in the prefrontal cortex.
We also explored how prefrontal connectivity alterations at rest reflect memory impairment.
P30 was found to predict memory (i.e., FNAT) performance: as P30 amplitude increases, memory impairment worsens.
This finding may allow us to understand the functional implication of prefrontal-to-parietal hyperconnectivity, providing suggestions to further disentangle whether such increased recruitment reflects a compensatory or a pathogenic mechanism.
The hypothesis of "successful compensation"
The present finding resonates with the idea put forward by
Otherwise, our results might be interpreted in the framework of a failed "attempted compensation"
This does not mean that there cannot be some underlying compensation going on: perhaps, the fast posterior connectivity decline may be compensated by the prefrontal connectivity increase, which may not be sufficient to avoid the functional deficit.
In this sample of patients with AD, P30 amplitude was found to have a good predictive performance (AUC ¼ 0.78) in discriminating between mild and moderate AD, thus endorsing this measure as a potential connectivity marker of disease severity (sensitivity: 92%; specificity: 62%).
TMSeEEG has been already successfully applied to develop connectivity-based biomarkers for prediction, diagnosis, or prognosis of various neuropsychiatric conditions
P30 may thus potentially represent a future connectivity marker able to predict disease severity in overt AD with important implications in AD research as it could help to: 1) monitor the efficacy of clinical interventions (potentially also during TMS therapy) and their ability to modify the course of the disease, 2) identify patients at risk for more severe clinical outcome, and 3) improve understanding of AD pathophysiology

Limitations and future directions
Although these results appear promising, a few issues need to be considered.
First, this study has been performed in a relatively small sample so the results need to be confirmed in larger cohorts.
This is particularly important to confirm that TMSeEEG can provide a reliable diagnostic biomarker of AD severity.
Second, longitudinal studies assessing long-term changes are needed to take a step toward the development and validation of P30 as biomarker of AD progression.
Indeed, considering the crosssectional design of the present study, conclusions must be drawn with caution.
Third, further studies could attempt to adopt advanced methodological improvements in the acquisition and analysis of TMSeEEG data to obtain more accurate networkbased connectivity estimation and thus improve classification accuracy.

Conclusions
Despite the growing body of evidence regarding connectivity alterations in AD, only a few studies have investigated how these alterations are associated with clinical symptoms in AD across different severity stages.
The present study demonstrated that TMSeEEG can reveal resting-state connectivity alterations related to overt AD which, in turn, are able to predict disease severity.
Specifically, we have shown that increased disease severity is associated with a boost in long-distance interhemispheric frontoparietal signal propagation and connectivity.
Our findings allowed also to disentangle the functional implication of prefrontal hyperconnectivity, showing that the additional recruitment possibly represents a maladaptive pathogenic mechanism rather than a true compensatory phenomenon, which might indicate a progressive impairment in the excitatoryeinhibitory balance between anterior and posterior brain regions.

Disclosure
RJI is founder, minority shareholder, and advisor of Nexstim Plc.
The other authors have no conflict of interest to disclose.



Fig. 1 .
Fig. 1.
TMSeEEG results.
A) Butterfly plot of the grand-averaged TMS-evoked potentials from all the electrodes showing the main components elicited by left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) stimulation.
The signal from the target site of stimulation (electrode F3) is depicted by the red line; B) Topographic distribution; and C) sLORETA source localization for each TEP component before 100 ms.
(For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the Web version of this article.)



Fig. 3 .
Fig. 3. Relationship between P30 amplitude and FNAT accuracy score.
Scatter plot showing the significant negative correlation between P30 amplitude and faceename association memory task (FNAT) accuracy.



Table 1
Demographic, clinical, and neuropsychological results