Plasma β-amyloid in mild behavioural impairment – neuropsychiatric symptoms on the Alzheimer’s continuum
Introduction: Simple markers are required to recognize older adults at higher risk for neurodegenerative disease.
Mild behavioural impairment (MBI) and plasma β-amyloid (Aβ) have been independently implicated in the development of incident cognitive decline and dementia.
Here we studied the associations between MBI and plasma Aβ 42 /Aβ 40 .
Methods: Participants with normal cognition (n = 86) or mild cognitive impairment (n = 53) were selected from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.
MBI scores were derived from Neuropsychiatric Inventory items.
Plasma Aβ 42 /Aβ 40 ratios were assayed using mass spectrometry.
Linear regressions were fitted to assess the association between MBI total score as well as MBI domain scores with plasma Aβ 42 /Aβ 40 .
Results: Lower plasma Aβ 42 /Aβ 40 was associated with higher MBI total score (p = 0.04) and greater affective dysregulation (p = 0.04), but not with impaired drive/motivation (p = 0.095) or impulse dyscontrol (p = 0.29) MBI domains.
Conclusion: In persons with normal cognition or mild cognitive impairment, MBI was associated with low plasma Aβ 42 /Aβ 40 .
Incorporating MBI into case detection can help capture preclinical and prodromal Alzheimer's disease.

Background:
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a neurodegenerative condition characterized by abnormal β-amyloid (Aβ) and tau aggregation into plaques and tangles, resulting in cerebral dysfunction.
AD clinical trials have failed to identify disease-modifying treatments, hindered in part by poor recruitment and retention of early phase disease.
One unifying goal in dementia research is to recognize highrisk individuals in the preclinical and prodromal stages of AD, not only to provide timely intervention but to target recruitment for future research.
Simple markers for risk are required.
though cognitive changes and functional decline are the hallmarks of AD progression, noncognitive markers are also associated with incident dementia.
Of these markers, neuropsychiatric symptoms (NPS) are simple and inexpensive to determine and can be captured at scale.
Mild behavioural impairment (MBI) is a validated neurobehavioural syndrome characterized by the later-life emergence of persistent NPS
]
Plasma biomarkers could also satisfy the need for a cost-effective, minimally invasive approach to quantify early AD risk and to correlate with non-cognitive markers such as MBI as an initial screen.
A growing body of work has demonstrated the efficacy of plasma biomarkers in the evaluation of early neurodegeneration.
2]
Little research has explored the association between MBI and plasma biomarkers,
Here we assessed plasma Aβ associations with MBI.
Informed by recent evidence on the association between MBI and amyloid PET,

Methods:

Study Population

Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI)
Data used in the preparation of this article were obtained from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) database (adni.loni.usc.edu).
The ADNI was launched in 2003 as a public-private partnership, led by Principal Investigator Michael W. Weiner, MD.
The primary goal of ADNI has been to test whether serial magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), positron emission tomography (PET), other biological markers, and clinical and neuropsychological assessment can be combined to measure the progression of mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and early Alzheimer's disease (AD).
ADNI is currently in its 4 th iteration at the time of writing.
All data used in this study were accessed from ADNI before October 19 th , 2020.

Participants
Participants were between 55-90 years of age (inclusive) and spoke either English or Spanish.
They were accompanied by study partners.
Informed consent was obtained from all participants before study enrollment.
We selected participants with MMSE scores between 24-30 (inclusive).
Exclusion criteria in ADNI included concurrent neuropsychiatric diagnoses such as clinically significant depression, psychosis, or non-Alzheimer's neurological disorders.

Measures

Clinical variables:
Age, sex, and education were included to assess for potential associations with plasma Aβ 42 /Aβ 40 .

Cognitive status (normal cognition [NC] or mild cognitive impairment [MCI]
) was determined at the initial visit based on ADNI criteria (

Neuropsychiatric variables:
In ADNI, NPS were assessed using the Neuropsychiatric Inventory (NPI).
Based on a published algorithm,
For each domain, domain scores were calculated as the product of domain frequency (range of 0 to 4) and severity (range of 0 to 3).
Scores across the five transformed MBI subdomains were added to generate a total MBI score (theoretical range of 0 to 60).

Biomarkers:
In the ADNI database, analysis of plasma Aβ 42 and Aβ 40 was completed by the Bateman Laboratory.
Participants were given a stable isotope tracer containing L-[U-
After digestion with Lys-N protease, reconstituted digests were subjected to liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry.
To determine plasma Aβ 42 /Aβ 40 , assays were conducted using the Thermo Scientific TSQ Altis Triple Quadrupole Mass Spectrometer.

Sample
Participants with available plasma amyloid were selected.
NC and MCI participants with NPI data and plasma Aβ 42 /Aβ 40 measurements were included in the final analysis (n=139).
A detailed flowchart of how the final sample was obtained is shown in Figure

Statistical Analysis
Statistical analysis was performed using R (version 3.6.2).
Linear regressions were fitted to assess the association between MBI total score as well as MBI domain scores with the outcome variable, plasma Aβ 42 /Aβ 40 .
The domain scores included the following: affective dysregulation, drive/motivation, and impulse dyscontrol.
Abnormal thoughts/perception and social inappropriateness were low frequency domains in this sample, precluding analysis.
The models controlled for participants' age, sex, education, and diagnostic status (NC or MCI).

Results:
Sample characteristics, including basic demographic information such as age, sex, and education, are shown in Table
A total of 139 participants were included in the analysis, with 86 in the NC group, and 53 in the MCI group.
Linear regressions revealed that a higher MBI total score was associated with decreased plasma Aβ 42 /Aβ 40 (p = 0.04) (Table
An association with age was also observed such that older patients had lower Aβ 42 /Aβ 40 (p = 0.003).
All other variables, including sex, education, and baseline diagnosis of MCI versus NC, were not associated with plasma Aβ 42 /Aβ 40 .
Further analyses of MBI domains showed a significant relationship between higher MBI affective dysregulation and lower plasma Aβ 42 /Aβ 40 (p = 0.04) (Table
However, neither decreased motivation (Table
Plasma Aβ 42 /Aβ 40 has shown promise in supporting the diagnosis of AD,
Further, plasma Aβ 42 /Aβ 40 has predictive value for abnormal amyloid density in the brain
Some early studies using older assays disputed the prognostic value of plasma Aβ 42 /Aβ 40 for incident dementia,
However, the predictive performance of Aβ 42 /Aβ 40 is not influenced by age.
Newer research has identified high levels of plasma Aβ at baseline as a risk factor for future neurodegeneration in NC populations.
These studies have also implicated decreasing plasma Aβ 42 and Aβ 42 /Aβ 40 in early AD progression.
Thus, a declining Aβ 42 /Aβ 40 ratio may portend the development of clinical dementia symptoms.
Differences in the association between plasma Aβ 42 /Aβ 40 and incident dementia between older and newer studies may be explained by the improving specificity and accuracy of Aβ detection using mass spectrometry
Overall, plasma Aβ 42 /Aβ 40 does appear to be an appropriate biomarker for the screening of pre-dementia states.
NPS are present in both preclinical and prodromal disease.
In our sample, MBI symptoms were present in 39/139 (28.1%) participants.
In a population-based cohort, using a similar methodology for NPI score transformation as ours, NPS were present at rates of 30.8% in NC and 47.1% in subjective cognitive decline (SCD).
According to one systematic review, NPS are also common in prodromal AD at 35-85%.
The emergence of NPS in older adults can herald cognitive decline in both NC
In a study of 2769 National Alzheimer's Coordinating Center participants with a Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR) of 0 at baseline, 23.1% with MBI developed cognitive and functional decline to a CDR > 0 at 3-year follow-up.
While the risk of progression from MCI to dementia is around 10-15% at baseline,
MBI provides a validated approach to NPS characterization in at-risk older adults.
Prevalence of MBI varies depending on the setting and approach to MBI case ascertainment.
In a psychiatric outpatient clinic, MBI prevalence was as low as 3.5% 9 using chart review, whereas prevalence was higher at 5.8% in SCD
A sample of memory clinic patients had a high MBI prevalence of 76.5% in SCD and 85.3% in MCI,
Using the same methodology as the present study, population estimates of MBI varied according to cognitive status, from 43.1% in at-risk NC to 48.9% in MCI.
Overall, prevalence estimates using the MBI-C are lower than those using the NPI.
Nonetheless, MBI is associated with cognitive decline throughout the AD continuum, including faster progression in NC
MBI also confers a greater risk of progression to dementia than MCI without MBI.
I has several biological correlates, which the literature is just beginning to explore.
Known associations exist between MBI and biological markers of AD, including Aβ-positron emission tomography (PET),
The current study extends the literature on the biological basis of MBI.
For some, MBI captures the neurobehavioural symptomatology of early phase disease as evidenced by its inverse relationship with plasma Aβ 42 /Aβ 40 .
Our data corroborate the use of MBI as a sensitive instrument for tracking pre-dementia states.
There were no significant differences in plasma Aβ 42 /Aβ 40 between NC and MCI groups.
This supports the utility of MBI in identifying at-risk individuals regardless of baseline cognitive status (NC or MCI), and suggests that for some individuals, MBI may be more sensitive to early Aβ changes than cognition.
Importantly, in the NIA-AA clinical staging for AD, NPS are incorporated in a way that is aligned with MBI.
Specifically, individuals can be placed in stage 2 AD based on neurobehavioural symptoms alone, in the absence of cognitive decline.
These "mild neurobehavioural changes" should have a clearly defined recent onset, which persist and cannot be explained by life events alone.
Our data further support the NIA-AA clinical staging by linking neurobehavioural symptoms with Alzheimer's proteinopathies.
Although the connection between Aβ 42 /Aβ 40 and cognitive decline is well-established, relatively less is known about AD biomarkers and their role in the neuropsychiatric sequelae of disease.
In this study, affective dysregulation was the only MBI domain significantly associated with decreased plasma Aβ 42 /Aβ 40 .
MBI affective dysregulation consists of NPI depression, anxiety, and elation/euphoria, and relates to changes in regulating emotional tone as a consequence of the structural and functional changes associated with AD.
8]
Some studies identified no relationship between decreased CSF Aβ 42 and increased depression in samples of mixed cognitive status;
Plasma Aβ levels have been associated with depression, such that higher baseline plasma Aβ 42 was a predictor for first depressive episode in NC older adults, and progression to AD at 5 years.
gher baseline Aβ 40 was also associated with depressive symptoms in the context of dementia at 11-year follow-up.
In a longitudinal study of cognitively normal older adults with no mood symptoms or mild depression at baseline, worsening depressive symptoms over 2-7 years were significantly associated with cognitive decline, and this effect was moderated by the presence of cortical amyloid on PET imaging.
However, amyloid deposition was less severe in older adults with concurrent major depression than in older adults without depression.
In NC samples, it appears that the pathophysiology of dementia differs in MBI (as characterized by the later-life onset of persistent NPS) versus in pre-existing psychiatric conditions.
Although the data are equivocal, if there is a true acceleration of cognitive decline in older adults with emergent depression and concurrent amyloid burden, treatment of depressive symptoms might offer an opportunity to delay the progression of dementia symptoms.
found a trend toward an association between lower plasma Aβ 42 /Aβ 40 and MBI decreased motivation.
MBI decreased drive/motivation, as denoted by NPI apathy/indifference, may have a tenuous association with amyloid biomarkers in the literature.
The relationship between lower CSF Aβ 42 and apathy was seen in one study
However, new work demonstrated a significant association between Aβ-PET and MBI decreased motivation.
well, another study determined that new-onset apathy, agitation, and irritability predicted faster progression from MCI to AD.
Considering the high prevalence of MBI decreased motivation in dementia, it is unsurprising that the association between Aβ 42 /Aβ 40 and apathy trended towards significance in this small sample.
Finally, subdomain analysis revealed no association between plasma Aβ 42 /Aβ 40 and MBI impulse dyscontrol.
There have been several studies related to the subdomain of MBI impulse dyscontrol, which is comprised of NPI agitation/aggression, irritability, and aberrant motor behaviour.
One review found a consistent relationship between CSF AD biomarkers (Aβ 42 , t-tau, and p-tau) and agitation/aggression in a mixed population of MCI and AD, with no other NPS correlates.
In contrast, another review paper investigating CSF Aβ 42 and agitation/aggression in AD did not demonstrate a clear association.
In summary, the association between Aβ 42 and MBI impulse dyscontrol-related NPS is inconsistent and somewhat surprising given the natural history of impulse dyscontrol symptoms in the evolution of dementia.
Several longitudinal studies have identified emergent impulse dyscontrol symptoms among the earliest behavioural changes associated with incident cognitive decline and dementia.
Two studies found that impulse dyscontrol symptoms were comparable to hippocampal atrophy for prognostication of cognitive decline and dementia,
Thus, the link between AD biomarkers and MBI subdomains can be challenging to interpret, and further investigation is required to explore these relationships.

Limitations and Future Directions:
Our study has some limitations.
MBI total score was extrapolated from composite scores on corresponding NPI items, thus approximating MBI.
The MBI-C is the case ascertainment instrument developed to capture MBI in accordance with the International Society to Advance Alzheimer's Research and Treatment -Alzheimer's Association MBI criteria.
The MBI-C captures emergent and persistent NPS over a period of 6 months or greater, whereas NPI addresses a point estimate of NPS over a 1-month period.
Despite the established algorithm of transformation of NPI items to MBI domains, point estimates of NPS are more susceptible to the inclusion of reactive or transient NPS, decreasing specificity and potentially inflating MBI prevalence.
With our current screening measures, it can be difficult to distinguish between chronic and recurrent psychiatric conditions in late life, versus new-onset neuropsychiatric symptoms in the context of neurodegeneration.
Thus, ADNI exclusion criteria around preexisting psychiatric illnesses may preclude the participation of some older adults with MBI if the pre-existing symptoms are of relatively recent onset.
Therefore, our ADNI sample might not be fully representative of MBI.
Finally, the NPI was developed for and validated in a clinical AD population, and though it has since been used extensively in MCI, its ability to evaluate NPS in NC is not as well defined.
To elucidate the relationship between MBI and plasma biomarkers of AD, future studies should more precisely measure NPS.
The MBI-C would allow for a standardized approach to documenting NPS in pre-dementia populations,
Unfortunately, our data for NPS were limited to a single time-point due to linkage with the plasma biomarker analyses.
Previous studies have successfully used NPS captured at two time points to approximate the persistence criterion of MBI,
It would be valuable to track the natural history of MBI as it relates to longitudinal changes in plasma Aβ 42 /Aβ 40 .
There are limited studies on the effects between AD biomarkers and MBI psychosis and social cognition, and a larger sample size may better characterize these relatively rare NPS.
Finally, our study suggests that MBI predicts early Aβ pathology regardless of baseline cognitive status (NC or MCI), and thus potentially in advance of substantial cognitive changes.
This merits replication in future analyses.

Conclusion:
Our study provides evidence for the biological association between MBI and plasma Aβ 42 /Aβ 40 , a validated marker of brain beta-amyloid.
Therefore, MBI may have utility as an accessible case ascertainment approach in AD clinical trial recruitment.
More research is required to delineate the patterns of association between AD biomarkers and MBI symptoms over time.

Tables


p = 0.29) were associated with lower plasma Aβ 42 /Aβ 40.
Discussion: In a sample of 139 participants with NC and MCI, those with greater MBI burden had significantly lower plasma Aβ 42 /Aβ 40 .
Looking at MBI subdomains, decreased plasma Aβ 42 /Aβ 40 was significantly associated with greater MBI affective dysregulation, but not MBI decreased motivation or impulse dyscontrol.
To our knowledge, this study is the first to demonstrate the relationship between MBI and plasma Aβ 42 /Aβ 40 .



Figure 1 .
Figure 1.
Flowchart showing how the sample populations were obtained from the ADNI cohort



Table 1 .
Sample Characteristics



Table 2 .
The association between Mild Behavioural Impairment (MBI) and plasma Aβ 42 /Aβ 40



Table 3 .
The association between Mild Behavioural Impairment subdomains and plasma Aβ 42 /Aβ 40 ‡Coefficients derived from separate models and adjusted for age, sex, education and baseline cognitive status (NC or MCI).