Tau deletion reduces plaque‐associated <scp>BACE</scp> 1 accumulation and decelerates plaque formation in a mouse model of Alzheimer's disease
In Alzheimer's disease, BACE1 protease initiates the amyloidogenic processing of amyloid precursor protein (APP) that eventually results in synthesis of b-amyloid (Ab) peptide.
Ab deposition in turn causes accumulation of BACE1 in plaque-associated dystrophic neurites, thereby potentiating progressive Ab deposition once initiated.
Since systemic pharmacological BACE inhibition causes adverse effects in humans, it is important to identify strategies that specifically normalize overt BACE1 activity around plaques.
The microtubule-associated protein tau regulates axonal transport of proteins, and tau deletion rescues Ab-induced transport deficits in vitro.
In the current study, long-term in vivo two-photon microscopy and immunohistochemistry were performed in tau-deficient APPPS1 mice.
Tau deletion reduced plaque-associated axonal pathology and BACE1 accumulation without affecting physiological BACE1 expression distant from plaques.
Thereby, tau deletion effectively decelerated formation of new plaques and reduced plaque compactness.
The data revealed that tau reinforces Ab deposition, presumably by contributing to accumulation of BACE1 in plaque-associated dystrophies.
Targeting tau-dependent mechanisms could become a suitable strategy to specifically reduce overt BACE1 activity around plaques, thereby avoiding adverse effects of systemic BACE inhibition.

Introduction
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is characterized by the presence of intracellular neurofibrillary tangles composed of hyperphosphorylated tau and extracellular cerebral amyloid plaques composed of bamyloid (Ab) peptide
Ab is produced by sequential proteolytic cleavage of the transmembrane amyloid precursor protein (APP) by beta-site amyloid precursor protein cleaving enzyme 1 (BACE1)
In the AD brain, BACE1 accumulates in dystrophic axons around plaques
This overt accumulation of BACE1 might pose a major obstacle for pharmacological intervention.
Systemic BACE inhibition causes dose-dependent adverse effects in mice and humans
Thus, an adequate BACE inhibitor dosage that sufficiently suppresses Ab production at plaques might already cause excessive inhibition of physiological BACE1 and BACE2 function elsewhere in the body.
New BACE inhibitors are becoming more selective for BACE1 over BACE2
However, numerous substrates of BACE1 have been identified, including 33 neuronal proteins
Thus, it is highly relevant to understand the underlying cascade that leads to overt BACE1 accumulation around plaques and to identify strategies that particularly reduce excessive BACE1 accumulation rather than reducing BACE1 activity systemically.
The degradation of BACE1 occurs via the lysosomal pathways and therefore depends on retrograde axonal transport to the cell body
Plaques cause microtubule disruption and mislocalization of microtubule motors, kinesin and dynein
Thereby, transport of vesicles is thought to be disrupted, leading to accumulation of vesicles and local swelling of axons.
The microtubule-associated protein tau
We therefore investigated how physiological tau expression contributes to BACE1 accumulation in plaque-associated dystrophies.

Results

Tau deletion attenuates progression but not initiation of Ab deposition
We investigated the impact of tau deletion on the kinetics of Ab deposition in APPPS1 mice
Chronic in vivo two-photon imaging of Methoxy-X04-stained Ab plaques was performed weekly in the somatosensory cortex from 3 to 6 months of age
The density of individual plaques was similar between cohorts at 3 months, but was 24% lower in 6-month-old Tau À/À .APPPS1 compared to APPPS1 mice
Congruently, the plaque formation rate was similar between cohorts in 3-month-old Tau À/À .APPPS1 mice.
However, at 4 months of age, the rate of new plaque formation declined in Tau À/À .APPPS1 mice, resulting in an eightfold lower plaque formation rate between 5 and 6 months of age
Plaques tended to form at a higher rate in female compared to male mice, and tau deletion had a lowering impact in both genders
Increased Ab deposition is likely caused by the presence of an estrogen response element in the Thy-1 promoter driving expression of APP and PS1 in these transgenic mice
Since the number of females and males was counterbalanced between treatment cohorts, mice of both genders were pooled for subsequent experiments.
In contrast to clearly alleviated plaque formation in Tau À/À .APPPS1 mice, the growth rates of plaques were similar between cohorts, with a slight but non-significant reduction in Tau À/À .APPPS1 mice
Unaltered plaque growth in combination with reduced plaque formation resulted in a similar density of large plaques, but particularly reduced density of small plaques (< 8 lm radius) in 6-monthold Tau À/À .APPPS1 mice
The total brain volume covered by plaques increased over the imaging period at a rate of 0.46% AE 0.06% brain volume fraction covered by plaque per week in APPPS1 mice (linear regression, F-test, P < 0.001).
In Tau À/À .APPPS1 mice, the plaque burden was similar to APPPS1 mice initially, but tended to progress at an approximately 30% lower rate
However, interaction between age and genotype narrowly failed to demonstrate statistical significance (P = 0.08).
The low impact of tau deletion on the total plaque volume coverage resulted from the mild contribution of small newly formed plaques to the integrated volume of all plaques.
Overall, our in vivo data indicated that tau deletion started to alleviate plaque formation after considerable Ab deposition had already occurred, but did not reduce Ab deposition in young 3-month-old APPPS1 mice.
Therefore, we further investigated how tau deletion affected Ab production before pronounced Ab deposition in 2-month-old mice.
At this age, cortical APP levels
Furthermore, we did not observe differences in the Ab40/42 ratio at that age

Tau deletion suppresses satellite plaque formation
We further addressed how pre-existing plaques might affect formation of new plaques in APPPS1 mice.
At each imaging time point, the distance between newly formed plaques and the closest border of pre-existing plaques was calculated in 3D
In APPPS1 mice, plaques most frequently formed within 20 lm distance from the border of pre-existing plaques
In Tau À/À .APPPS1 mice, the plaque formation rate was lower everywhere, but the strongest reduction was detected within 20 lm distance of pre-existing plaques.
Tau deletion similarly tended to reduce plaque formation with regard to pre-existing plaques in both genders

Tau deletion reduces accumulation of BACE1 in peri-plaque dystrophies
Increased satellite plaque formation might result from overt accumulation of APP and BACE1 and hence increased local Ab production around plaques
We performed immunohistochemical analysis to assess the impact of tau deletion on accumulation of BACE1 in plaque-associated dystrophies.
In high-resolution 3D data stacks, approximately 40 plaques per mouse were identified based on the Methoxy-X04 fluorescence.
Subsequently, the amount of BACE1-positive dystrophies was quantified around individual plaques (Fig 3A
In APPPS1 mice, plaques consist of a dense core which is surrounded by a layer of less densely packed Ab fibrils.
BACE1-positive dystrophies were predominantly confined to the peripheral less dense region of plaques and extended maximally a few micrometers from the outer plaque border into the surrounding brain tissue
With increasing plaque size, the BACE1-positive annulus around plaques not only increased in total volume, but also became more dense (Fig
In 7.5-month-old Tau À/À .APPPS1 mice, the density of plaque-associated BACE1-positive dystrophies was reduced by half compared to APPPS1 mice
BACE1 accumulation around plaques tended to be slightly higher in male compared to female mice, and tau deletion tended to have a lowering impact in both genders
We were interested whether tau deletion generally alters expression of BACE1 or might specifically affect enrichment of BACE1 in plaque-associated dystrophies.
Since BACE1 is particularly enriched in mossy fiber terminals
However, the BACE1 immunofluorescence signal was similar between APPPS1 and Tau À/À .APPPS1 mice (Fig
Furthermore, Western blot analysis indicated that BACE1 levels were similar between wild-type, Tau À/À , APPPS1, and Tau À/À .APPPS1 mice at 2 months of age (Fig
Conversely, while BACE1 levels tended to increase with aging in APPPS1 mice, they tended to decrease in wild-type, Tau À/À as well as Tau À/À .APPPS1 mice.
However, interaction between age and genotype failed to demonstrate statistical significance (P = 0.75).
In line with increased plaque deposition, female APPPS1 mice tended to have slightly higher BACE1 levels compared to male APPPS1 mice and tau deletion similarly tended to lower BACE1 levels in both genders
Overall, the data indicate that tau deletion alleviated plaque-associated elevation of BACE1 levels without affecting physiological BACE1 expression in the absence of plaques.

Tau deletion alleviates plaque-associated axonal damage
At plaques, BACE1 mainly concentrates in presynaptic dystrophic neurites
We therefore further investigated whether tau deletion specifically reduces enrichment of BACE1 or might alleviate plaque-associated axonal pathology in general.
VGLUT1 Venus mice express the Vesicular GLUtamate Transporter 1, fused to the fluorescent protein Venus under the endogenous VGLUT1 promoter
Thereby, glutamatergic presynaptic boutons were fluorescently labeled and appeared as small sphere-like structures in APPPS1.VGLUT1 Venus mice.
Conversely, dystrophic axons were visible as large diameter varicosities (Fig 4A  ) and was more pronounced around large plaques.
Therefore, the data was stratified according to plaque size.
Around small plaques of 2-10 lm radius, the fraction of brain volume occupied by axonal dystrophies was similar between cohorts.
However, in Tau À/À .APPPS1 mice, large plaques above 10 lm radius were associated with less axonal dystrophies compared to similarly sized plaques of APPPS1 mice
The tau-dependent alleviation of plaque-associated axonal pathology tended to be strongest among female mice
We addressed whether tau deletion particularly reduced axonal dystrophies or might in general reduce also the small VGLUT1-positive boutons around large plaques.
Therefore, among those plaques with a radius larger than 10 lm, the size distribution of VGLUT1-positive structures was compared.
While regularly sized structures (diameter below 3 lm) were present at equal densities, tau deletion particularly reduced the amount of swollen dystrophic axons (Fig 4I, solid lines).
Since tau protein is critically involved in microtubule stability
However, distant to plaques (> 20 lm from plaque borders) the size distribution was similar between the cohorts
Overall, the data indicate that tau deletion alleviated swelling of presynaptic structures around plaques, but did not affect the size of presynaptic structures distant to plaques.

Tau deletion reduces accumulation of APP in peri-plaque dystrophies
The previous analyses pointed to a role of tau in mediating Abinduced axonal pathology.
In a similar manner as for BACE1, immunohistochemical analysis was combined with automatic image segmentation to quantify the impact of tau deletion on the expression pattern of APP and ubiquitin in 7.5-month-old mice.
Around large plaques (> 8 lm radius), the density of APP-positive dystrophies was significantly reduced in Tau À/À .APPPS1 compared to APPPS1 mice
Similarly, ubiquitinpositive structures tended to be reduced particularly among large plaques as well
However, interaction between age and genotype narrowly failed to demonstrate statistical significance (P = 0.06), potentially because ubiquitin-positive soma close to plaques diluted the effect in dystrophic neurites.
Since microglia have been attributed a role in plaque-associated pathology and plaque compactness
Toward the core of plaques, IBA1-positive brain volume tended to be slightly denser in Tau À/À .APPPS1 compared to APPPS1 mice (Fig 5I, dashed lines).
However, the genotype effect failed to demonstrate statistical significance (P = 0.44).
At the plaque border and outside plaques, the density of IBA1-positive brain volume was similar between the cohorts (Fig 5I, solid lines).

Tau deletion reduces plaque compactness
Reduced plaque-associated BACE1 accumulation in Tau À/À .APPPS1 mice correlated well with reduced formation of satellite plaques, but only slightly affected plaque growth.
We addressed the potential cause for this discrepancy.
At lower Ab production rates-as suspected around plaques in Tau À/À .APPPS1 mice-soluble Ab molecules might already accrete to Ab fibrils in the plaque periphery and not reach the plaque core.
Thereby, plaques would grow, but might not become as compact.
In 7.5-month-old mice, cortical brain sections were labeled with Methoxy-X04 and two antibodies (Ab126468 and NAB228), specific for fibrillar Ab ( 6 of 16 with caution.
Altogether, the Methoxy-X04 and Ab immunolabeling data indicate that plaques of similar size were less compact in Tau À/À .APPPS1 mice.

Discussion
While it is widely recognized that Ab accumulation triggers tau aggregation (Go ¨tz et al, 2001;
Our data indicate that tau deletion attenuated the progression but not the initiation of Ab deposition in APPPS1 mice.
Cortical BACE1, APP, and soluble Ab levels were similar between the cohorts before pronounced plaque deposition in 2-month-old mice.
Accordingly, at 3 months of age, the density and total brain volume coverage of plaques were similar between cohorts.
Only with aging, the formation rate of new plaques strongly declined in Tau À/À .APPPS1 mice.
Previous studies have reported that tau deletion affects Ab deposition neither in APP23 mice
In contrast, tau deletion reduced the Ab load in 5xFAD mice
While the previous studies were performed postmortem, we applied chronic in vivo two-photon imaging to investigate the kinetics of Ab deposition.
Overall, our data indicate that the presence of tau not affects Ab deposition during the onset stage, but considerably drives Ab deposition once initial plaques have formed.
This aging-dependent effect of tau deletion on Ab deposition might be an explanation for the controversial results in previous single time point studies.
We addressed the potential reason for the differential effect of tau deletion at different stages of Ab deposition.
Interestingly, our data indicate that tau deletion effectively prevented the formation of satellite plaques, which are known to frequently form close to preexisting plaques
Satellite plaque formation might result from enrichment of BACE1 and APP
Therefore, we investigated how tau deletion affects BACE1 expression in APPPS1 mice.
Interestingly, while tau deletion strongly reduced the amount of BACE1-positive dystrophies around plaques, BACE1 expression distant to plaques was not affected.
That is, in the target region of hippocampal mossy fibers that are known to express high levels of BACE1, we did not observe any difference between the cohorts.
These results are consistent with observations that ablating or knocking down tau in neurons prevented Ab-induced axonal transport defects without affecting transport at baseline
Congruent with our immunostaining experiments, Western blot analysis affirmed that cortical BACE1 levels were similar between APPPS1 and Tau À/À .APPPS1 mice before pronounced Ab deposition had occurred.
Only with aging, BACE1 levels tended to increase in APPPS1 mice, while they tended to decrease in wildtype, Tau À/À , and Tau À/À .APPPS1 mice.
Overall, these data support that tau deletion focally reduced overt BACE1 accumulation associated with plaque deposition but did not affect physiological BACE1 expression elsewhere in the brain.
In comparison, a previous study reported that tau deletion did not affect plaque-associated BACE1 accumulation even though BACE1 levels were overall reduced in the brains of tau-ablated 5xFAD mice
Similar to BACE1, we observed that VGLUT1-and APP-positive dystrophies were reduced and ubiquitin-positive dystrophies tended to be reduced around plaques in Tau À/À .APPPS1 mice.
VGLUT1 is a presynaptic protein, and BACE1 normally localizes to presynaptic terminals as well
Around plaques, BACE1, APP, and ubiquitin particularly concentrate in presynaptic dystrophic neurites
Thus, our immunohistochemical analyses support that tau deletion not specifically reduces BACE1 accumulation, but seems to generally alleviate accumulation of proteins in the presynaptic/axonal neuritic compartment.
Importantly, plaque-associated axonal damage was not entirely prevented in Tau À/À .APPPS1 mice and thus other tauindependent mechanisms likely contribute to this pathology.
Previous studies have reported that tau deletion not affects neuritic pathology around plaques in 5xFAD mice
On the contrary, overexpressing wild-type human tau in APP/PS1 mice enhanced plaque-associated neuritic damage
The conflicting observations on the role of tau in mediating plaque-associated axonal pathology might be due to the different AD models or different ages that were investigated.
Importantly, our quantitative image analysis in hundreds of plaques indicates that the degree of axonal damage considerably depended on the size of plaques and was heterogeneous even among plaques of similar size from the same brain region.
Thus, for a proper estimate of plaque-associated pathology, it is crucial to include a large number of plaques per mouse and to stratify the data according to plaque size.
The focal reduction of BACE1 and APP around plaques in Tau À/À .APPPS1 mice is in line with the kinetics of Ab deposition that we observe in these mice.
Based on our results, we would propose the following hypothetical model: In young mice, plaques initially form at similar rates because cortical BACE1 and APP levels and thus Ab production are similar between the cohorts.
With aging, plaques grow and start to locally elicit accumulation of BACE1 and APP, thereby further potentiating Ab production and satellite plaque formation in their vicinity.
Since tau deletion alleviates overt BACE1 accumulation around plaques, new plaque formation which requires a high critical Ab concentration
However, even at a lower concentration, Ab continues to accrete to pre-existing plaques in Tau À/À .APPPS1 mice.
In fact, the reduced plaque compactness in Tau À/À .APPPS1 mice indicates that soluble Ab is mostly absorbed already in the periphery of plaques and scarcely reaches the plaque core.
Thereby, plaques would grow at a similar rate but become less compact in Tau À/À .APPPS1 mice.
Our data support that tau exacerbates Ab deposition by mediating plaque-associated axonal pathology, but the role of tau is likely manifold.
An alternative explanation could involve tau-dependent alteration of the microglial immune response around plaques.
Our immunohistochemical analysis indicated that the amount of IBA1positive microglial volume was similar between the two cohorts around plaques.
Only within the plaque core, the IBA1-positive brain volume fraction tended to be higher in Tau À/À .APPPS1 mice.
However, the genotype effect failed to demonstrate statistical significance and immunolabeling within the core could also be lowered due to reduced antibody penetration into the more compact plaques of APPPS1 mice.
Thus, our data do not exclude that tau deficiency in microglia contributes to the results we observe, but they do not point to a major influence.
In line with previous findings that tau deletion alone not interferes with axonal transport
Thus, the role of tau in mediating axonal damage and Ab deposition seems to be linked to gain of function within the unique Ab plaque environment.
In a recent study, it was shown that tau initially aggregates in dystrophic neurites surrounding Ab plaques
It is tempting to speculate that such initially formed tau species might locally compromise microtubules and thereby axonal transport of BACE1 and other proteins.
This notion would be in line with in vitro studies reporting that Ab species cause tau-dependent microtubule disassembly
While tau deletion has been shown to alleviate Ab-induced anterograde transport deficits in vitro
However, it remains unclear how pathological forms of tau affect axonal transport after prolonged Ab exposure around plaques in the living adult brain.
Vesicles might be able to enter, but not transit or exit dystrophic regions, due to microtubule disruption
Overall, our data reinforce the notion that BACE1 accumulation in plaque-associated dystrophies potentiates local Ab production and thus emphasize plaque-induced pathology as a relevant mediator that drives further pathological progression.
Importantly, the results support the hypothesis that the connection between Ab and tau is bidirectional rather than unidirectional.
While Ab is clearly required as an initial trigger, tau thereafter mutually reinforces Ab deposition.
Tau-dependent enrichment of BACE1 in plaque-associated dystrophies might emerge as the connecting link entailing this positive feedback loop.
Thus, targeting tau-dependent mechanisms might not only reduce tau-induced neurotoxicity, but could interfere with this vicious pathogenic cycle.
Importantly, tau deletion specifically alleviated overt accumulation of BACE1 associated with progressive Ab deposition, without compromising physiological BACE1 expression distant to plaques.
In comparison with systemic BACE inhibition with the known caveat of dose-dependent adverse effects

Materials and Methods

Transgenic and mutant mice
The experiments with postmortem brain tissue were carried out in 2and 7.5-month-old mice, and in vivo imaging data were obtained from 3 to 6 months of age.
Heterozygous APPPS1 mice
APPPS1 mice (B6.Cg-Tg(Thy1-APPSw,Thy1-PSEN1*L166P) 21Jckr) were obtained from Mathias Jucker and coexpress human APP with the Swedish mutation (KM670/671NL) and mutated PS1 (L166P) under the pan-neuron-specific Thy1 promoter.
VGLUT1-Venus mice were obtained from Nils Brose and express the Vesicular GLUtamate Transporter 1 (VGLUT1), fused to the fluorescent protein Venus under the endogenous VGLUT1 promoter.
Tau knockout mice (B6.129X1-Mapt tm1Hnd /J) were obtained from the Jackson Laboratory and have disrupted tau genes on both alleles.
Mice were grouphoused under pathogen-free conditions until surgery, after which they were kept single-housed.
Similar numbers of male and female mice were used in the tau-deficient and tau-expressing cohort.
The mice were generated in separate colonies from TauWT/WT × TauWT/WT and Tau À/À × Tau À/À parents.
APPPS1 × VGLUT1 Venus mice expressing endogenous murine tau served as control.

Study approval
All applicable international, national, and/or institutional guidelines for the care and use of animals were followed.
All protocols and procedures involving animals were approved and conducted in accordance with the ethical standards of the Ludwig-Maximilian University and the Government of Upper Bavaria (Az.
55.2-1-54-2532-62-12 and 55.2-1-54-2532-214-2016).
This article does not contain any studies with human participants performed by any of the authors.

Statistics
For statistical analysis, GraphPad Prism 5 (GraphPad Software) and SPSS (IBM SPSS Statistics 25) were used.
Inter-group comparisons were performed using two-tailed unpaired Student's t-test or Mann-Whitney test.
Mixed-design ANOVA was performed to compare variables across groups in the longitudinal measurements and to assess changes between groups with respect to plaque size, distance to plaque border, or size of VGLUT1-positive structures.
Two-way ANOVA was applied to compare cortical BACE1 levels across different genotypes and age.
P values refer to the test of interaction unless specified otherwise.
Normal distribution and homoscedasticity were assessed by Shapiro-Wilk and Levene's test, respectively.
If variables were not normally distributed, square root transformation or rank transformation was applied to improve normality and homoscedasticity.
For rank transformation, the entire set of observations was ranked from smallest to largest
Mauchly's test was performed to calculate sphericity, and Greenhouse-Geisser or Huynh-Feldt adjustment were used to correct for violations of sphericity.
If genotype effects or interactions were found, post hoc analyses were performed using Bonferroni's multiple comparisons test.
Regression lines were calculated based on the least square algorithm, and value R 2 , ranging from 0 to 1, was calculated as an indicator for goodness of fit.
All results are presented as mean AE SEM.
For statistical analysis, biological replicates (individual mice, not plaques) were considered as experimental unit.
Data analysis was conducted in blinded fashion.

Brain extraction
Mice were anesthetized by intraperitoneal injection of ketamine (130 mg/kg) and xylazine (10 mg/kg).
Subsequently, brains were extracted, quick-frozen on dry ice, and stored at À80°C.

Ab quantification
Frozen murine cortices were homogenized with a Sonifier 450 (Branson) in nine volumes of Tris-buffered saline (pH 7.4, 4°C) containing complete protease inhibitor cocktail and stored in aliquots at À80°C.
Triton X-100 was added to a final concentration of 1%, and homogenates were incubated for 15 min at 4°C.
After ultracentrifugation at 100,000 × g for 15 min, clear supernatants were diluted 1:100 and used for analysis.
Levels of Ab40 and Ab42 were determined using the electrochemiluminescence immunoassay kits based on 6E10 from Meso Scale Discovery (Rockville) in either singlet or triplex format.
Samples and standards were prepared according to the manufacturer's protocols.

Protein analysis
Protein concentrations were determined in cortex homogenates with the BCA (B9643, Sigma-Aldrich).
Equal amounts of proteins were loaded onto 8% SDS-PAGE gels with Laemmli buffer (8% SDS, 10% b-mercaptoethanol, 40% glycerol, 0.025% bromophenol blue, 125 mM Tris, pH 6.8).
Proteins were separated in Tris-buffer (0.1% SDS, 190 mM glycine, 25 mM Tris) and then transferred onto polyvinylidene difluoride membranes (Amersham Hybond P 0.45 PVDF) overnight with Tris-glycine buffer (25 mM Tris, 240 mM glycine).
The Dual Xtra Prestained Protein Standard (Bio-Rad) served as molecular mass marker.
The membranes were blocked for 30 min at room temperature (RT) in PBS containing 0.1% Tween-20 (A4974, 0500 AppliChem Panreac) and 6% non-fat dry milk.
Membranes were incubated overnight at 4°C with primary antibodies against BACE1 (rabbit polyclonal, D10E5, Cell Signaling, 1:1,000), APP (rabbit polyclonal, Y188, ab32136, Abcam, 1:10,000), calnexin (mouse monoclonal, ADI-SPA-860, Enzo, 1:2,000), and bactin (mouse monoclonal, A5316, Sigma, 1:10,000) in PBS-T buffer (0.5% Tween-20 in PBS).
Membranes were washed three times for 10 min at RT in PBS-T and subsequently incubated with horseradish-peroxidase-conjugated goat anti-rabbit and goat anti-mouse secondary antibodies.
After incubation for 1 h at RT followed by three washes in PBS-T, membranes were incubated with horseradish-peroxidase substrate (ECL, GE Healthcare or ECL Plus) for 2 min and signals were captured with the ImageQuant LAS 4000 biomolecular imager (GE Healthcare Life Science).
Multi Gauge software (Fujifilm) was applied for quantification of protein levels.
Hybridization of calnexin and b-actin was used as controls for equal loading.
To compare BACE1 levels across several gels, the brain homogenate of a 2-month-old control mouse was run on each gel as an internal standard.
All band intensities were normalized to this standard.
The samples derive from the same experiment, and gels were processed in parallel.

Cranial window surgery
A cranial window was implanted over the right cortical hemisphere as previously described
In brief, mice were anesthetized with an intraperitoneal injection of ketamine (130 mg/kg) and xylazine (10 mg/kg).
Additionally, dexamethasone (20 ll at 4 mg/ml) was administered intraperitoneally immediately before surgery to prevent the development of cerebral edema.
An open-skull cranial window (5 mm diameter coverslip) was implanted above the somatosensory cortex.
The center coordinates of the craniotomy were at Bregma +1.0 and 3.0 mm lateral from the midline.
A metal bar was attached firmly to the skull to allow repositioning the mouse during subsequent imaging sessions.
After surgery, mice received a subcutaneous analgesic treatment with carprofen (7.5 mg/kg) and antibiotic treatment with cefotaxime (5 mg/kg).

Chronic in vivo two-photon imaging
Chronic in vivo two-photon imaging was started after a recovery period of 4 weeks to minimize the effect of microglial activity in response to installation of the cranial window.
In order to stain Ab plaques, Methoxy-X04 was injected intraperitoneally (0.5 mg/kg) 24 h before each imaging session.
During imaging, mice were anesthetized with isoflurane (1% in 95% O 2 5% CO 2 ), placed on a heating pad to keep body temperature at 37°C, and fixed to a custom-made holder using the glued metal bar.
In vivo two-photon imaging was performed on a LSM 7 MP (Carl Zeiss) equipped with GaAsP (Gallium Arsenide) detectors and a 20× water-immersion objective (W Plan-Apochromat 20×/1.0
DIC, 1.0 NA, Carl Zeiss).
In each mouse, a 425 × 425 × 200 lm 3 large region of interest was reimaged weekly at a resolution of 0.24 × 0.24 × 0.4 lm 3 .
Methoxy-X04 was excited at 750 nm by a Ti:Sa laser (MaiTai DeepSee, Spectra-Physics), and emission was collected below 485 nm.
In subsequent imaging sessions, the previously imaged brain region was identified using the unique blood vessel pattern.
To keep the emitted fluorescence stable at different depths, the laser intensity was adjusted using the z-correction tool in the microscope control software.

Immunohistochemistry
Mice were deeply anesthetized with an intraperitoneal injection of ketamine (130 mg/kg) and xylazine (10 mg/kg) and were perfused with PBS, followed by 4% formalin solution.
Mouse brains were dissected and post-fixed in 4% formalin for 24 h at 4°C.
Fixed brains were then cut into coronal sections (50 lm) with a vibratome.
Freefloating sections were permeabilized over night with 2% Triton X-100 in PBS at RT and blocked with 10% normal goat serum, 0.3% Triton X-100 in PBS for 2 h at RT.
Sections were incubated with the following primary antibodies in 0.3% Triton X-100 for 2 days at 4°C: BACE1 (rabbit polyclonal, D10E5, Cell Signaling, 1:100), APP (rabbit polyclonal, Y188, ab32136, Abcam, 1:500), IBA1 (rabbit polyclonal, 019-19741, Wako, 1:500), NAB228 (mouse monoclonal, sc-32277, Santa Cruz, 1:500), Ab126468 (rabbit polyclonal, Abcam, 1:500) and ubiquitin (rabbit polyclonal, ab7780, Abcam, 1:200).
Subsequently, sections were washed three times in PBS and incubated with secondary antibody coupled to Alexa with an affinity for different species at a dilution of 1:500 for 2 days at 4°C.
To stain amyloid plaques, sections were incubated for 15 min with 10 lg/ml Methoxy-X04 in 50% ethanol, followed by three washes with 50% ethanol at RT.
Sections were finally washed three times for 10 min with PBS before mounting them on glass coverslips with fluorescence conserving mounting medium (Dako).

Confocal imaging
Images were acquired with a LSM 780 confocal microscope (Zeiss) equipped with a 40×/1.4
oil-immersion objective.
Three-dimensional 16-bit data stacks were acquired in the somatosensory cortex with a lateral size of 1,024 × 1,024 pixels and an axial size of 30-110 pixels (depending on axial resolution and thickness of brain sections).
BACE1, VGLUT1, IBA1, and APP micrographs were recorded at a lateral resolution of 0.1 lm/pixel and an axial resolution of 0.2 lm/pixel.
Ubiquitin, Ab126468, and NAB228 micrographs were recorded at a lateral resolution of 0.2 lm/pixel and an axial resolution of 0.8 lm/pixel.
For quantification of protein expression levels in mossy fiber terminals, two-dimensional 16-bit images with 1,024 × 1,024 pixels were acquired at 0.35 × 0.35 lm resolution.

Analysis of 3D microscopical data
Image data analysis was performed as previously reported
All data stacks obtained by in vivo two-photon microscopy were deconvoluted using AutoQuant (AutoQuantX3, Media Cybernetics).
Quantification of amyloid plaques, axonal dystrophies, and BACE1-positive dystrophies was performed using custom-written MATLAB software.
Initially, data stacks were processed to diminish intensity variations among different stacks and to account for the intensity decline in the axial dimension due to absorption and scattering of photons.
For this purpose, the voxel intensity was normalized in each Z-layer to the 70 th and 85 th percentile for Methoxy-X04 and VGLUT1, respectively, and to the 50 th percentile for BACE1, APP, and ubiquitin.
Subsequently, a percentile-based intensity threshold was applied, and connected component analysis was performed to identify contiguous clusters of voxels.
This standard analysis was slightly modified for each of the biological readouts with the detailed analysis described below.
For BACE1-, APP-, and ubiquitin-positive dystrophies, the 70 th percentile of immunofluorescence signal was used as threshold for each image stack and clusters smaller than 8 lm 3 were excluded.
Microglia were identified by applying the 90 th percentile as minimal intensity threshold, and connected components below 1 lm 3 volume were excluded as noise.
For VGLUT1 Venus fluorescence data stacks, the 75 th percentile was applied as threshold.
The resulting web-like mask of supra-threshold voxels was further segmented morphologically by calculating the distance transformation, followed by watershed segmentation along minimal distance ridges.
Subsequently, the diameter of each VGLUT1-positive segment was calculated from its respective volume by assuming sphere-like morphology (volume = (4/3) * p * radius 3 ).
To analyze the size distribution of VGLUT1-positive structures as a function of plaque distance and plaque size, diameters were binned into 0.1 lm steps.
Amyloid plaques were defined by applying the 90 th percentile in the Methoxy-X04 fluorescence data stacks, which allows to detect the total extent of a given plaque, including the peripheral sparse meshwork of Ab fibrils around the core
The radius of each individual plaque was calculated from the Z-plane with the largest area extension in XY (radius ¼ ffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffi area=p p ), assuming spherical shape of plaques
All plaques that contacted the image border were excluded from the analysis.
The cut-off size was set to a minimal plaque radius of 2 lm.
The distribution of VGLUT1-and BACE1-positive dystrophies, Methoxy-X04 intensity, and rate of plaque formation was analyzed with regard to proximity to the closest amyloid plaque.
For this purpose, a quasi-Euclidean 3D distance transformation was performed at 1 lm resolution from the border (not center) of each plaque into surrounding tissue as well as toward the inside of each plaque.
Voxels inside plaques were assigned negative distance from plaque border.
Subsequently, the mean Methoxy-X04 intensity or mean volume fraction of dystrophic structures was calculated in individual successive 1-lm-thick consecutive layers around the plaque border.
To quantify the pathological impact of each individual plaque, the 3D data stacks were divided into sectors with all voxels closest to a particular plaque constituting the sector of that plaque.
For statistical analysis, plaques were grouped according to their radius (bins of 2 lm or 4 lm) and the pathological impact was compared between plaques of the same size group.
In the data sets obtained by chronic in vivo imaging, individual plaques were tracked semi-automatically over time with the surface tracking module of Imaris (version 7.7.2,
Bitplane).
To identify events of plaque formation, plaques were tracked back to the first time point of appearance and were only assessed when present for at least 3 weeks, to warrant unambiguous distinction from background signal.
In order to obtain the radial plaque growth rate, the radii of individual plaques were fitted with a monophasic association function and the first derivative of the best fit was calculated at each time point.
For the correlation of plaque formation rate with plaque distance, all plaques that formed between 3 and 6 months of age were pooled and closest plaque distance was binned into 20 lm segments.
To estimate the relative protein expression levels in the mossy fiber terminals, the ratio between the mean immunofluorescence intensity within hippocampal stratum lucidum and that in the stratum oriens was calculated.



Figure 1 .
Figure 1.
Tau deletion decelerates Ab deposition.
A Time series of representative 3D-rendered plaques.
Scale bar represents 30 lm.
B Density of individual plaques per unit volume.
Data presented as mean AE SEM; mixed-design ANOVA interaction genotype × age F 1.3,17.4
= 5.25, P = 0.026, Greenhouse-Geisser correction.
C Rate of newly formed plaques.
Data presented as mean AE SEM; mixed-design ANOVA interaction genotype × age F 1.8,23.4
= 8.12, P = 0.003, square root transformation was applied to reduce heteroscedasticity, Greenhouse-Geisser correction.
D Kinetics of plaque growth rates.
Data presented as mean AE SEM; mixed-design ANOVA genotype F 1,13 = 2.06, P = 0.175.
E Frequency distribution of plaque radii at 6 months of age.
Data presented as mean AE SEM; mixed-design ANOVA interaction genotype × plaque size F 6,78 = 6.43,
P < 0.001, square root transformation.
F Total brain volume fraction occupied by plaques.
Data presented as mean AE SEM; mixed-design ANOVA interaction genotype × age F 2.5,32.5 = 2.56, P = 0.081, Greenhouse-Geisser correction.
G Cortex samples on Western blots stained with APPY188-specific antibody in 2-month-old mice.
Hybridization of b-actin was used as a control for equal loading.
The graph indicates quantified APP levels presented as mean AE SEM; unpaired t-test; n APPPS1 = 7, n TauÀ/À.APPPS1 = 5 mice.
H-J Determination of soluble Ab levels via ELISA in the cortex of 2-month-old mice.
(H) Ab40 levels; unpaired t-test.
(I) Ab42 levels; Mann-Whitney test.
(J) Ab40/Ab42 ratio; Mann-Whitney test.
Data presented as mean AE SEM; n APPPS1 = 10, n TauÀ/À.APPPS1 = 8 mice.
Data information: Number of mice in all in vivo experiments was n APPPS1 = 5, n TauÀ/À.APPPS1 = 10; mean plaque number analyzed per mouse = 72; Bonferroni's post hoc test; *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001.
Source data are available online for this figure.



Figure 2 .
Figure 2. Tau deletion reduces plaque formation.
A Representative images of 3D-rendered plaques from 3 to 6 months of age.
White plaques were already present at the beginning, and colored plaques appeared during the imaging period.
The color map indicates the distance of each newly formed plaque to the closest border of a pre-existing plaque at the respective time point of formation.
Since plaques are scattered in 3D over a depth of 200 lm, the inter-plaque distance in these top-view 2D representations occasionally seems smaller than inferred from the color code.
Scale bar represents 50 lm.
B Perspective view of the plaque burden in the 6-month-old APPPPS1 mouse in (A).
For each newly formed plaque, connecting lines point to the respective closest pre-existing plaque.
C Mean rate of plaque formation during the imaging period at varying distances to already existing plaques.
Data presented as mean AE SEM; mixed-design ANOVA genotype F 1,13 = 10.33,
P = 0.007, square root transformation was applied to reduce heteroscedasticity; Bonferroni's post hoc test; **P < 0.01; n APPPS1 = 5, n TauÀ/À.APPPS1 = 10 mice; mean number of newly formed plaques analyzed per mouse = 19.Source data are available online for this figure.



◀ Figure 3 .
Figure 4.



◀ Figure 4 .Figure 5 .
Figure 5. Tau deletion reduces accumulation of APP in peri-plaque dystrophies.
A-C Immunofluorescence micrographs indicating the expression pattern of (A) APP (APPY188-specific antibody), (B) ubiquitin, and (C) IBA1 around Methoxy-X04-stained plaques in 7.5-month-old mice.
White lines indicate the plaque border as defined by Methoxy-X04 fluorescence.
Scale bar represents 10 lm.
D-F Fraction of (D) APP, (E) ubiquitin, and (F) IBA1 immunopositive brain volume at varying distances to the closest plaque border for plaques of different radii.
Data presented as mean.
G Fraction of APP-positive brain volume within the outmost plaque layer (À1 to 0 lm).
Data presented as mean AE SEM; mixed-design ANOVA genotype F 1,6 = 7.54, P = 0.033; Bonferroni's post hoc test; n APPPS1 = 4, n TauÀ/À.APPPS1 = 4 mice; mean plaque number analyzed per mouse: 15.
H Fraction of ubiquitin-positive brain volume between 1 and 6 lm from plaque borders.
Data presented as mean AE SEM; mixed-design ANOVA interaction genotype × plaque radius F 2.2,19.5 = 3.28, P = 0.056, rank transformation was performed to reduce heteroscedasticity; n APPPS1 = 6, n TauÀ/À.APPPS1 = 5 mice; mean plaque number analyzed per mouse: 50.
I Solid lines indicate the fraction of IBA1-positive brain volume within the outmost plaque layer (À1 to 0 lm; mixed-design ANOVA genotype F 1,6 = 0.93, P = 0.37).
Dashed lines indicate the maximum IBA1-positive volume fraction within plaques (mixed-design ANOVA genotype F 1,6 = 0.69, P = 0.44).
Data presented as mean AE SEM; n = 4 mice per cohort; mean plaque number analyzed per mouse: 30.
Source data are available online for this figure.



Figure 6 .
Figure 6.
Tau deletion reduces plaque compactness.
A Cortical brain sections of 7.5-month-old mice stained with Methoxy-X04 and the fibrillar Ab-specific antibodies NAB228 and Ab126468.
White lines depict the outer plaque border as defined by Methoxy-X04 fluorescence.
Scale bar represents 10 lm.
B-D Graphs indicate (B) Methoxy-X04, (C) Ab126468, and (D) NAB228 intensity profiles from outside plaques toward the core of differently sized plaques.
Volume within plaques was assigned negative distance from plaque border.
Fluorescence was normalized to the mean background fluorescence distant to plaques (> 20 lm from plaque borders).
Data presented as mean AE SEM; n APPPS1 = 6, n TauÀ/À.APPPS1 = 5 mice; mean plaque number analyzed per mouse was 121 (Methoxy-X04) and 81 (Ab126468, NAB228).
E Maximal Methoxy-X04 intensity for plaques of varying size.
Data presented as mean AE SEM; mixed-design ANOVA genotype F 1,9 = 7.48, P < 0.023, square root transformation was applied to reduce heteroscedasticity; n APPPS1 = 6, n TauÀ/À.APPPS1 = 5 mice; mean plaque number analyzed per mouse = 121.
F Distance from plaque border at which Ab126468 fluorescence signal exceeds 150% of mean background intensity.
Data presented as mean AE SEM; mixed-design ANOVA genotype F 1,9 = 4.91, P = 0.054; n APPPS1 = 6, n TauÀ/À.APPPS1 = 5 mice; mean plaque number analyzed per mouse = 81.
G Mean NAB228 intensity between 4 and 10 lm from plaque border.
Data presented as mean AE SEM; mixed-design ANOVA genotype F 1,9 = 4.24, P = 0.070, rank transformation was performed to reduce heteroscedasticity; n APPPS1 = 6, n TauÀ/À.APPPS1 = 5 mice; mean plaque number analyzed per mouse = 81.Source data are available online for this figure.



ª
2019 The Authors The EMBO Journal 38: e102345 | 2019