Applications of amyloid, tau, and neuroinflammation PET imaging to Alzheimer's disease and mild cognitive impairment
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a devastating and progressive neurodegenerative disease for which there is no cure.
Mild cognitive impairment (MCI) is considered a prodromal stage of the disease.
Molecular imaging with positron emission tomography (PET) allows for the in vivo visualisation and tracking of pathophysiological changes in AD and MCI.
PET is a very promising methodology for differential diagnosis and novel targets of PET imaging might also serve as biomarkers for disease-modifying therapeutic interventions.
This review provides an overview of the current status and applications of in vivo molecular imaging of AD pathology, specifically amyloid, tau, and microglial activation.
PET imaging studies were included and evaluated as potential biomarkers and for monitoring disease progression.
Although the majority of radiotracers showed the ability to discriminate AD and MCI patients from healthy controls, they had various limitations that prevent the recommendation of a single technique or tracer as an optimal biomarker.
Newer research examining amyloid, tau, and microglial PET imaging in combination suggest an alternative approach in studying the disease process.

| INTRODUCTION
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the most common cause of dementia worldwide.
It is estimated that by 2050, 1 in 85 people worldwide will develop AD
The prodromal phase of AD, defined as mild cognitive impairment (MCI), is characterised by declines in performance of one or more cognitive domains with the preservation of functional independence
Central nervous system (CNS) degeneration and disease neuropathology predates AD and MCI.
This is particularly true in presymptomatic carriers of apolipoprotein E (APOE) ε4
The hallmark neuropathological substrates for AD and MCI are β-amyloid (Aβ) plaques and intracellular tau neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs).
One major theory, the 'amyloid cascade hypothesis', suggests that the overproduction combined with dysfunctional clearance of Aβ is the fundamental event that initiates AD pathogenesis
However, several lines of evidence challenge this assumption.
For example, approximately 30% of healthy elderly individuals have significant levels of Aβ deposition without apparent clinical symptoms
In AD, histopathological evidence suggests that Aβ levels are a poor predictor of severity of cognitive impairment
Presence and extent of hyperphosphorylated tau-based NFT pathology is positively associated with disease duration and severity of cognitive symptoms
In addition to the more traditional markers of AD pathology, the existence of neuroinflammation in AD is currently well established.
Whilst the initial inflammatory response aims to ameliorate neuronal injury, abnormally prolonged microglial activation can have detrimental effects and potentially serve to exacerbate neurodegeneration
Positron emission tomography (PET) is a neuroimaging tool designed to measure in vivo molecular processes in the brain.
PET radioligands bind a target, such as a receptor, a transporter, or an enzyme.
Degree of tracer binding or uptake is used to quantify neuropathology.
This technology may be particularly useful for diagnostic purposes, treatment planning, and to assess disease progression in neurological illnesses
PET biomarkers that have been recommended to improve diagnostic accuracy for AD and MCI include decreased cerebral metabolism on [ 18 F]fludeoxyglucose (FDG) PET and increased Aβ deposition on amyloid PET
Rates of cerebral metabolism do not explicitly elucidate potential disease-causing neuropathology, but more likely highlight the degree of neuronal activity
Characteristic region-based patterns of brain hypometabolism have been established within a range of different dementia aetiologies
PET tracers that measure Aβ burden, tau aggregation, and neuroinflammation provide remarkable insight directly into the processes underlying the pathophysiology of AD and MCI; however, the latter two have not yet been suggested for use in clinical practice.
This review describes the recent developments and current applications of PET imaging of amyloid, tau, and neuroinflammation in AD and MCI.
Abnormalities on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) have also been used as clinically relevant imaging markers for AD and MCI
Table
In their seminal study, it was shown that this benzothiazole-based radioligand was capable of discriminating between patients with a diagnosis of extremely mild AD and healthy controls.
Areas such as frontal and temporoparietal cortex, which are particularly susceptible to Aβ pathology, demonstrated increased [ 11 C]PiB retention in AD.
These findings have been replicated, and moreover, recent findings highlight intermediate regional binding of [ 11 C]PiB in MCI when compared to healthy controls and AD patients
PiB PET has demonstrated the ability to bind to cored and neuritic Aβ plaques, and also diffuse ones
Amyloid load as measured by [ 11 C]PiB in vivo has also been associated with other markers of AD including brain atrophy
Regarding disease progression, cortical [ 11 C]PiB uptake in frontal, temporal, and cingulate areas was found to be predictive of phenoconversion from MCI to AD
It is important to concede that MCI patients display a bimodal distribution for amyloid uptake where amyloid load is significantly elevated in a proportion of some MCI patients but not others
Because of this, mean levels of amyloid accumulation may not be the most reliable discriminator in MCI.
In line, MCI patients with elevated binding of [ 11 C]PiB were more likely to T A B L E 1 Studies examining in vivo regional brain uptake using amyloid tracers in AD and MCI Cortical uptake in all regions including temporal, parietal, frontal, occipital, and both posterior and anterior cingulate cortex was higher in AD patients when compared to healthy controls.
The posterior cingulate cortex had the best ability to discriminate between the two groups.
Regional uptake values had a sensitivity of 85% and a specificity of 91% and were inversely related to global cognitive and memory performance.
(Continues) convert to AD than prodromal patients who were classified as 'amyloid negative'
Noted strengths of [ 11 C]PiB include high amyloid selectivity and affinity, but technical limitations hinder its clinical use in centres without in-house cyclotrons such as its short decay half-life
Additionally, there are significant operational costs associated with the construction and maintenance of a cyclotron on-site
Data also question the sensitivity of [ 11 C]PiB for the detection of early amyloid pathology when compared to cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) Aβ 42 biomarkers.
Specifically, it was found on the trajectory of normal ageing that decreased levels of CSF Aβ 42 are present before the manifestation of elevated PiB binding
These tracers display a substantially longer half-life than that of [ 11 C]PiB, specifically 110 compared to 20 min.
This factor in particular removes the main barrier faced by imaging facilities in pursuing in vivo amyloid quantification for clinical use
Moreover, in 2011, the Food and Drug Administration approved use of [ 18 F]florbetapir to aid in the diagnostic process in AD

| 18 F-labelled amyloid tracers
In line with its suggested clinical utility, the most widely investigated 18 F-labelled amyloid tracer is [ 18 F]florbetapir (Figure
No differences were found in MCI patients versus healthy controls.
This could be due to the evidenced bimodal SUVR distribution of MCI patients.
Abbreviations: AD, Alzheimer's disease; MCI, mild cognitive impairment; SUVR, standardised uptake value ratio.
In a group of individuals with a life expectancy of no more than 6 months, [ 18 F]florbetapir showed a sensitivity and specificity of 92 and 100%, respectively, in detecting a significant degree of amyloid plaques.
Moreover, the accumulation of amyloid detected by in vivo PET imaging correlated with amyloid pathology measured from brain tissue post-mortem
In AD, frontal, temporal, occipital, parietal, cingulate, and precuneus cortical areas all show increased amyloid retention as measured by this ligand compared to healthy controls.
This finding also holds for MCI patients in the posterior cingulate cortex
A strong discriminative ability of [ 18 F]florbetapir for AD and MCI compared to a cognitively normal status is supported by a number of additional studies
MCI patients rated as Aβ positive using this tracer demonstrated greater longitudinal decline in measures of global cognition, cognitive processing speed, and verbal fluency when compared to Aβ negative patients.
AD patients rated as Aβ positive showed a similar pattern on measures of global cognition and verbal fluency
Moreover, a positive amyloid scan for MCI patients indicates a greater risk of disease progression to AD
While 18 F-labelled amyloid tracers are equivalent in their degree of diagnostic accuracy
When considering the clinical implementation of this modality, recent evidence demonstrates its cost-effectiveness
While not as widely investigated as [ 18 F]florbetapir, a similar pattern of amyloid retention is demonstrated throughout the cortex in AD using both [ 18 F]florbetaben
Although it is not a stilbene derivative, it is important to note that [ 18 F]flutemetamol has demonstrated dosimetry comparable with other 18 F-labelled radiopharmaceuticals
Additional commonalities shared by these two tracers with [ 18 F]florbetapir include high rates of sensitivity and specificity in diagnosing AD
Associations are shown between Aβ uptake and cognitive dysfunction in AD
However, there is a still a strong need to further validate [ 18 F]flutemetamol using standardised neuropsychological assessments.
Additionally, research suggests that there is a diagnostic advantage of combining structural MRI and PET imaging with this ligand in AD and MCI
There is some disagreement between studies regarding the measurement of Aβ deposition using in vivo PET.
This is due to a range of factors including variability in scanning time, methodology employed during analyses, identified reference regions and regions of interest, attenuation correction, partial volume correction, machines used to scan, and tracer-specific properties.
This has led to some uncertainty regarding a consistent definition of abnormal amyloid levels characteristic of AD
In support, Villeneuve et al. found that routinely established thresholds for Aβ positivity using [ 11 C]PiB were insensitive and likely to lead to false negatives
There has been an attempt to solve this problem through the creation of a standardised outcome measure across amyloid-PET modalities measured in units termed 'Centiloids' ranging from 0 to 100
However, there is still a great deal of variability present in the amyloid positivity thresholds derived from this approach
Additionally, an amyloid positivity threshold of a standardised uptake value ratio of 1.5
was not sensitive to MCI patients in Thal Phase 1 or 2, and just lowering this value by 0.2 led to approximately 75% of healthy control subjects being classified as having significant brain amyloidosis

| TAU STUDIES
Advances in the measurement of tau pathology in humans using in vivo PET radioligands are scarce, but recent, when compared to their amyloid-specific counterparts.
For years, the gold standard in quantifying tau-derived pathology was either histopathological analysis from post-mortem tissue or the invasive collection of tau and phosphorylated tau from the CSF by means of lumbar puncture
This delay in applying a tau ligand was due to several major challenges that were inherently present in the imaging of tau.
Unlike amyloid, tau is intracellular, so potential ligands need to be able to cross both the blood-brain barrier and the plasma cell membrane of the neurone.
In comparison to amyloid pathology, tau aggregates are present in lower concentrations throughout the brain; therefore, ligands are required to have higher specificity for tau.
Additionally, tau has multiple protein conformations and isoforms, which could potentially adversely impact sites for ligand binding
The first breakthrough in tau imaging using PET was made using the radioligand [ 18 F]FDDNP.
However, this methodology concomitantly assesses amyloid plaque burden and cannot be considered a truly selective for tau pathology
Since then, four families of tracers in particular have shown
This included the hippocampus
In vivo tau burden as detected by this ligand is associated with grey matter atrophy and cognitive impairment

| [ 11 C]PBB3 and THK tracers
Research suggests that radiotracers from the THK family bind to a different site than that of [ 11 C]PBB3
The latter may be more selective to tau aggregations that have a spatial relationship with amyloid deposits, while the former may show preference for tau closely linked to brain atrophy, CSF tau, and neuropsychological functioning
Similar results are shown with [ 18 F]THK5351 with particularly high retention in temporal brain areas
A direct comparison of these two tracers revealed that [ 18 F]THK5351 has a superior pharmacokinetic profile and greater dissociation from white matter and cerebellar grey matter

| [ 18 F]AV-1451
Compared to [ 18 F]THK5317, [ 18 F]AV-1451 (flortaucipir) which is also referred to as [ 18 F]T807, has a clearer pattern of cortical uptake in AD patients and demonstrates a lower degree of off-target binding
However, larger effect sizes for cerebellar uptake were noted relative to [ 18 F]THK5351
Binding of this radioligand mirror the distribution of NFT pathology across the Braak stages
One study found a classification rate of 85.7% for [ 18 F]AV-1451 in making an accurate clinical diagnosis, including AD and MCI
This tracer also demonstrates high sensitivity and specificity in discriminating AD patients and healthy controls
In AD, a similar pattern of cortical uptake is found compared to other tau-based ligands, whereas patients with MCI demonstrate a more localised pattern of tau deposition in entorhinal regions
While a strength of this radioligand is its specificity for NFT pathology, limitations that pertain to off-target binding should be acknowledged.
A autoradiographic evaluation of [ 18 F]AV-1451 demonstrated that sites exhibiting off-target binding included the meninges, scalp, basal ganglia, choroid plexus calcifications, blood vessels and potentially red blood cells, areas characteristic of iron deposition, and leptomeningeal melanin
T A B L E 3 Studies examining in vivo regional brain uptake using tau tracers in AD and MCI Notable differences in tracer uptake were observed in neocortical areas, and particularly the medial temporal cortex for those on the spectrum of AD compared to healthy controls.
Medial temporal atrophy on MRI was also observed for this group.
Moreover, for those along the spectrum of AD, uptake in frontal and temporo-parietal junctions were negatively associated with cognitive status, uptake in limbic, paralimbic, and frontoparietal areas were positively associated with dementia status, and uptake in frontal regions was positively associated with frontal executive dysfunction.
Increased regional tau uptake has also shown associations with impaired domain-specific neuropsychological performance including memory, language, and visuospatial abilities in numerous variants of AD
Interestingly, patients with a high degree of retention in the entorhinal cortex displayed particularly poor memory functioning
A recent study also links tau burden quantified by [ 18 F]AV-1451 to neurodegeneration, specifically longitudinal brain atrophy
Other neurodegenerative pathology shows unique profiles of tau aggregation as detected by this tracer.
For example, patients diagnosed with corticobasal syndrome show retention increases in frontal and parietal cortices compared to those with MCI due to AD
Considering atypical manifestations of AD, those with posterior cortical atrophy display more cortical uptake in occipital areas relative to logopenic progressive aphasia (lvPPA) patients, whilst lvPPA is characterised by more temporal and frontal uptake
Despite having a favourable pharmacokinetic profile and specificity for tau, further study is required in determining the clinical utility of in vivo imaging using [ 18 F]AV-1451 in AD and MCI

| Second-generation tau tracers
There is a fast pace of development in the tau PET imaging literature with several novel second-generation tracers currently in development and undergoing validation
Evidence indicates numerous advantages attributed to some of these emergent tau tracers, including having a characteristically low relative affinity for MAO-B in silico
One promising secondgeneration tau tracer is [ 18 F]MK-6240.
A high binding affinity was shown to tau deposits specifically in the brain tissue of AD patients, but not to those in the tissue of patients with other tauopathies or TDP-43, Aβ, and α-synuclein.
However, off-target binding to neuromelanin was indicated
Cortical tau binding for this tracer was two to three times higher in AD subjects compared to healthy controls

| NEUROINFLAMMATION/ TRANSLOCATOR PROTEIN STUDIES
It has been known for some time from the results of histopathological studies that activated microglia localise to Aβ plaques
Moreover, the results of a genome-wide association study has implicated the triggering receptor expressed on myeloid cells 2 (TREM2) gene, which encodes a microglial cell surface protein, as the second most significant risk factor for late onset AD after APOE ε4
This has stimulated much research into elucidating the role of inflammation in the pathogenesis of AD.
Advances in the in vivo quantification of neuroinflammation have been made through the investigation of translocator protein 18 kDa (TSPO) as a PET imaging target.
Throughout the CNS, TSPO is present in glial and ependymal cells and is located on the outer membrane of mitochondria.
It is posited that TSPO is involved in a range of cell-based functions, including cholesterol transport and hormone synthesis
However, its exact role and functional significance in relation to the brain immune response is not fully understood.
Under normal physiological conditions, there is a low expression of TSPO limited to glial cells.
Nevertheless, during neuronal injury or insult, when microglia are activated, TSPO levels in turn experience a significant upregulation
Moreover, immunohistochemistry studies have confirmed that TSPO upregulation and microglia activation co-localise spatially following a neurotoxic intervention, suggesting that TSPO can measure neuroinflammation through the detection of activated microglia
Beyond microglia, increased TSPO expression is also observed in reactive astrocytes
While numerous TSPO radioligands have been developed so far, we will focus on those investigated in AD/MCI patient populations.

| [ 11 C]PK11195
The most thoroughly researched TSPO radiotracer is [ 11 C]PK11195
(Table
In a pioneering study, Cagnin et al. demonstrated that patients with AD had a signature pattern of [ 11 C]PK11195 uptake in brain areas that included the cingulate, temporoparietal, and entorhinal cortex
Since then, results from this tracer have been mixed and somewhat contradictory.
Minimal or small clusters of increased binding in MCI and mild to moderate AD was reported in two studies
These authors speculated that either microglial activation is implicated later in the disease course or [ 11 C]PK11195 is not a sensitive marker of such activity.
However, these claims are challenged by findings from studies that used region of interest-based analyses to show widespread tracer uptake throughout the cortex for AD patients
The neurodegenerative effects of this potentially prolonged immune response are hinted at when considering that increased tracer retention has been linked with hippocampal atrophy
Utilising [ 11 C]PK11195, longitudinal research suggests an initial reduction of microglial activation in prodromal disease stages

Results pertaining to the relationship between [ 11 C]PK11195
binding and cognitive status are also conflicting.
Three studies found inverse correlations between MMSE score and tracer uptake
However, others failed to find similar associations between [ 11 C]PK11195
retention and neuropsychological performance
This pattern of contradictory results could possibly be attributed to small sample sizes, limitations of the tracer and variability in study methodology.
Several technical limitations of [ 11 C]PK11195 were found, including its short half-life of approximately 20 minutes that is a barrier for centres without a costly on-site cyclotron, low brain uptake, and importantly low signal to noise ratio.
It also exhibits a high degree of nonspecific binding
This nonspecific binding may apply to targets including brain-based lipids
Additional clinical translation difficulties are imposed on the molecule through carbon-11 labelling
However, suboptimal modelling of this tracer is likely its most pressing concern as there has been substantial difficulty in the definition of a true reference region, which is an area absent of binding, for [ 11 C]PK11195
When using an arterial plasma input function, the use of a reference region allows for valid quantification of binding potential
In fact, variability in the findings of studies discussed using [ 11  Regions including the temporal, frontal, orbital, straight, parietal gyrus, insula, putamen, and occipital lobe were 28-36% higher in MCI relative to controls.
Throughout the four lobes of the cortex, and the insula, thalamus, and hippocampus microglial activation and amyloid load measured by [ 11 C]PiB were positively correlated, a similar but not as widespread relationship was evidenced in MCI.
TSPO uptake in frontal, temporoparietal, and occipital cortex was negatively correlated with global cognition, while regional associations were also found with cerebral glucose hypometabolism on FDG PET.
Patients with AD, including the prodromal form, demonstrated greater tracer uptake in regions that include the precuneus, parietal, temporal cortex, and medium and posterior cingulate compared to controls.
This uptake was positively associated with performance on global cognition and grey matter volume.
This also holds for regional amyloid uptake.

Suridjan et al. (2015)
[ 18 F]FEPPA 21 AD patients, 21 healthy controls Temporal, frontal, parietal, and occipital cortical regions and the hippocampus demonstrated increased tracer retention for AD patients compared to controls.
This also held for the posterior limb of the internal capsule and the cingulum bundle.
Regional uptake was associated with impairment in visuospatial ability and language ability.
(Continues)
clustering procedure utilising a priori kinetic classes has been developed
to extract grey matter estimates that can be reliably classified as reference region tissue

| Second-generation TSPO tracers
The shortcomings of [ 11 C]PK11195 were overcome with the advent of second-generation TSPO ligands, which notably had an improved signal-to-noise ratio and higher binding affinity compared to [ 11 C] PK11195
While many second-generation TSPO tracers have been discovered, we will cover only those that have been most widely used in humans and specifically in AD or MCI.
PK11195.
Specifically, increased levels of region-specific TSPO binding in numerous cortical areas are demonstrated in AD patients compared to healthy controls
The temporal pattern of neuroinflammation over the course of the AD has also been well-characterised through longitudinal investigations.
In AD patients, yearly average increases in TSPO binding that ranged from 2.5 to 7.7% were shown using [ 11 C]PBR28
A change in role of activated microglia is supported by a large longitudinal study utilising [ 18 F]DPA-714
Participants with MCI and higher initial TSPO binding had a slower rate of decline measured by the Clinical Dementia Rating and smaller increase in TSPO binding than those with lower initial TSPO binding.
These results, coupled with the aforementioned [ 11 C]
PK11195 studies, have led to the proposal of a dual peak hypothesis of neuroinflammation in AD
This suggests that the early peak in activated microglia in MCI patients is initially protective, attempting to remove Aβ, whereas the later peak in activated microglia is detrimental.
Associations between TSPO expression and clinical outcome for individuals on the spectrum of AD may only be observable for neuroimaging data collected during rising rather than declining phases of these peaks.
It is important to note that results from TSPO imaging studies that include MCI patients may reflect either a rising or declining PET signal.
While different phenotypes of activated microglia are detectable in pathological studies
Similar to [ 11 C]PK11195, in vivo increases in TSPO binding are associated with impairments in global cognition and memory
However, some studies demonstrate no such correlations with the ADAS-Cog or MMSE
This latter result could possibly be attributed to the inclusion of prodromal AD patients in the study sample.
Overall, the nature of the correlation between inflammatory changes and cognitive performance requires further investigation.
When clarifying regional uptake patterns of second-generation TSPO ligands in MCI, further research is needed as well.
This is due to some studies showing striking patterns of upregulated cortical tracer retention when compared to healthy controls, especially in the temporal lobe
It is imperative to acknowledge the primary limitation of these second-generation tracers, which is their particular sensitivity to a single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) of the TSPO gene.
Genetic variation in the SNP rs6917 results in different patterns of binding affinity to TSPO: high affinity binders, low affinity binders, and mixed affinity binders.
Therefore, it is essential to test for these genetic polymorphisms when examining data from these tracers and exclude low affinity binders, which consist of approximately 10% of the population, from analyses
Not being influenced by this TSPO polymorphism can be considered an advantage of [ 11 C]PK11195.

| INTERPLAYS BETWEEN TAU, AMYLOID, AND MICROGLIA
Overall, tau, amyloid, and TSPO radiotracers show good ability in the detection of AD and MCI, in addition to associated neuropathology (Table
However, the role of prolonged microglial activation in the kines can then lead to the promotion of tau pathology
In support of this, PET imaging with both [ 11 C]PK11195 and second-generation TSPO ligands have shown positive correlations between regional TSPO binding and amyloid load in AD and MCI
Whilst older and using smaller samples, studies indicating negative or no association between microglial activation and Aβ accumulation
Two very recent studies have sought to investigate whether associations also exist between TSPO binding and both tau retention on [ 18 F]AV-1451 and amyloid load.
The first found no association between the two, but used a sample of patients primarily with prodromal disease
The second study evidenced a positive relationship between neuroinflammation and both tau and amyloid pathology in patients with AD and MCI, with similar targeted clusters of cortical regions
Furthermore, the correlation between tau and neuroinflammation was demonstrated even in participants without significant amyloid burden, suggesting a process independent of Aβ.
These results offer the first in vivo evidence in AD and MCI patients that neuroinflammation and tau pathology have a pathophysiological link.

| CONCLUSIONS

ACKNOWLEGMENTS



2
| AMYLOID STUDIES 2.1 | 11 C-labelled amyloid tracers Klunk et al. discovered what would become the most heavily researched amyloid PET radiotracer, 11 C-labelled Pittsburgh compound B ([ 11 C]PiB;


promise in the assessment of AD and MCI: [ 11 C]PBB3, from the same tracer family as [ 11 C]PiB, the THK aryquinoline derivatives, the pyrido-indole derivative [ 18 F]AV-1451, and recently developed second-generation tau tracers (Table


Maruyama et al. validated  the use of [ 11 C]PBB3, a pyridinated benzothiazole, in providing high-contrast imaging of tau inclusions in both animals and AD patients.
Using a limited sample of three AD patients and three healthy controls, higher tracer accumulation was reported in medial temporal brain areas of AD patients compared to controls.


However, regional [ 18 F]THK5317 binding has shown an inverse relationship with measures of performance on global cognition and episodic memory
One should interpret results from THK tracers with caution, given evidence that they bind to monoamine oxidase (MAO).
For example, in AD, cortical [ 18 F] THK5351 binding was associated with MAO-B measured in postmortem brain tissue.
Moreover, an MAO-B inhibitor was shown to actively block THK5351 binding in vivo
Results from another study indicated the detection of suspected off-target MAO-B binding for [ 18 F]THK5317 in a study of five AD patients


initiation and exacerbation of amyloid and tau neuropathology in AD remains contested.
Pro-inflammatory cytokines, which are produced by microglia in response to neuronal damage
These cytokines have also been implicated in the manifestation of tau in its pathological state, specifically in tau hyperphosphorylation and NFT generation
Parbo et al. posit a model where amyloid pathology precedes and activates microglia.
Resultant cyto-


Abbreviations: AD, Alzheimer's disease; TSPO, translocator protein.


Compared to healthy controls, AD patients showed increased tracer retention in all four lobes of the cortex, in addition to the striatum.
Regions including pons, subcortical white matter, and the cerebellum, which are typically unaffected by amyloid depositions showed no such differences.
Regional amyloid retention was negatively associated with glucose metabolism as measured by FDG PET.


Studies examining in vivo regional brain uptake using amyloid tracers in studies including amyloid positive MCI


. The first generation of THK radioligands included [ 18 F]THK523, [ 18 F]THK5105, and [ 18 F]THK5117, but demonstrated several flaws that hindered their clinical utility including poor disease discriminability and high white matter retention.Having overcome these limitations, [ 18 F]THK5317 and [ 18 F]THK5351 may be particularly useful in clinical practice(Saint-Aubert et al., 2017).
[ 18 F]


Both MCI and AD patients showed increased tau binding in inferior temporal, lateral temporal, lateral occipital, inferior parietal, anterior frontal, lateral occipital cortex, in addition to the precuneus compared to healthy controls.
Negative correlations between tau retention and FDG uptake were observed in the frontal cortex, while areas of the neocortex showed positive correlations between tau and amyloid binding on PET.


. [ 18 F]JNJ311 and [ 18 F]JNJ-067 are structurally different from existing tau tracers and published in vivo data on this JNJ family of radioligands is currently unavailable (Leuzy et al., 2019).
Wong et al. evaluated three potential tau tracers in amyloid positive AD patients and controls: [ 11 C]RO-963, [ 11 C]RO-643, and [ 18 F]RO-948.
Among the three, only [ 18 F]RO-948 was rec-


Studies examining in vivo regional brain uptake using TSPO tracers in AD and MCI Elevated levels of tracer level were observed in brain areas including the fusiform gyri, left parahippocampal gyrus, left posterior cingulate, inferior and middle temporal gyri, left amygdala, inferior parietal lobules, and to a lesser degree putamen and right pallidum in AD patients when compared to controls.In particular, uptake in the left inferior temporal lobe differentiated AD patients with a sensitivity of 75%.Relative to healthy controls, areas in frontal temporal, parietal, and occipital association cortex, in addition to the cingulate and striatum, showed increased tracer uptake in AD patients.Inverse correlations between uptake in posterior cingulate, parietal, and frontal cortical areas and global cognition were found.In a combined group of AD and MCI patients, increased binding was found in brain areas within the occipital, parietal, and temporal cortex, in addition to medial temporal regions including the hippocampus and amygdala.Binding in the precuneus was negatively associated with performance on a measure of delayed recall.Medial frontal, parietal, and left temporal cortical areas demonstrated higher [ 11 C]PK11195 retention for AD patients compared to controls.
Additionally, uptake in the left anterior cingulate, left precuneus, left hippocampus, and left medial frontal cortex showed negative association with global cognitive performance.
A similar inverse relationship was found for regional TSPO binding in the posterior cingulate cortex and amyloid uptake on [ 11 ]C-PiB in this region.


In frontal, posterior cingulate, parahippocampal, lateral and posterior temporal cortex, precuneus, and hippocampus, increased TSPO binding was found in MCI patients compared to controls.
In a mixed group of 16 MCI and AD patients with high Aβ, microglial activation was correlated with PiB amyloid uptake in frontal, parietal, and lateral temporal areas.


Data collection and sharing for this project, specifically generation of figures depicting PET images, was funded by the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) (National Institutes of Health Grant U01 AG024904) and DOD ADNI (Department of Defense award number W81XWH-12-2-0012).
ADNI is funded by the National Institute on Aging, the National Institute of Biomedical Imaging and Bioengineering, and through generous contributions from the following: Takeda Pharmaceutical Company; and Transition Therapeutics.
The Canadian Institutes of Health Research is providing funds to support ADNI clinical sites in Canada.
Private sector contributions are facilitated by the Foundation for the National Institutes of Health (www.fnih.org).
The grantee organization is the Northern California Institute for Research and Education, and the study is coordinated by the Alzheimer's Therapeutic Research Institute at the University of Southern California.
ADNI data are disseminated by the Laboratory for Neuro Imaging at the University of Southern California.
ADNI was not involved in the writing of this manuscript or the decision to submit the manuscript for publication.
Mr A.C., Dr P.E.V., Dr G.P., Dr