Dysregulation of BDNF in Prefrontal Cortex in Alzheimer’s Disease
Background: Brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) is essential for neurogenesis and has been implicated in Alzheimer's disease (AD).
However, few studies have investigated together the epigenetic transcriptional and translational regulation of this peptide in the brain in relation to AD.
Objective: To investigate mechanisms underlying for how BDNF is possibly dysregulated in the brain in relation to ageing and AD neuropathology.
Methods: Prefrontal cortex tissues were acquired from the Manchester Brain Bank (N = 67).
BDNF exon I, and exon IV containing transcripts and total long 3' transcript gene expression were determined by quantitative PCR.
Bisulfite pyrosequencing was used to quantify DNA methylation within promoters I and IV.
Protein concentrations were quantified via an enzyme linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA).
Donors were previously genotyped for the rs6265 (Val/Met) polymorphism.
Results: BDNF exon IV and total long 3' isoform gene expression levels negatively associated with donor's age at death (IV: r = -0.291,
P = 0.020; total: r = -0.354,
P = 0.004).
Expression of BDNF exon IV containing isoform was significantly higher in Met-carriers of the rs6265 variant, compared to Valhomozygotes, when accounting for donor ages (F = 6.455,
P = 0.014).
BDNF total long 3' transcript expression was significantly lower in those with early AD neuropathology, compared to those without any neuropathology (P = 0.021).
There were no associations between BDNF promoter I and IV methylation or protein levels with ages, rs6265 genotype or AD neuropathology status.
Prefrontal cortex BDNF gene expression is associated with ageing, rs6265 carrier status and AD neuropathology in a variant-specific manner.
This dysregulation seems to be independent of DNA methylation influences at the I and IV promoters.

Introduction
Brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) is a neurotrophin that promotes neurogenesis, synaptic plasticity and long-term potentiation (LTP) in the CNS
BDNF has been implicated in the 'age-bydisease hypothesis', in which BDNF expression is reduced in the ageing brain and a reduction in BDNF expression has been associated with multiple neurological disorders
Reductions in BDNF have been widely investigated as a mediator of age-associated decline in synaptic density and cognitive function
However, the underlying mechanisms behind age-associated BDNF declines are not completely understood.
The human BDNF gene has a complex structure involving 9 promoters and 11 exons of which only the exon IX at the 5' end contains the coding sequence
The untranslated 3' exons, through alternative splicing, lead to different transcripts that still contain common coding region at the 3′ end.
Therefore, through the use of alternative promoters and splicing mechanisms, various different BDNF transcripts with alternative 5' untranslated regions (UTRs) can be generated that all code for the same BDNF protein.
Finally, two alternative polyadenylated transcription stop sites in exon IX can lead to transcripts with either short or long 3′ UTRs.
A study has shown that while the short 3′ UTR BDNF mRNA variant is restricted to the cell body in hippocampal neurons, the long 3′ UTR mRNAs are also observed in dendrites
Together, in the human brain, all exons are expressed, but to different degrees in different brain structures (for review see
It is thought that these different promoters allow BDNF to respond to a greater variety of stimuli that further result in the generation of different transcripts that are stable in multiple intracellular environments
As BDNF promoters mediate differential BDNF isoform expression in various parts of the brain, it is thought that changes to their activity could affect cellular and behavioural phenotypes
Epigenetic mechanisms, predominantly promoter methylation that generally serves to silence gene expression, have been shown to regulate BDNF expression
BDNF promoter IV is one of the most widely investigated promoters in the contest of DNA methylation changes associated with alterations in BDNF expression: For example McKinney et al.
Keller et al.
In the periphery, increased methylation at BDNF promoters I and IV have been found in blood DNA from patients with Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI) compared to controls and increased methylation at CpGs in promoter IV predicted conversion from MCI to AD
Further studies in blood DNA have shown increased BDNF methylation at promoter I in AD cases compared to controls
Interestingly, the conversion from amnestic MCI to AD depended upon an interaction of methylation with a non-synonymous single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) in the BDNF gene, rs6265
However there are some conflicting reports not finding increased BDNF methylation in peripheral DNA in AD compared to controls
Within the CNS, Rao and colleagues
A reduction in prefrontal cortex BDNF expression in AD has also been found in a study by
Li et al.
They further found that rs6265 associated with transcriptional regulation only in the female brains.
The aim of this study was to investigate mechanisms underlying the dysregulation of BDNF within the AD brains studying human prefrontal cortex tissue for BDNF protein levels, promoter-specific expression, promoter DNA methylation specifically at promoters for exons I and IV and the rs6265 genotype.

Methods

Study population
Fresh, frozen tissue was taken from superior frontal gyrus (Brodmann area 8).
Samples were acquired from donors through the Manchester Brain Bank.
Ethical approval was granted from the Manchester Brain Bank Committee.
Donors were participants of a large prospective cognitive ageing cohort known as The University of Manchester Age and Cognitive Performance Research Cohort
Stratification into Alzheimer's disease neuropathology groups were based on the National Institute on Aging-Alzheimer's Association guidelines
Briefly, the amyloid beta (Aβ) plaque score (Thal), neurofibrillary tangle stage (Braak) and neuritic plaque score (CERAD) were used to create an "ABC" score.
Four groups were determined: Not, Low, Intermediate and High AD neuropathologic change.
Those with high levels of Aβ and neuritic plaques with low neurofibrillary tangle score were excluded ("ABC" score: A2-3, B0-1, C0-3), due to potential contributions by other co-morbidities.

Gene expression analysis
Brain tissue (~30 mg) was extracted for RNA using TRIsure™ (Bioline, UK), quantified using the Nanodrop 2000c (Thermo Scientific, Wilmington, USA) and qualifies using the Agilent Bioanalyser.
RIN values are given in Supplementary Table
The Tetro cDNA synthesis kit (Bioline, UK) was used to reverse transcribe total RNA (2 μg), according to the manufacturer's protocol using random hexamers.
Relative gene expression was analysed using qPCR with SensiFAST TM SYBR® Lo-ROX kit (Bioline), in accordance with the manufacturer's protocol using primers for BDNF exon I containing transcript (F: CAGCATCTGTTGGGGAGACGA; R: GCCACCTTGTCCTCGGATGT), BDNF exon IV containing transcript (F: TGGGAGTTTTGGGGCCGAAG; R: TGGTCATCACTCTTCTCACCTGG), BDNF total long 3', (F: GGACCCTTCAGAGGTGGCTC; R: GTCGGCTTGAGTGTGGTCCT), ACTB (F: CATCCTCACCCTGAAGTACC; R: ATAGCAACGTACATGGCTGG) and GAPDH (F: CCGCATCTTCTTTTGCGTCG; R: TGGAATTTGCCATGGGTGGA).
qPCR was performed on a Stratagene Mx3000P qPCR system (Agilent) in duplicate.
Relative gene expression, accounting for primer efficiencies and normalised to GAPDH and ACTB, were determined using the geometric averaging method described by Vandesompele and colleagues
Those samples with gene expression levels were not detected (Ct ≥40) were excluded from analyses.

Genotyping
DNA samples were extracted from peripheral blood samples, as described previously
Genotyping for the G196A/Val 66 Met (rs 6265) was performed using the Kompetitive Allele Specific PCR (KASP) assay (LGC Ltd) in reaction volumes of 10ul together with 5ng of DNA that was run on a Stratagene MX3000P qPCR machine (Agilent).
Fluorescence values were read by the MXPro software to enable genotype calling.

Protein quantification
Brain tissue (~100 mg) were lysed using RIPA buffer (Sigma) supplemented with 1x protease inhibitor cocktail and 0.1 M PMSF, as described previously
Quantification of BDNF protein was performed using the Human/Mouse BDNF DuoSet ELISA (R&D Systems).
Protein levels were normalised to total protein levels in the assay (pg/mg of total protein).

DNA methylation analysis
Genomic DNA was extracted using the Isolate II Genomic DNA kit (Bioline) and 500 ng bisulfiteconverted using the EpiMark Bisulfite Conversion Kit (New England Biolabs).
Primers were used to amplify regions of the BDNF promoter I (F: TGAGTGATGATTAAATGGGGATTG; R: BIO-ACTATTAACTCACATTTAAAAAACCATAAC; S: TGGGGATTGGGGGGA) and promoter IV (F: GATTTTGGTAATTCGTGTATTAGAGTGTT; R: BIO-AGATTAAATGGAGTTTTCGTTGAT; S: AATGGAGTTTTCGTTGATGGGGTGCA) using MyTaq HS mix PCR reagents (Bioline).
The BDNF promoter I and promoter IV amplicons contained 5 and 9 CpG sites, respectively.
Amplicons were processed on the Qiagen Q24 Workstation and sequenced on the Qiagen Q24 pyrosequencer.
DNA methylation levels across each amplicon were averaged.
See Supplemental Figure

Statistical analysis
All analyses were performed using IBM SPSS Statistics (v.25).
BDNF isoform expression, protein and DNA methylation levels were log10 transformed prior to statistical analysis.
Correlations between gene expression, DNA methylation and protein levels with donor age were performed using Pearson correlation tests.
Correlations between gene expression, DNA methylation and protein levels were performed using Partial correlation tests, with donor age as a covariate.
Differences in gene expression, DNA methylation and protein levels between rs6265 variant groups were assessed using independent student t-tests.
Further, differences between groups while controlling for donor age were assessed using a one-way ANCOVA.
Differences in gene expression, DNA methylation and protein levels between AD neuropathological groups were assessed using one-way ANOVA, as well as a one-way ANCOVA to control for age.
Results are presented as mean and standard deviation, unless otherwise stated.
Statistical significance was accepted when P<0.05.

Results
Clinical and pathological characteristics of the study population can be found in Table

Relationship between BDNF gene expression, DNA methylation and protein levels with age
The association between BDNF exon I, IV and total long 3' isoform expression with the age at death of donors was investigated (Figure
There was a negative association between expression of exon IV containing (r = -0.291,
P = 0.020; Figure
P = 0.004; Figure
P = 0.149; Figure
There were no associations between BDNF protein levels (r = -0.143,
P = 0.256) or DNA methylation levels (promoter I: r = -0.038,
P = 0.761; promoter IV: r = 0.177, P = 0.156) with donor ages.

Correlations between BDNF gene expression, DNA methylation and protein levels
The relationships between BDNF gene expression, DNA methylation and protein levels can be seen in Table
Briefly, BDNF exon I isoform expression positively correlated with BDNF exon IV and total long 3' isoform expression.
BDNF exon IV expression did not correlate with total long 3' variant expression.
Promoter I DNA methylation negatively correlated with BDNF exon I isoform expression levels, however this correlation was lost (p=0.08) when account for RIN values (Supplementary Table
However, there were no associations between promoter IV methylation and BDNF exon IV isoform expression levels.
Protein levels were not associated with either BNDF exon I, exon IV or total long 3'UTR RNA expression or DNA methylation levels.

Relationship between BDNF gene expression, DNA methylation and protein levels with rs6265 variant
The rs6265 variant was in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium in the study population (X 2 = 0.162, P = 0.687).
To explore the differences in BDNF gene expression levels with the rs6265 variant, donors were stratified into Val-homozygotes and Met-allele carriers.
There were no differences in BDNF exon I (t = -1.592,
P = 0.118) and total long 3' (t = 0.122, P = 0.904) variant gene expression levels between the two groups.
However, the Met-allele carriers had significantly higher BDNF exon IV isoform expression compared to Val-homozygotes (t = -2.640,
P = 0.010) (Figure
This difference remained after controlling for donor age at death (F = 6.455,
P = 0.014) and age AND RIN values (F = 7.229, P = 0.009).
There were no differences in BDNF protein levels (t = 0.446, P = 0.657) or DNA methylation levels (promoter 1: -0.435, P = 0.665; promoter 4: -0.755, P = 0.453) between rs6265 variants.

Relationship between BDNF gene expression, DNA methylation and protein levels with

Alzheimer's disease pathology
To investigate the difference in BDNF gene expression with AD pathology, donors were stratified based on the NIA-AA "ABC" score, which considers the amyloid plaque, neuritic plaque and neurofibrillary tangle scores.
These groups were Not, Low, Intermediate and High AD neuropathological change.
Overall, there were differences in BDNF total long 3' isoform gene expression levels between AD pathological groups (F = 3.074, P = 0.035).
Specifically, inter-group comparisons revealed a significant downregulation of BDNF total long 3', isoform expression in the Low AD group, compared to the Not AD group (P = 0.021) (Figure
This difference was also apparent when accounting for donor age at death (overall comparison: F = 3.323, P = 0.026; post-hoc comparison: P = 0.021), however when including age AND RIN values, there were no differences (F = 1.909,
P = 0.139).
There were no differences in BDNF exon I (F = 2.766, P = 0.053) or IV (F = 0.405, P = 0.750) isoform expression levels between the AD neuropathological groups.
Further, there were no differences in protein (F = 0.953, P = 0.421) or DNA methylation (promoter 1: F = 1.019,
P = 0.391; promoter 4: F = 1.009,
P = 0.396) levels between groups.

Discussion
In the prefrontal cortex, BDNF gene expression was associated with donor age, rs6265 carrier status and early AD neuropathology in a variant-specific manner.
These associations were independent of any influences of DNA methylation or protein levels.
Thus, we provide further evidence to the complex mechanisms dysregulating central BDNF during ageing and neurodegeneration.
The majority of research investigating age associations of BDNF levels in humans has focussed on peripheral measures.
Specifically, many reports suggest a gradual reduction in plasma and serum concentrations during ageing
There is, however, limited knowledge of BDNF regulation in human brain tissue across ages.
We report significant reductions of BDNF exon IV and total long 3', but not exon I, containing isoforms between the ages of 72 and 104 years old.
This corroborates findings from that of Oh and colleagues, who also reported reductions in total and exon IVcontaining RNAs in the prefrontal cortex, without any differences in the exon I-containing transcript, between ages 16 to 96 years
Because only exon IX contains the coding region, all the different exon-containing RNA transcripts will be translated to a single species of BDNF polypeptide.
It is hypothesised that this sophisticated gene serves to fine-tune a dynamic transcriptional regulation in different cell types by different neuronal activities.
For example, it has been shown in rodent studies that fear conditioning increased both BDNF exon I and IV containing RNA in hippocampus, but only exon IV in the CA1 region
Interestingly, a study on contextual fear conditioning caused a significant increase of BDNF exon I in WT hippocampus while the levels of exon IV remained unchanged
This highlights that the different exons can be differently regulated.
Mechanistically, within BDNF exon IV promoter three calcium responsive elements (i.e.
CaRE1, 2 and 3) have been identified
regulating calcium-mediated BDNF IV transcription, while in promoter I there is one CRE in promoter I that can be differently regulated by different Ca2+-stimulated protein kinases and other Ca2+stimulated intracellular molecules
The calcium hypothesis of aging
Perhaps this may reflect differential regulation of BDNF transcritps.
Interestingly a NF-kappaB
We report variant-specific associations with the rs6265 variant.
Specifically, Met-carriers had an upregulation of BDNF transcripts containing exon IV, but not exon I or total long 3'UTR transcripts, compared to Val-homozygotes.
The effect of the rs6265 polymorphism on BDNF gene expression is largely unknown
A previous study involving over 500 prefrontal cortex donor samples revealed no differences of BDNF gene expression between rs6265 genotypes
Despite the superior statistical power in this analysis, expression levels of different transcript variants were not reported, rather, only total expression.
Given our preliminary insight suggesting the influence of the rs6265 variant may be transcript-specific in BDNF expression, it would be interesting to replicate our analysis in this population.
The reduction in BDNF expression with AD neuropathology is in agreement with other reports analysing prefrontal
Interestingly, our results further suggest the association between expressions and neuropathology magnitude may be stage specific.
Specifically, those with early AD neuropathology having significant BDNF downregulation seem to be particularly affected.
Increased neuroinflammation is suspected to have a major role in AD progression.
The predominant hypothesis suggests levels of neuroinflammation peaks early on, possibly reflecting an initial antiinflammatory response, followed by a second peak during conversion from MCI to AD, which may indicate a pro-inflammatory shift
This complex relationship may be related to the microglial reaction following the deposition and propagation of amyloid and hyperphosphorylated tau pathologies
Numerous studies demonstrate that neuroinflammation in turn affects the expression of BDNF within the brain; therefore, reduction of BDNF expression and function may be a key mechanism underlying the negative impact of pro-inflammatory cytokines on neuroplasticity
There are a number of limitations to this study.
Variations in postmortem times and RIN values (Supplementary Table
Also, some RNA samples were unable to clearly measured for all transcripts from the total 67 subjects (i.e.
exon I, n=53; exon IV, n=64; long 3'UTR, n=66).
A further confounding variable is that the prefrontal cortex samples also contain relatively heterogeneous cell populations that were not able to control for.
Finally, we only investigated specific promoters and transcripts containing exon I, IV and long 3'UTR, though it would be interesting to investigate further regions of the BDNF gene and more complete coverage of all the different transcripts.

Conclusion
In conclusion, we report prefrontal cortex BDNF gene expression is associated with ageing, rs6265 carrier status and AD neuropathology in a variant-specific manner.
This dysregulation seems to be independent of DNA methylation influences at the I and IV promoters.
These results add further evidence to the complex regulation of the BDNF gene within the cortex.

Supplemental


Garzon et al. investigating individual BDNF variants found transcript specific decreases of BDNF in ADbrains.
Few studies have investigated together the epigenetic, genetic, transcriptional and translational regulation of this peptide in the brain in relation to AD.



Figure 1 .
Figure 1.
Associations between donor age at death with A: BDNF I variant, B: BDNF IV variant and C: BDNF total mRNA expression.



Figure 2 .
Figure 2. Difference in BDNF gene expression between rs6265 Val-homozygotes and Met-carriers.
BDNF I: Val-homozygotes N = 28, Met-carriers N = 25.
BDNF IV: Val-homozygotes N = 37, Metcarriers N = 27.
BDNF total: Val-homozygotes N = 38, Met-carriers N = 28 * P < 0.05.



Figure 3 .Supplementary Figure 1 .
Figure 3. Difference in BDNF total variant gene expression between AD neuropathology groups.
N = 16 (Not), 14 (Low), 26 (Intermediate), 5 (High).
* P < 0.05.



Table 1 .
Clinicopathological characteristics for the donor samples.



Table 2 . Partial correlation matrix, controlling for donor ages, between BDNF gene expression, DNA methylation and protein levels



Table 1 .
Sample details.