Multiparametric graph theoretical analysis reveals altered structural and functional network topology in Alzheimer's disease
A C T Alzheimer's disease (AD), an irreversible neurodegenerative disease, is the most common type of dementia in elderly people.
This present study incorporated multiple structural and functional connectivity metrics into a graph theoretical analysis framework and investigated alterations in brain network topology in patients with mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and AD.
By using this multiparametric analysis, we expected different connectivity metrics may reflect additional or complementary information regarding the topological changes in brain networks in MCI or AD.
In our study, a total of 73 subjects participated in this study and underwent the magnetic resonance imaging scans.
For the structural network, we compared commonly used connectivity metrics, including fractional anisotropy and normalized streamline count, with multiple diffusivity-based metrics.
We compared Pearson correlation and covariance by investigating their sensitivities to functional network topology.
Significant disruption of structural network topology in MCI and AD was found predominantly in regions within the limbic system, prefrontal and occipital regions, in addition to widespread alterations of local efficiency.
At a global scale, our results showed that the disruption of the structural network was consistent across different edge definitions and global network metrics from the MCI to AD stages.
Significant changes in connectivity and tract-specific diffusivity were also found in several limbic connections.
Our findings suggest that tract-specific metrics (e.g., fractional anisotropy and diffusivity) provide more sensitive and interpretable measurements than does metrics based on streamline count.
Besides, the use of inversed radial diffusivity provided additional information for understanding alterations in network topology caused by AD progression and its possible origins.
Use of this proposed multiparametric network analysis framework may facilitate early MCI diagnosis and AD prevention.

Introduction
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is an irreversible neurodegenerative disease and the most common type of senile dementia.
It is characterized by chronic cortical atrophy, such as posterior cingulate atrophy and medial temporal atrophy, and by progressive decline in memory and cognitive functions.
AD is typically diagnosed in people aged older than 65 years
The prevalence of AD is increasing because of the extended lifespan of modern population; therefore, prognostic biomarkers for early AD diagnosis are needed.
The proposed biological hypothesis of AD development is as follows: synaptic dysfunction and loss results in neuronal death, which disrupts structural and functional connectivity in AD; this process is considered a disconnected syndrome
Most biomarkers for AD require on invasive examination, including biochemical assays of cerebrospinal fluid and peripheral tissue as well as evaluating amyloid beta (Aβ) accumulation and neurofibrillary lesions
The recent development of noninvasive neuroimaging techniques, including positron emission tomography (PET) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), has given rise to various commonly used neuroimaging biomarkers for AD.
In clinical studies, PET amyloid imaging and FDG-PET are two of the most commonly used neuroimaging techniques of AD diagnosis
Furthermore, image biomarkers based on structural MRI [i.e., T1-weighted MRI (T1WI)] are often employed to detect anatomical changes in AD, including the volume and thickness of cortical atrophy
These imaging biomarkers currently only serve as supplementary tools facilitating the standard diagnosis protocol, and no standard imaging biomarker based on PET and anatomical MRI have surpassed the reliability and availability of the current protocol.
Therefore, considerable efforts to develop advanced biomarkers are being made.
In addition to PET and anatomical MRI, connectivity-based analysis is increasingly employed to investigate the alterations in structural and functional brain network architectures in AD and mild cognitive impairment (MCI)
Diffusion MRI techniques, such as diffusion tensor imaging (DTI), could be potentially used to detect subtle microstructural changes in the brain of patients with AD by quantifying various properties of water molecular diffusion (e.g., mean diffusivity and anisotropy)
Fiber tracking with diffusion MRI can also be used to characterize the connective patterns of white matter (WM) tracts and has been widely used in AD research
With the reconstruction of neural fiber tracts, a connectivity-based analysis using graph theory to diffusion MRI data demonstrated disrupted topological properties of the structural brain networks in AD, suggesting the evidence for disconnection theory
Functional neuroimaging techniques, such as resting-state fMRI (rs-fMRI) and restingstate EEG (rs-EEG), have been developed as investigative tools for mapping the intrinsic activity of the brain and depicting the synchronization of interregional functional connectivity
Functional neuroimaging studies on MCI and AD have shown that connectivity may alter in some specific functional networks, such as the default-mode network (DMN)
By integrating the complementary information obtained from structural connectivity (SC) and functional connectivity (FC), the mechanism underlying network degradation in AD-affected brains can be unveiled.
Researchers have also studied the changes in the coupling between SC and FC in different conditions or diseases, such as epilepsy
Although connectivity-based analysis incorporating graph theory is potentially useful for investigating disease-related changes in network topology, the interpretation of the findings strongly depends on the connectivity indices used for network construction.
Potential connectivity metrics bias has been demonstrated in a previous evaluation of healthy young participants
Despite this potential bias, most previous studies on brain network analysis of AD empirically selected a single type of connectivity metric.
For brain network analysis of DTI data, FA and metrics based on streamline count (including unnormalized streamline count, and streamline count normalized by averaged fiber lengths or ROI volumes) commonly used as SC metrics.
Most functional network studies applied Pearson correlation as the measure for FC.
Whether the strength of WM connections can be captured by a single connectivity index remains debatable
In addition to FA and streamline count-based metrics, diffusivity-based metrics derived from DTI (including mean, axial, and radial diffusivity) may provide more detailed insights into subtle changes or disruptions of WM tracts
AD-related research using tract-based statistics (TBSS) has used multiple DTI-derived metrics and showed significant changes
Despite the presence of such multiparametric TBSS studies, almost all studies on brain network analysis of AD are based on a single type of connectivity index, and complementary information provided by other DTI-derived measures is often disregarded.
In this study, we incorporated multiple SC and FC metrics into a graph theoretical analysis framework and investigated the alterations in brain network topology in MCI and AD.
For the structural network, we incorporated other metrics than those commonly used, such as FA and streamline count, into the analysis, including inverse radial diffusivity, mean diffusivity, axial diffusivity, and radial diffusivity.
For the functional network, other than commonly used functional connectivity metric, Pearson correlation, we also employed another FC metric, covariance.
By using this multiparametric analysis, we expected different connectivity metrics may reflect additional or complementary information regarding the topological changes in brain networks in MCI or AD.

Material and methods

Participants
In total, 73 subjects divided into three groups [27 healthy controls (HCs), 23 MCI patients, and 23 AD patients] participated in this study.
This study was approved by the research ethics committees at National Health Research Institutes and Buddhist Dalin Tzu Chi Hospital, and informed consent was provided by all patients.
Behavioral measurements were performed to evaluate the cognitive ability for all patients, including the Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA) and Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE), showing significant differences in cognitive ability (p < .01)
among the three groups.
Age (p < .0001),
years of education (p = .0001),
and body mass index (BMI, p = .0245)
were also significantly different among the groups.
Among the 73 subjects, two (one HC and one AD patients) did not undergo diffusion MRI scans, and six (two HC, one MCI, and three AD patients) were excluded because of severe head motion (> 1.5 mm) during rs-fMRI session.
Thus, final cohorts of 71 and 67 subjects underwent structural and functional network analyses, respectively.
Detailed demographics are listed in Table

Image acquisition
MR experiments were performed on a 1.5-T MRI scanner (Signa HDxt, GE Healthcare, Milwaukee, WI, USA).
The scan protocols included 3-dimensional T1WI, DTI, and rs-fMRI.
The T1WI protocol used an IR-prepared fast SPGR sequence (BRAVO) with TR/TE of 10,432/ 4184 ms, TI of 300 ms, flip angle of 20°, voxel size of 1 × 1 × 1.2 mm3, matrix size of 256 × 256, and 154 slices.
The DTI protocol used spinecho diffusion-weighted echo-planar imaging with TR/TE of 12,000/ 104.6 ms, voxel size of 0.9375 × 0.9375 × 2.5 mm3, matrix size of 256 × 256, 45 slices, 30 gradient directions, and b value of 1000 s/ mm2.
The rs-fMRI protocol with blood oxygen level-dependent (BOLD) contrast used gradient-echo echo-planar imaging withTR/TE of 3000/ 35 ms, flip angle of 90°, voxel size of 3 × 3 × 3 mm3, matrix size of 64 × 64, 43 slices, and 120 repetitions.

Construction of the structural network
To construct the structural network, diffusion tensors were reconstructed based on DTI theory
Following DTI reconstruction, a streamline-based fiber tracking algorithm
All DTI reconstructions and streamline-based fiber tracking procedures were performed in DSI Studio (
To construct the structural brain network, the 90 cerebral regions from the automatic anatomical labeling (AAL) template (see Table
We quantified the network edge between two distinct AAL regions by calculating multiple DTI metrics along the interconnected streamlines.
Because not all DTI metrics are positively associated with the strength or integrity of WM connections, to distinguish between natures of network edges, we referred to DTI metrics as SC metrics only if they are designed to reflect the strengths of WM connections.
These DTI metrics comprised two commonly used SC metrics, FA and normalized streamline count (SC N ; number of streamlines divided by the mean length of streamlines).
Diffusivity metrics along streamlines derived from DTI were also included in our analyses: mean diffusivity (MD), axial diffusivity (AxD), and radial diffusivity (RD).
In addition, we used inversed radial diffusivity (iRD) as the novel definition for SC of DTI-according to previous research showing that increased RD in WM is closely associated with myelin loss
Therefore, we hypothesized that that RD is negatively associated with the integrity of the WM connection and employed inversed radial diffusivity (iRD) in our analysis as an alternative metric to quantify the integrity of WM connections (analogous to FA and SC N ).
To our knowledge, this is the first study incorporating inversed radial diffusivity as a measure of DTI SC.

Construction of the functional network
To construct the functional network, rs-fMRI data of individual patients were preprocessed using the DPARSF toolbox (Chao-Gan and Yu-Feng, 2010).
Preprocessing comprised the removal of the first 10 volumes, slice timing correction, coregistration to 3D T1WI, nuisance signal regression (head motion, WM signals and cerebrospinal fluid signals), nonlinear spatial normalization using T1WI, and band-pass filtering (0.01-0.1 Hz).
Images with head motion exceeding half of the voxel width (1.5 mm) were excluded from the study.
On completing preprocessing, the mean time series of each AAL region was obtained by averaging the voxelwise BOLD signals within the selected cerebral region
In this study, two FC metrics, Pearson correlation (PC) and covariance (COV), were computed from the mean time series between two given cortical regions.
COV is closely related to PC, but PC is normalized by the variance of the signals.
Therefore, we expected COV to provide additional information pertaining to the magnitude of signals.

Multiparametric graph theoretical analysis
Following the construction of each individual network, graph theoretical analysis was employed to characterize its structural and functional network topologies.
A threshold connectivity metric is usually applied to filter out unwanted spurious edges of a network prior to graph theoretical analysis.
We employed a multiple-sparsity thresholding method, rather than a single threshold, to reduce variations caused by different thresholding values
Different ranges of thresholding values were used for constructing the structural and functional networks.
For the structural network, the sparsity values used for thresholding are given by S s 0.1 min

=
] with a step size of 0.01, where Ω is the subject group and s i (orig) the original sparsity of the structural network of the ith subject before the thresholding process.
For each individual sparsity threshold (say, s i
), the sparsity thresholding process was applied to the streamline count (SC) matrix such that connections with few streamlines were removed from the graph to match the designated graph sparsity s i (struct) .
This process was applied for every sparsity threshold value, yielding a set of thresholded SC matrices corresponding to each sparsity value in S (struct) .
These thresholded SC matrices were then used as masks to filter out the unwanted entries in other structural network matrices.
Finally, structural network metrics were calculated from each thresholded matrix, and averaged metric values across all sparsity thresholds were used for subsequent analyses.
This multiple-sparsity threshold method is illustrated in Fig.
Similarly, this method was used for functional network analysis; however, the connective matrices of PC and COV were thresholded separately on the basis of their respective values (in contrast to thresholding by a single metric as in structural network analysis).
Note that we used a fixed range of sparsity (S (fun) = [0.1 0.3]), with a step size of 0.01, for thresholding both FC matrices.
On removal of unwanted spurious edges, various nodal and global graph-based metrics were derived from the thresholded connectivity matrices by using the Brain Connectivity Toolbox
In total, five nodal graph-based metrics quantifying regional network topological characteristics were derived: weighted degree centrality (DC), betweenness centrality (BC), PageRank centrality (PR), local efficiency (E loc ), and clustering coefficient (CC).
Those nodal metrics investigating the centrality (i.e.
DC, BC, and PR) quantify the value of individual network nodes within a network based on different definitions.
DC quantifies centrality as the summation of weights of all edges connected to a given node, and BC measures the centrality of a given node by calculating the fraction of shortest paths passing through a given node
Another centrality-based nodal metric, PR, is a quantitative measure developed by Google for ranking websites by calculating the static probability distribution of a Markov chain of a network
To quantify the efficiency of a network to transfer information, the local efficiency E loc is defined as the average inverse shortest path length from a given node to its neighborhood, depicting the fault tolerance of the system
Finally, CC of a given node measures the tendency of all the nodes in its neighborhood to form a cluster and is defined by the fractions of triangles (i.e., strongly connected node triads) to all possible triads in the local subgraph.
The computation of CC in this study was generalized to weighted networks by weighting each triangle count with the geometric average of edge weights
In addition to nodal graph-based metrics, multiple global graphbased metrics were derived from the thresholded connectivity matrices, including characteristic path length (L), global efficiency (E glob ), mean local efficiency (E loc ), mean clustering coefficient (CC), transitivity (T), modularity (M), assortativity coefficient (AC), and small-worldness (SW)
By definition, L is the average shortest path length between all pairs of nodes in a given network; E glob an analog to L and the average inverse shortest path length between all pairs of nodes; CC the average value of all nodal CC; and T a variant of CC, where the fraction of triangles to all possible triads is estimated on a global scale (as opposed to local neighborhoods of individual nodes as in CC), and therefore is not disproportionately influenced by nodes with low DC
Furthermore, M quantifies the tendency for nodes to form nonoverlapped modules throughout the network; AC is defined as the average correlation between degrees of connecting nodes, reflecting the resilience of a network against damages; and SW is measures how accurately a network can be described by a small-world model
Among these metrics, L, E glob , and E loc were used to quantify the degree of network integration (i.e., ease of communication between nodes).
By contrast, CC, T and M were used to quantify the degree of network segregation (i.e., tendency for a group of nodes to form dense interconnections allowing specialized processing).
In addition to network analyses of SC metrics, we investigated the structural networks constructed using diffusivity-based measures derived from DTI.
By definition, DC, E loc , E glob , and E loc reflect the diffusive characteristics along regional WM tracts and across the whole brain.
Other graph-based metrics may lack interpretability for networks defined by diffusivity metrics.
Therefore, we only incorporated these four network metrics in the analysis of tract-specific diffusivity networks.
Because multiple measures were investigated in this study, the connectivity index of the network metrics is denoted by the superscript on a given graph-based metric (e.g., DC (FA) denotes the degree centrality of the network constructed from FA).

Statistical analysis
Here, we investigated network characteristics on global, regional, and connectivity levels.
Because the results of participants' demographics revealed that the baseline characteristics of age, education, and BMI were significantly different among the three groups, we thus took these three covariates into account to adjust the potential effects on the brain network analysis results.
Thus, graph-based and connectivity measures were analyzed through general linear modeling (GLM) by adjusting for age, education level, and BMI.
Moreover, the health effects of these three variables on individuals are not always linearly related (for example, U-shape relationship of BMI on the elders' mortality, skewed distribution of impacts of education and age on cognitive function), therefore, we believe it would be better to treat these three covariates as categorical variables.
The cutoff boundaries of these variables are determined based on empirical evidence in literature or clinical guidelines (e.g., BMI boundary was defined by Taiwan's Ministry of Health and Welfare; age older than 70 was significantly related to cognitive decline
Therefore, each confounding covariate was divided into two groups as follows: 1) age: < 70 years or ≥ 70 years; 2) education level: ≤6 years or > 6 years; 3) BMI: normal weight (18.5 ≤ BMI < 24) or abnormal weight (BMI < 18.5 or BMI ≥ 24).
Resulting p values of regional graph-based and connectivity metrics were corrected for multiple comparisons by using Bonferroni correction.

Results

Structural network analysis

Nodal network metrics
Fig.
At first sight, more regions with significant differences of nodal network metrics were found by comparing either AD or MCI to HC, whereas there were only two nodes with significant difference of nodal network metrics found between AD and MCI, that is, PR (FA) in the AMYG.L (AD > MCI) and E loc iRD ( ) in the OLF.L (AD < MCI) as shown in Fig.
For SC-based nodal network metrics (Fig.
In contrast, MCI group demonstrated increased DC (MD) and DC (AxD) in AMYG.R, increased DC (RD)  ) and E loc RD ( ) also span a wide range of cortical and subcortical regions, as illustrated in Fig.
By comparing with HC, the AD group showed significant decreases of CC (FA) in REC.L and AMYG.R, DC (FA) in LING.L, E loc FA ( ) in REC.L, ACG.R, SOG.R, MOG.R, and IOG.R, CC (iRD) in ORBsupmed.L, REC.L, AMYG.R, CAL.R, CUN.R and LING.R, DC (iRD) in PCG.L, LING.L and PCUN.L.
In addition, the widespread increase of E loc iRD ( ) was more pronounced compared to the MCI-HC comparison, revealing several additional regions such as OLF, SFGmed and ACG (see Fig.
In contrast, AD group showed significant increases of DC (MD)  and DC (AxD) in AMYG.R, DC (RD) in REC.L and AMYG.R.
We also found widespread increase of E
A complete list of nodal network metrics with significant between-group differences are shown in Table

Global network metrics
To investigate the alteration in network metrics over the whole brain, various global network metrics were derived and compared among three groups by using one-way ANOVA (Fig.
The comparison of the MCI and HC groups revealed altered global network metrics in multiple networks constructed by SC and diffusivity.
For the FA network, decreased AC, CC, E glob , E loc , and T were found.
Similarly, decreased AC, CC, E glob , E , loc and T were found in the D r -1 network with the addition of increased L. For diffusivity-based network, significant increase of E glob and E loc were consistently found in the AxD, RD, and MD networks.
By comparing AD and HC groups, similar to our comparison between MCI and HC groups, we found decreased CC, E glob , E loc , and T in both the FA and iRD networks.
In addition, increased L was noted in both the FA and iRD networks.
Unlike the comparison between the MCI and HC groups, no significant differences of AC in the FA and iRD networks were found between AD and HC groups.
For the diffusivity-based network, increased E glob and E loc were consistently found in AD patients among all diffusivity metrics (i.e., MD, AxD, and RD).
In addition, significantly increased M (iRD) was found by comparing AD with MCI groups, whereas no other SC-or diffusivity-based metrics show significant difference between these two groups.

Connectivity metrics and tract-specific diffusivity metrics
The comparisons of interregional SC and tract-specific diffusivity metrics among three groups are shown in Fig.
A total of 4005 interregional pairs were compared, and multiple-comparison statistical correction was performed.
For the FA metric, significant difference was only found in the pair MOG.R-to-FFG.R, in which MCI group showed significantly decreased FA when compared with the HC group.
Comparatively, significantly decreased iRD was observed in four pairs, including PHG.L-to-FFG.L (AD < HC), PCG.Rto-PCUN.R (MCI < HC and AD < HC), HIP.L-to-PHG.L (AD < HC) and HIP.R-to-PHG.R (AD < HC).
For diffusivity-based metrics, common significant differences of MD, AxD and RD were found in three pairs: PHG.L-to-FFG.L (AD > HC), HIP.L-to-PHG.L (AD > HC) and ORBsup.L-to-OLF.L (AD > MCI, in addition to AD > HC in MD and AxD).
The significant differences in MD and RD were commonly found in several pairs: PCG.R-to-PCUN.R, OLF.L-to-REC.L (AD > MCI, in addition to AD > HC in MD), REC.L-to-ACG.L (AD > HC), and HIP.Rto-PHG.R (AD > HC).
AxD metrics also showed significant difference in PHG.L-to-PUT.L (AD > HC).

Functional network analysis
By analyzing regional network metrics in the functional network among three groups, significantly decreased CC (PC) was noted in the PUT.R in MCI group compared with HC group (Fig.
For global network metrics, significant between-group differences were found only using PC as connectivity.
Compared with HCs, MCI patients showed decreased CC, decreased E , loc and increased L (Fig.
Furthermore, compared with AD, MCI showed lower CC and E loc .
By comparing interregional FC metrics, significant difference in PC was found in the SFGdor.L-IPL.R (MCI < AD) (Fig.
Note that no significant between-group differences were noted using COV as connectivity for all comparisons (nodal network, global network, and connectivity-based metrics).

Discussion
We investigated the degradation of network topology in MCI and AD patients by applying graph theoretical analysis to DTI and rs-fMRI data.
To gain insight into the choice of connectivity, different definitions of connectivity were incorporated into the analysis and compared.
For the structural network, conventional SC-based metrics, such as FA, SC N , and an alternatively proposed metric for network construction (i.e., inverse radial diffusivity) were used.
In addition to SC metrics, diffusivity-based metrics, including MD, AxD and RD, were used as another category of network edge metrics for characterizing network topology.
For the functional network, we investigated the network topology according to two definitions of FC: PC and COV.
Our results showed that incorporating different connectivity metrics into the analysis can influence the characterization of the network and provide complementary information that cannot be revealed using a single type of connectivity metric.

Alteration in nodal network topology
Through between-group comparison on nodal CC and DC, we found significantly altered structural network topology in several regions, including ORBmid.L, ORBsupmed.L, REC.L, ACG.R, PCG.L, HIP.L, AMYG.R, CAL.R, CUN.R, LING.L, LING and PCUN.L. Besides, betweengroup comparison on nodal PR also revealed alteration at AMYG.L. Interestingly, the alterations in E loc are widespread throughout most of the cortical and subcortical regions.
For the functional network, significantly altered network topology was also found in the PUT.R.
As shown in previous histopathological studies, the limbic system consistently degenerates from the early stage of AD and is one of the earliest sites responsible for AD progression
They eventually spread across the entire neocortex in the final AD stage
Consistent with previous studies, the altered structural and functional topology in the limbic system as found in our study may have resulted from these cellular disruptions and depositions.
In our study, altered network topology was consistently found in the AMYG across different SC and network metrics.
Histological studies have shown that the AMYG is one of the earliest sites to suffer neurodegeneration in the early stage of AD
Previous histological and imaging studies in AD patients have also demonstrated neuronal loss and volumetric atrophy in the AMYG
Recent studies employing neuroimaging techniques have also shown altered network topology in the AMYG.
Ribeiro et al. employed a multimodal approach incorporating anatomical MRI, DTI, and PET to study the brain network of AD, late MCI, and early MCI.
Their results also showed disease-related changes in gray matter volume (decreased gray matter volume in late MCI and AD patients compared with HCs), diffusivity metrics (increased MD in late MCI and AD patients compared with HCs), and structural network metrics (increased clustering coefficient in late MCI and AD patients compared with HCs, found through streamline count SC) in the AMYG
Although different SC-based metrics were investigated, our results showed a decrease of CC (FA) , CC (iRD) and E loc iRD ( ) in the AMYG.R for both AD and MCI groups compared with HC, reasonably consistent with those of Ribeiro et al.
Moreover, the analysis of diffusivity-based metrics consistently demonstrated increased DC in the AMYG.R in AD and MCI compared with HC, in addition to increased E loc AxD ( ) in the AMYG.L for AD compared to HC.
The decreased CC could be interpreted as a loss of network integration surrounding the neighborhood of the AMYG.
The increased DC (AxD) , DC (RD) and DC (MD) in AD and MCI patients indicates significant changes in diffusivity along the tracts connecting to the AMYG.R, suggesting that neurodegeneration occurs in the AMYG starting from the limbic stage of AD and disrupts the associated connections along its surrounding neural fiber pathways.
By comparing AD patients with the other two groups, an increase in PR (FA) was found in the AMYG.L, contradictory to the findings of previous studies, wherein significant neurodegeneration in the AMYG was linked with decreased network centrality.
This disagreement might be explained by the definition of PR calculation.
Because PR is defined as the probability distribution across all brain regions at the steady state of the Markov chain, the sum of PR across all regions exactly equals one.
This means PR is a relative metric to quantify centrality within each individual network and is invariant to the extent of global degeneration in different AD stages.
This definition explains the reason that the AMYG showed increased PR (FA) in the AD group despite neurodegeneration.
From a clinical point of view, AD patients are diagnosed during the late stages of disease progression, when cortical atrophy has spread from the limbic system to the entire neocortex, causing considerable decline in cognitive function
With global degradation, the increase in PR in the AMYG (i.e., relative centrality) can be explained by the similar or more severe atrophy in other cortical regions.
Although PR is highly discriminative between the AD and HC groups compared with other network metrics, the association between PR changes and neuropathological alterations remains a challenging topic
Careful interpretation and further investigation are needed for understanding the mechanism of topological alteration.
Notably, our results showed altered network topologies in three other regions within the limbic system: the PCG, ACG and HIP.
In the PCG, AD patients exhibited decreased DC (iRD) and E loc iRD compared with HCs.
The PCG has been recognized as a network hub strongly associated with AD.
Specifically, volumetric and structural network analyses have shown cortical atrophy and decreased network efficiency in the PCG of AD patients
Analysis of rs-fMRI data showed significant alterations in FC within the DMN in the precuneus-posterior cingulate area
Similarly,
The changes noted in our results may also reflect the neurodegeneration of the limbic system.
Compared with HC, AD patients showed decreased E loc iRD The ACG is considered vital within the salience network, and a previous study showed significant differences in gray matter volume in most subregions within the salience network between AD and amnestic MCI patients
The increased regional activity in the ACG could be interpreted as compensatory and cognitive reserve mechanisms
HIP.L showed significant alterations in both AD and MCI groups, which includes decreased CC (iRD) , E loc iRD

Table 3
Significant differences in global network measures between the three patient groups (HC, MCI, and AD), as quantified through GLM and one-way ANOVA.
ANOVA was used for three-group comparison, and differences between pairs of patient groups were quantified by the β values from GLM. ) and increase of E loc RD ( ) in AD group.
HIP is an essential region for memory formation, and has been shown to be highly susceptible to neurodegeneration caused by AD.
Previous studies have shown that HIP exhibits alterations over the course of AD progression, including senile plaques and NFT
In addition, several graph-theoretical studies also showed alterations of network measures in the HIP of AD patients in structural network
The network alteration of HIP in our study has shown to be highly consistent with the previous findings.
Several prefrontal regions were identified with disrupted network topology and WM diffusivity.
Specifically, SFGdor.L, ORBsup.L, MFG.R, ORBmid.L, IFGoperc.R, IFGtriang.R, ORBinf.L, bilateral OLF, bilateral SFGmed, ORBsupmed.L, and REC.L showed alteration in nodal metrics in comparison between AD and HC groups.
Comparison between MCI and HC groups showed alterations in a smaller set of prefrontal regions including MFG.R, ORBmid.L, IFGoperc.R, ORBinf.L and SFGmed.R.
In addition, AD group also showed significantly decreased E loc iRD ( ) in OLF.L in comparison to MCI group.
Alterations in prefrontal regions in AD patients have been reported in histological studies
Disrupted networks in superior frontal gyrus have also been reported in SC and FC studies.
A DTI study showed AD patients exhibit reduced E loc by comparing with HCs in several prefrontal regions, including the SFGmed.L, SFGmed.R, ORBsupmed.R, SFGdor.R, ORBsup.R, MFG.R, ORBmid.R, and ORBinf.L
A PET study utilizing FC analysis in AD reported decreased BC in the SFGdor.L
In this study, the observed alterations in the prefrontal areas of AD and MCI group may reflect the disruption of fiber integrity.
Since the limbic system is affected by AD progression, the pathway through which the prefrontal association areas receive sensory information in the limbic circuit would be disrupted by neurodegeneration
Therefore, we suggest this disrupted SC between the limbic system and the prefrontal area may critically contribute to the alterations in prefrontal areas.
Fig.
The color of the connection signifies the type of groupwise differences.
Black: no significant differences; green: decrease in MCI patients compared with HCs; magenta: decrease in AD patients compared with HCs; red: increase in AD patients compared with HCs; blue: increase in AD patients compared with MCI patients.

Table 4
Individual fiber connections demonstrating significant differences between the three patient groups (HC, MCI, and AD), as quantified through GLM and oneway ANOVA.
Bold numbers signify significant differences (p < .05
after Bonferroni correction for all 4005 undirected connections between 90 AAL regions).
(*: p < .05
after Bonferroni correction; **: p < .01 after Bonferroni correction; ***: p < .001
after Bonferroni correction).

Fig. 5.
Connections showing significant between-group differences in the FC metrics.
Black: no significant differences; Green: decrease in MCI patients compared with HCs; magenta: decrease in AD patients compared with HCs; red: increase in AD patients compared with HCs; blue: increase in AD patients compared with MCI patients.
In our study, the graph theoretical analysis showed significant altered topology in the several occipital areas including CAL, CUN and LING.
Anatomically, these regions are primarily located in the visual cortex (V1) area, which receives visual input.
Among AD patients, visual deficit is a common symptom, and previous histological study showed that the V1 typically suffers from senile plaques and NFT in AD progression, and pathology in cuneal and lingual gyri could contribute to the visual field defects of some AD patients
Previous network-related studies on AD have also reported altered network topology in the CAL, either structurally or functionally.
By analyzing SC, Wang et al. found reduced network efficiency in the CAL.R and bilateral CUN by comparing AD patients with HCs
As reported by Liu et al., the functional network analysis has also shown increased BC in MCI patients compared with HCs
The alterations observed in our study were most likely associated with neurodegeneration in the V1 area and functionally linked to visual deficit in AD patients.
It is worthy to mention that the alterations in E loc were found throughout the brain, encompassing regions in all cortical lobes together with limbic and subcortical regions.
Although based on different SC metrics, several previous studies have also shown that the structural network of AD patients demonstrated decreased nodal efficiency in a wide variety of regions.
For example, Wang et al. quantified SC using streamline count and discovered reduced nodal efficiency of AD network in regions including REC, PCG, PHG, CAL, FFG, SOG, MOG, IOG, PCUN, CUN and TPOmid
By relating to these network studies with previous histological research
Here, we have to note that the changes in E loc is partly contributed by changes in indirect connections.
As a result, widespread changes in E loc can be due to either widespread disruptions of SC, or cascading failure resulting from disruption in some other core network regions.
As have been reported by
Therefore, what contributes to such widespread alterations in E loc requires further investigation.
Our functional network analysis showed significantly decreased CC (PC) in the PUT.R on comparing MCI patients with HCs.
Anatomical studies have suggested that the PUT is one of the subcortical areas affected by AD progression and it exhibits significant atrophy in the MCI and AD stages
Studies employing functional MRI have altered FC and decreased nodal strength in the PUT of amnestic MCI patients
Notably, a study based on functional network analysis also revealed increased CC and E loc in the PUT of AD patients
Consistently, our result further suggested that CC (PC) could depict the disruption in functional network topology and might be useful in reflecting the cognitive decline during the progression from MCI to AD.

Alteration in global network topology
Alterations in global network topology are consistently found across various analyses of SC and diffusivity metrics.
By analyzing FA and iRD connectivity, we found a significant decrease in network integration as indicated by L, E glob , and E loc , and network segregation, as indicated by CC, T, and M.
These findings imply the global degradation of the brain network of AD is detectable in an earlier stage (i.e., MCI in our study).
The disruption of global structural network topology might be associated with the loss of myelination at the MCI stage
Studies have reported similar findings across different imaging modalities, including cortical thickness analysis, diffusion tractography analysis, rs-fMRI, rs-EEG, and MEG
As indicated by our findings, the progressive demyelination leading to degradation of WM tracts in AD and MCI patients may result in reduced efficiency in interregional communication.
Furthermore, WM degradation results in a general reduction in CC on a global scale.
As previously mentioned, as a quantification for network segregation, CC is positively associated with the ability of the brain to form clusters with specialized functions
Furthermore, our findings showing significantly decreased AC in MCI patients imply that the global network structure of MCI is more vulnerable to local disruption of the cortical region (network node) and interregional connectivity (network edge).
In particular, integration of diffusivity metrics into graph theoretical analysis has shown great potential for revealing the alteration in network topology, whereas no significant difference of network topology has been found by analyzing SC N network on a global scale.
Compared with HCs, significant increases of E glob and E loc were found in both MCI and AD patients by using different diffusivity metrics.
Using diffusivity as network edge, the increase of network efficiency may be explained by the reduction of axonal density or integrity.
This finding is supported by a study based on TBSS analysis demonstrating that AD patients exhibit reduced FA and increased diffusivity (MD, AxD, and RD) in widespread WM structures
Investigation of the functional network at the global scale showed reduced E loc PC ( ) and CC PC ( ) and increased L (PC) in MCI patients.
This finding is consistent with previous functional network studies
However, in our study, no significant difference of functional network topology was found by comparing the AD and HC groups; this is contradictory to previous results that show significant differences between AD patients and HCs.
This inconsistency might be caused by the diversity in AD patients in terms of age, cognitive ability, and mental conditions as indicated by slightly larger within-group variation of MoCA and MMSE scores.
Although a regression approach was employed to minimize these effects, reducing their influence on group comparisons remains challenging.

Alteration in structural connectivity and tract-specific diffusivity metrics
Consistent with previous findings on altered network topology, significant between-group differences of SC and diffusivity were demonstrated in several interregional connections associated with the limbic and paralimbic regions: ACG, PCG, HIP, OLF, and PHG.
A total of eight interregional connections-PHG.L-to-FFG.L, PHG.L-to-PUT.L, PCG.R-to-PCUN.R, HIP.L-to-PHG.L, HIP.R-to-PHG.R, ORBsup.L-to-OLF.L, OLF.L-to-REC.L and REC.L-to-ACG.L,-showed significantly decreased SC or increased diffusivity in either the AD or MCI group compared with HCs.
These alterations within the limbic system might be a consequence of limbic atrophy commonly found during AD progression.
iRD connectivity and tract-specific diffusivity metrics shows higher sensitivity to AD-related structural changes than do FA and SC N , as demonstrated by the alterations noted in our analysis.

Choice of connectivity measures in graph theoretical analyses
Our results showed that SC N is less sensitive to AD-related changes than other SC and diffusivity metrics at both the global and connectivity level.
Because SC N is highly dependent on the parameters used for fiber tracking and termination criteria, such as anisotropy threshold, proceeding angle, and fiber length, it can become a confounding factor that may bias connectivity measurements
SC-based measures are also inherently insensitive to changes occurring above the termination thresholds.
For instance, a minor change in FA above the FA threshold does not noticeably alter SC.
The insensitivity of SC could be easily observed in our results because the changes in the SC N network were less prominent compared with those of the FA network.
Furthermore, liability to multiple factors implies that SC-based measures are not specific to the types of changes in the diffusive properties, and how each termination criterion contributes to SC remains unclear.
Such obscurity is a problem to the interpretability of the discoveries.
Inconsistent with previous rs-fMRI studies, our analysis of functional network showed relatively few significant between-group differences.
The regression of covariates may have affected the significance of statistical comparison.
Head motion may also be considered a factor affecting the significance level for between-group statistical comparison.
Although we applied an exclusion criterion of 1.5 mm to exclude patients who had a larger head motion and performed the head motion regression in our rs-fMRI data, residual head motion and regression-induced bias may still have affected between-group differences because of systematic artifacts and spurious connections
To overcome this problem, a more rigorous exclusion criterion is needed to reduce the potential effects of head motion on functional network metrics.
Currently, selecting connectivity metrics for graph theoretical analysis is usually empirical and application dependent.
Although studies have shown how the choice of SC affects network analysis, proposing a universal and optimal SC metric applicable to general applications remains a challenge.
Therefore, using joint investigation on multiple connectivity metrics would give a more complete insight into how these different metrics associate with each other, as has been shown by several previous studies incorporating tract-based statistics
In this study, prior to establish a joint investigation analysis framework, the first aim was to explore if each individual metric of the proposed multiparametric brain network analysis could provide useful and complementary information with biological or functional relevance, which can be a fundamental basis for proceeding the joint investigation analysis.
In results, we verified that these metrics could provide complementary information which is sometimes neglected in conventional uniparametric brain network analysis.
This present study strengthens our confidence to pursue the establishment of a joint analysis framework by using multiple connectivity metrics in further studies.
To integrate multiple connectivity metrics into a joint analysis framework, several previous studies can be served as essential references, including machine-learned linear combination
While these approaches could resolve the brain networks with a higher sensitivity, the interpretation remains a challenge and needs a further exploration.
We believe our current work could contribute more fundamental knowledge into the framework and strengthen the interpretability of the use of multiparametric network analysis.

Limitations
Several study limitations must be considered.
First, the demographics of the study cohort recruited showed significant differences in age and years of education among the three groups.
Although a GLMbased regression method was employed to reduce the influence of these covariates, evaluating whether these effects completely decreased following linear regression is difficult.
Moreover, the gender distribution in our cohort was unbalanced, which may also have biased our results.
Second, the accuracy of SC may be biased by the methodological effects of DTI.
The measures of SC derived from DTI could be associated with various microstructural characteristics, such as axonal ordering, axonal density, and degree of myelination.
However, these measures are generally not specific to only one microstructural attribute
Thus, the lack of biological specificity leads to difficulty in result interpretation.
Because this limitation is theoretically inherent to almost all diffusion MRI-based connectivity metrics, some studies have developed a multimodal approach called tractometry, which combines fiber tractography and multiple microstructural indices, such as axonal density and myelin water fraction, to provide more biologically relevant information
The second limitation is the insufficient angular resolution of DTI.
The relatively low angular resolution of DTI might may cause biased accuracy of mapping fiber orientations and the consequent fiber tractography, particularly in the region of fiber crossings
It is potentially useful to incorporate high angular resolution diffusion MRI (HARDI) approaches, such as diffusion spectrum imaging
With higher angular resolution and the capability to resolve multiple fiber orientations, HARDI approaches can significantly reduce the potential confounding factors arisen from erroneous fiber tracking and thus improve the sensitivity of the subsequent network analysis.
This benefits of HARDI has been shown in previous studies employing HARDI techniques on AD applications, where HARDI techniques could provide higher sensitivity to network deficiencies compared with using DTI
Although HARDI techniques typically need more diffusion encoding samples and higher b-value than DTI, recent advancement has been proposed to accelerate the HARDI data acquisition which can make the clinical use of HARDI feasible.
The state-of-the-art computational techniques, such as compressed sensing and simultaneous multiple-slice acquisition, have considerably improved the feasibility of HARDI in clinical settings
Therefore, we believe it is worth incorporating HARDI into brain network analysis framework and further facilitating its use on clinical applications.
The third limitation is the clinical usability of graph-theoretical analysis.
Although graph-theoretical analysis has been widely used in a variety of disease-oriented researches, such as Alzheimer's disease
This is typically challenging because the graph-theoretical analysis involves a fairly large number of adjusting parameters and methodological choices, e.g. the uses of connectivity metrics, connectivity thresholds, network constructions and targeted graph-theoretical network measures, yielding a challenge in finding consensus between different studies
Technically, each step of the analysis would complicate the robustness of measurement and may need to be optimized by using a well-designed protocol on simulated or empirical data.
Further, its interpretability has to be verified in more biological and functional relevant studies.
Although challenging, graphtheoretical analysis still has great potential to map the alteration of a complex brain network and could serve as an important clinical useful tool for assisting the diagnosis.
Further studies are essentially needed to verify its robustness and establish a standard protocol to strengthen its clinical usability on revealing disease related brain network alterations.

Conclusions
In this study, graph theoretical analysis using multiple SC and FC metrics was performed on DTI and rs-fMRI data to investigate the altered brain network topology among HC, MCI and AD groups.
Our results showed the disruption of structural network topology in MCI and AD patients predominantly in regions within the limbic system, including the AMYG, HIP, PCG, and ACG, prefrontal regions, and the occipital regions, including CAL, CUN and LING.
In addition, our result also showed widespread alterations of E loc .
On a global scale, our results showed consistent disruption of the structural network across different edge definitions and global network metrics from the MCI to AD stages.
By comparing various types of connectivity, our results showed that the use of multiple connectivity could provide more insight into subtle changes in structural network topology and demonstrated the benefit of the proposed multiparametric network analysis.
In particular, the use of iRD provided additional information for understanding the alteration in network topology caused by AD progression and its possible origins.
Our findings also suggested that the use of tract-specific metrics (e.g., anisotropy and diffusivity) provided more sensitive and interpretable measurements than SC N .
Future studies should implement other microstructural metrics and strengthen the translational use of proposed multiparametric framework for early AD diagnosis.



Fig. 1 .
Fig. 1.
Illustration of the multiple-sparsity thresholding employed in structural network analysis.
(a) Network masks were generated by applying several sparsity thresholds on the streamline count matrices.
(b) The generated network masks were subsequently applied to each type of structural network, yielding thresholded structural networks at different levels of network sparsity.



Fig. 2 .
Fig. 2. Regions showing significant between-group differences in nodal network metrics.
Significantly increased and decreased nodal network indices are indicated using red and blue, respectively, whereas gray entries indicate nonsignificant differences.
(a) Differences in SC indices.
(b) Differences in diffusivity indices.
(a) Differences in FC indices.



Fig. 3 .
Fig. 3. Significant between-group differences in global network metrics.
(a) Differences in SC indices.
(b) Differences in diffusivity indices.
(c) Differences in FC indices.
Significantly increased and decreased global network indices are indicated using red and blue, respectively, whereas gray entries indicate nonsignificant differences.


ACG.R. Similarly, MCI patients showed increased DC(RD) in the ACG.R.



Table 1
Tables of abbreviations for brain regions.



Table 2
Demographic details of the recruit participants in this study.