Water-exchange MRI detects subtle blood-brain barrier breakdown in Alzheimer's disease rats
Blood-brain barrier (BBB) breakdown has been hypothesized to play a key role in the onset and progression of Alzheimer's disease (AD).
However, the question of whether AD itself contributes to loss of BBB integrity is still uncertain, as many in-vivo studies have failed to detect signs of AD-related BBB breakdown.
We hypothesize AD-related BBB damage is subtle, and that these negative results arise from a lack of measurement sensitivity.
With the aim of developing a more sensitive measure of BBB breakdown, we have designed a novel MRI scanning protocol to quantify the trans-BBB exchange of endogenous water.
Using this method, we detect increased BBB water permeability in a rat model of AD that is associated with reduced expression of the tight junction protein occludin.
BBB permeability to MRI contrast agent, assessed using dynamic contrast-enhanced (DCE)-MRI, did not differ between transgenic and wild-type animals and was uncorrelated with occludin expression.
Our data supports the occurrence of AD-related BBB breakdown, and indicates that such BBB pathology is subtle and may be undetectable using existing 'tracer leakage' methods.
Our validated waterexchange MRI method provides a new powerful tool with which to study BBB damage in-vivo.

Introduction
Loss of blood-brain barrier (BBB) integrity occurs in ageing
Growing evidence suggests BBB breakdown may occur when amyloid-β (Aβ) peptides interact with blood vessels in the brain, a process which causes arteriolar and capillary amyloid angiopathy (CAA)
Patients with AD typically have more severe CAA than age-matched non-AD patients
However, the question of whether AD itself reduces BBB integrity remains unresolved, due to a number of conflicting studies
However, in the case of an intact BBB or subtle BBB breakdown, leakage of these probes into tissue is slow, resulting in the need for long measurement durations to resolve differences in leakage between study groups
Based on the known sensitivity of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) to compartmental water exchange
Specifically, we use an MRI contrast agent to shorten the spin-lattice relaxation time of blood, which increases the impact of trans-BBB water-exchange on MRI signals and makes possible the estimation of mean blood water residence time (τ b ) simultaneously with the blood water population fraction (p b ).
The ratio of these measurements provides the trans-BBB permeability surface-area product to water (PS w ), a quantity we hypothesize to be more sensitive to subtle BBB breakdown compared to existing 'tracer leakage' measurements.
We first undertake sensitivity analyses and simulations to determine the optimal acquisition parameters for our water-exchange technique and to assess possible sources of bias in parameter estimates.
The optimised MRI protocol, termed multi-flip angle multi-echo (MFAME)-MRI, is then used to measure BBB PS w in a rat model of early-onset AD (TgF344-AD), alongside measures of contrast agent leakage rate, K trans .
Transgenic rats display increased PS w relative to wild-type littermates, but BBB permeability to contrast agent remains unchanged.
To understand the potential cause of increased PS w , we then undertook immunostaining of tight junction proteins and show that PS w correlates inversely with the expression of occludin at the BBB.

Material and methods

Sensitivity analysis
The change in spoiled gradient echo (SPGR) MRI signal, ∆S, due to unit changes in p b , τ b and PS w was simulated using the SPGR-2S1X model (equations 3-6 to be found in section 1.2.5) for flip angles between 0-90 degrees, repetition times between 0-400 ms, and blood contrast agent concentrations single set of representative tissue parameters were taken from the literature
Assuming 7T MRI these were: T 1e = 1.8 s, T 1b = 2.1 s, p b = 0.020 mL mL .
Plots of ∆S/∆p b , ∆S/∆τ b , and ∆S/∆PS w versus flip angle, TR, and C b were generated to determine the optimal acquisition parameters.
Parameter definitions are given in section 1.2.5.

Monte Carlo Simulations
To estimate PS w , the separate effects of p b and τ b on MRI signals must be distinguished.
This requires acquisition of a minimum of 2 images with different flip angles or TRs, assuming all other model parameters are known.
In this study we opt to acquire 5 flip angles while using a relatively long TR (100 ms).
This protocol was chosen as opposed to using multiple TRs to provide an invariant and sufficient time delay between each RF pulse to acquire a multi-gradient echo readout for T 2 * decay correction.
To determine the optimal use of imaging time, Monte Carlo simulations were performed to assess how the precision of p b and τ b estimates depend on the number of distinct post-contrast flip angles and image repetitions.
Simulations were undertaken under the following conditions: 3 flip angles and 10 repeats (resulting in a total of 30 images), 4 flip angles and 7 or 8 repeats (also 30 images), and 5 flip angles and 6 repeats (also 30 images).
For each simulation, flip angles were equally spaced across the range 10°-80°.
Each fit was repeated 100 times in a Monte Carlo simulation using a range of zero mean Gaussian noise levels (noise standard deviation/S 0 = 0.00001 to 0.004).
Relative precision in parameter estimates was quantified using the coefficient of variation (CoV):
where IQR is the inter-quartile range, and is the parameter estimate.
Next, we assessed the effect of transmit B 1 field (B 1 + ) inhomogeneity and non-zero trans-BBB contrast agent leakage on SPGR-2S1X parameter estimates.
Synthetic multiple-flip angle images (α = 10º, 20º, 40º, and 60º at a TR = 100 ms) were simulated for estimation of pre-contrast T 1b and T 1t .
Dynamic SPGR images (α = 60°, TR = 20 ms) were generated to track C b (t) during a simulated injection of contrast agent.
A population average C b (t) measured from the TgF344-AD rats was used.
For estimation of p b and τ b , multiple flip angle images at 5 distinct flip angles (α = 10º, 20º, 30º, 40º, and 80º) were simulated.
All images were created as 10 x 10 grids, giving 100 voxels in total.
To assess the effect of B 1 + inhomogeneity on parameter estimates, images were generated across a range of realistic flip angle errors (±10%).
Parameters p b , τ b , and pre-contrast T 1e and T 1b , were set to 0.02 mL mL -1
, 0.4 s, 1.8 s and 2.1 s, respectively
Contrast agent T 1 relaxivity (r 1 ) was assumed to be 3.5 (mM s) -1 for both blood and tissue.
Equation
Relative bias of each parameter was estimated as:
where is the parameter estimate and is the true parameter value (ground truth).
In an attempt to correct observed biases in parameter estimates due to B 1 + inhomogeneity, an additional set of pre-contrast multi-flip angle images with a long TR were simulated
Varying the TR of SPGR images alters the T 1 and B 1 + weighting
Thus, by jointly fitting SPGR signal models to long and short TR multi-flip angle images, we aim to remove the effects of B 1 + inhomogeneity on estimates of T 1 , and importantly PS w .
Simulations described above were repeated with the proposed flip angle correction method, and the bias in estimated parameters computed.

M A N U S C R I P T A C C E P T E D ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 4
To simulate leakage of contrast agent across the BBB, T 1e was allowed to decrease in response to an increasing extravascular contrast agent concentration, C e (t).
C e (t) was calculated from the twocompartment exchange model
. Signal models (Eqn 3.) were then fit back to the simulated data assuming K trans = 0 min -1
, and the bias in p b , τ b , and PS w computed.

Animals
Male only TgF344-AD (n = 7) and wild-type (WT) littermates (n = 5) aged 18.3 months (range 17.9 -18.8 months) were scanned using the MFAME-MRI protocol (see section 1.2.4 for details), then culled for immunohistochemistry.
This rat model of AD has previously been shown to display widespread Aβ deposition in the form of plaques and cerebral amyloid angiopathy
All scanning was performed between the hours of 10.00am and 4.00pm across 9 days spanning a 2 month period.
The image acquisition parameters are given in Table
Axial T 1 -RARE images were acquired using the scanner default parameters for the purpose of brain region delineation (Figure
Coronal multi-flip angle spoiled gradient echo (SPGR) sequences were acquired at multiple TRs (long TR using 2D SPGR and short TR using 3D SPGR) to allow combined estimation of flip angle error (k) and pre-contrast T 1 in blood and each brain region (Figure
For short TR data, 10 gradient echoes were acquired per RF excitation to allow correction for T 2 * decay.
Dynamic SPGR acquisitions (Figure
These scans had a short TR to minimize sensitivity to τ b , and high spatial resolution to enable sampling of blood signal from the superior sagittal sinus (SSS), free from partial volume effects.
Gadoteric acid (Dotarem, Guerbet; dose = 0.5 mmol kg -1
) was injected intravenously on the 6th volume of dataset C through a 24G cannular inserted into the tail vein with a pump at 1 mL min

Analysis pipeline
The data analysis pipeline is shown in Figure
Flip angle error (k = α/α 0 , where α is the delivered flip angle, and α 0 the prescribed flip angle at the scanner console) and pre-contrast T 1 were mapped voxel-wise by jointly fitting SPGR signal models to multi-TR multi-flip angle data
Linear interpolation was used to up-sample long TR data to the matrix size of the short TR data.
MRI signals from hippocampal, cortical, striatal, and thalamic regions were extracted for each rat by registering the high resolution T 1 -RARE image (Figure
Image registration was performed using in-house software written in Matlab (The Mathworks, Inc., Natick, Massachusetts, USA).
Regional estimates of k, T 1 , and S(TE = 0) were obtained by taking the median from voxels in the region.
Regional estimates of PS w were then obtained by fitting SPGR signal models for an exchanging two-site system
where S(TE = 0, t) is the MRI signal at zero echo time (TE = 0) as a function of acquisition time, t, a S (t) is the apparent blood water population fraction, T 1,S (t) is the apparent intravascular T 1 value in the presence of trans-BBB water exchange, and T 1,L (t) is the apparent extravascular T 1 value in the presence of trans-BBB water exchange, α is the delivered flip angle (α = kα 0 ), and TR is the repetition time.
The two-site one-exchange (2S1X) model solutions relate a s , T 1,S, and T 1,L to the true blood water population fraction p b , the mean blood water residence time τ b , and true intravascular and extravascular T 1 values (T 1,b and T 1,e , respectively)
The T 1 relaxation time of extravascular water, T 1,e , was fixed to its pre-contrast value, effectively enforcing an assumption of zero contrast agent leakage across the BBB.
Before injection of the contrast agent, we assume the fast-exchange limit holds and thus parametrise T 1,e in terms of pre-
contrast blood and tissue T 1 values (T 1,b (t=0) and T 1,t (t=0)), which were estimated through precontrast T 1 mapping, and p b , which was unknown at the time of fitting:
The T 1 relaxation time of blood,T 1,b (t), was estimated via the following expression:
where r 1 is the T 1 relaxivity of gadoteric acid, set to 3.5 (mM s) -1
Estimates of the permeability surface-area product to water, PS w , were obtained from the ratio of p b and τ b , scaled by the brain-blood partition coefficient for water, λ.
We assumed λ is uniform across the brain and equal to 0.9
The trans-BBB leakage rate of contrast agent, The noise-to-signal ratio of extracted curves was estimated in five randomly selected rats and used to infer parameter CoV using results from Monte Carlo simulations.
Noise-to-signal ratio was estimated by dividing the standard deviation of signal, computed from the first six flip angle images of dataset D, by the equilibrium signal (S 0 ) estimated from model fitting.
Using the measured noise-to-signal ratios, the parameter CoV was inferred using the data from Figure

Post-hoc protocol appraisal
To evaluate possible time-saving modifications to our imaging protocol, Eqn. 3 was re-fitted to dataset D using only 2 or 3 of the 6 available repeats collected for each flip angle.
Bland-Altman plots showing the difference in parameter estimates were generated and the null hypothesis of no differences in the mean and variance of parameter estimates tested using t-and F-tests, respectively.

Immunofluorescent staining, imaging, and quantification
Following MRI, the brains of all animals were collected and underwent immunohistochemistry to visualize proteins linked to the tight junctions (occludin, claudin-5) and membrane water channels (aquaporin-4).
All proteins were dual stained with lectin to visualize vessels.
Slides were imaged at
using in-house software.
In transgenic rats, lectin led to aspecific staining of amyloid-β plaques.
No amyloid-β staining was observed in wild-types.
To avoid bias in derived statistics between TgF344-AD and wild-types, amyloid-β plaques were delineated manually on lectin images in ImageJ (v1.51,
National Institute of Health, USA) and excluded from quantification of lectin and marker expression.
Full details of immunohistochemistry, slide imaging, and quantification are given in supplementary materials.

Statistical analysis of MRI and immunofluorescent data
Two way analysis of variance (ANOVA) with effects of genotype and region (plus the genotype-region interaction) were performed on estimates of PS w , K trans , and all immunostains.
Region was input as a repeated measure.
Based on the ANOVA results, PS w and K trans measures were correlated against occludin (% snapshot area), i) in each brain region ignoring group status, ii) averaging PS w , K trans , and occludin across the four brain regions and computing independent correlations for TgF344-AD and wildtype rats.
Correlation coefficients were tested for statistical significance against the null hypothesis of zero correlation.
All statistical analyses were done in R (Version 3.1, R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria).
No corrections were made for multiple comparisons.

Results

Sensitivity analysis

Monte Carlo Simulations
In MFAME-MRI, we opt to vary flip angle, while using a relatively long, fixed TR (100 ms), such that T 2 * decay can be quantified and corrected in all images using an invariant multi-gradient echo readout.
Figure
In MFAME-MRI we use 5 flip angles centred around 30º.
The highest flip angle is increased from 50º to 80º to obtain a single image with very high sensitivity to p b but low sensitivity to τ b (see Figure
Simulations showed that flip angle error caused by B 1 + field inhomogeneity produces substantial biases in all parameters (black lines in Figure
Estimating flip angle error directly from multi-TR multi-flip angle data, alongside pre-contrast T 1 , successfully removed these biases (overlapping red lines in Figure
This correction method was implemented in the rat experiments.
Non-zero K trans caused overestimation of p b and τ b , however, because PS w is the ratio of these measures, it was mostly unaffected (< 8% bias up to K trans = 10 -3 min -1
; Figure

Animal experiments
ANOVA analyses revealed that PS w differed between genotype (p = 0.0022; higher PS w in TgF344-AD rats), but not between brain region (p = 0.93) (Figure
There was no genotype-region interaction effect (p = 0.85).
While ANOVA analyses suggest the magnitude of PS w alterations are not region dependent (between the regions studied), the plotted data in Figure
The trans-BBB leakage rate of MRI contrast agent (K trans ) did not differ significantly between transgenic and

M A N U S C R I P T A C C E P T E D
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 8 wild-type animals (p = 0.477) or between brain region (p = 0.226), and had no genotype-region interaction (p = 0.97) (Figure
As PS w was hypothesized to be closely related to BBB integrity, we assessed by immunohistochemistry vessel area by lectin and the expression of three different BBB markers: two tight junction proteins (occludin and claudin-5) and a water channel protein (aquaporin-4).
ANOVA analyses revealed a genotype effect for occludin (p = 0.0061), but no region effect (p = 0.64) or genotype-region interaction (p = 0.92).
Claudin-5 and aquaporin-4 did not display any genotype (p = 0.58 and p = 0.73 respectively), region (p = 0.070 and p = 0.38 respectively), or genotype-region interaction effects (p = 0.32 and p = 0.43 respectively -Figures
Vessel area as quantified by lectin staining did not differ significantly between transgenic and wild-types (p = 0.27, Figure
). Region specific correlation analyses showed that rats with lower occludin had higher PS w (Figure
In these plots, correlations were driven by both withinand between-group variability.
Because vessel area assessed by lectin did not differ significantly between genotype, genotype differences in occludin and PS w were most likely due to altered expression of the protein per unit vessel length (and therefore indicative of reduced BBB integrity),
and not due to reduced vessel surface area or density.
When estimates of PS w and occludin were averaged across the four brain regions and each group treated independently, correlations remained statistically significant (Figure
K trans did not correlate with occludin.
The noise-to-signal ratios of in-vivo regional multi-flip angle curves were between 0.001-0.003
(corresponding to signal-to-noise ratios of 333-1000).
Using the data presented in Figure
Noise-to-signal ratios, and thus predicted CoV values, were largest for the hippocampus, and smallest for the cortex.

Discussion
BBB breakdown is known to occur with ageing and could be exacerbated in AD, accelerating disease pathogenesis and associated cognitive decline
While a number of studies have shown an interaction between Aβ and tight junction proteins
A recent study evaluating BBB disruption in a variety of AD mouse models failed to detect AD-related differences in the blood-brain leakage of injected probes
A meta-analysis of cerebrospinal fluid assay and imaging studies also failed to infer a statistically significant effect of AD on BBB integrity
However, recent prospective human studies using advanced dynamic contrast-enhanced MRI have been able to detect increased leakage of contrast agent across the BBB in patients with mild-cognitive impairment
In our study of the TgF344-AD rat model, we fail to detect any increase in BBB permeability to MRI contrast agent, but do detect increased permeability to water, indicating MFAME-MRI may be more sensitive than available 'tracer leakage' methods and could provide a more useful marker of subtle BBB breakdown.
The consequence of subtle BBB damage is unknown.
It is unlikely to impact the trans-BBB transport of large molecules.
More likely is that such changes (i.e., increased water-exchange) will impact ion homeostasis and brain water balance
Furthermore, if BBB damage is a crucial early event in AD
pathogenesis, methods such as those presented here will be extremely useful for studying the timing and order of BBB changes when they first occur, and possibly for monitoring the response of novel BBB-targeted therapeutics.
The overall measurement time used in this study was long, presenting a potential barrier for implementation of this exact protocol to scan human patients with dementia.
Figure
In a clinical setting, less time-consuming flip angle mapping approaches based on Bloch-Siegert shift could be used
Examination of Figure
Such changes may actually increase precision in PS w through increased sensitivity to p b , however simulations are required to test this hypothesis.
Furthermore, additional time saving modifications to our method may be gained by acquiring fewer repetitions per unique flip angle, which we show does not significantly alter the central tendency or precision of PS w estimates.
Last, since MFAME-MRI uses multiple flip angles to gain PS w sensitivity and multiple TRs for estimation of flip angle error, reductions in scan time may also be gained by using an MR fingerprinting approach
Our approach uses standard MRI contrast agents, which leak across the BBB unless the BBB is fully intact.
The modelling used here to estimate PS w assumes that no leakage occurs, which may not be true due to age-
However, we show that at the leakage levels expected in dementia patients (10 -5 -10 -3 min -1
), and for those levels measured in TgF344-AD rats in this study (~1-3 x 10 -4 min -1
), leakage of contrast agent does not substantially impact estimates of PS w (Figure
Furthermore, it may still be possible to use our MFAME-MRI approach in stroke or tumours where leakage of contrast agent is greater, however a generalised water-exchange model that accounts for non-zero K trans would be required
Other MRI approaches have been proposed for quantifying trans-BBB water-exchange which do not rely on injection of exogenous tracers; e.g.
diffusion-weighted arterial spin labelling MRI
However, these techniques are usually limited to estimation of τ b , which is likely to be a less physiologically specific measure of BBB integrity due to its co-dependence on both PS w and p b .
The study had the following limitations.
Aspecific staining of amyloid plaques was observed in lectin immuno-stains of transgenic rats, but not in wildtypes.
Since such plaques were large in size relative to vessels (see Figure
If amyloid plaques were present in regions of highest or lowest vessel density, it is possible that such a procedure could have biased quantification of lectin, occludin, claudin-5, and aquaporin-4, artificially reducing or increasing the '% of snapshot' quantified respectively, relative to wild-types.
However, we did not see a favoured pattern of amyloid deposition visually, and believe that such biasing is unlikely.
Aspecific staining of vascular amyloid may have also occurred in lectin immuno-stains, however due to the proximity of vascular amyloid deposits to the vessel lumen, it was not possible to ascertain if this was present, and if so correct for it.
Such staining, if non-negligible, would have led to an artefactual increase in the amount of lectin classified as vessel in TgF344-AD rats, relative to wild-types.
The animals used were relatively old (~18 months).
Their age at time of scanning was chosen primarily to maximise the severity of AD pathology and thus AD-related BBB damage.
It is possible that agerelated BBB damage may also have been present, which would also have presented in wild-types, and could be a possible explanation for some of the within-group variation that is observed, particularly in the wild type animals.
The relative magnitude of age and AD-related BBB damage is currently unknown and should be investigated in future studies, both in animal models and humans.
The rats were not culled immediately following scanning.
Some BBB damage may have occurred between scanning and culling, which may have added variability to MRI and immunohistochemistry comparisons, worsening correlations.
However, since the time delay was only a small fraction of the entire lifetime of the animal, we expect this effect to be minimal.

Data availability statement
The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.

Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thanks Mrs Lidan Christie and Karen Davies for their technical contribution.

Funding
The purchase of the TgF344-AD rat was jointly supported by the European Union's Seventh

Author Contributions
BD designed the MRI protocol, acquired the imaging data, and performed data analysis and statistics.
JU contributed to MRI protocol development and optimisation.
MV performed immunostaining.
GP, LP and HB supervised the work and contributed to preparation of the manuscript.

Competing Interest Statement
GJMP is a shareholder and director of Bioxydyn Limited, a company with an interest in quantitative imaging biomarkers    Segmented regions were then removed from the calculation of snapshot statistics.
d Occludin is reduced in TgF344-AD relative to wild-types (p < 0.05; two-way ANOVA), corresponding well with genotype differences in PS w .
e No detectable TgF344AD/wild-type differences were observed for claudin-5 or, f aquaporin-4 (AQP4).
g Lectin stains showed no difference in total vessel area between TgF344-AD and wild-types (p = 0.27; two-way ANOVA).
h PS w measurements correlated inversely with occludin staining in all regions tested.
i When estimates for each rat were averaged across the four regions, and group-wise correlations computed, correlations maintained significance, confirming that occludin can explain variability in PS w independent of group.
In h-i, black markers represent TgF344-AD rats and white markers represent wild-types.
In all plots, '% of snapshot' is the percentage area of snapshot occupied by the immunostain, averaged across all snapshots taken for that region.
Data shown in a, b, d, e, f, and g are mean ± s.e.m.

1.10



(
C b ) between 0-10 mM.
A unit change was defined as a 50% increase in the parameter of interest.
When varying flip angle, a TR = 100 ms and C b = 4.8 mM was used.
When varying TR, a flip angle = 30º and C b = 4.8 mM was used.
When varying C b , a TR = 100 ms and a flip angle = 40º were used.
A



- 1 , 1 , 1 ,
∆p b = 0.010 mL mL τ b = 0.40 s, ∆τ b = 0.20 s and PS w = 3.0 mL min -1 mL -∆PS w = 1.5 mL min



- 1 .
After equilibration of the contrast agent throughout the blood pool (at approximately 2.5 minutes following first pass), dataset D was collected to estimate PS w .
Dataset D had a long TR, large voxels, and multiple repetitions, to maximize sensitivity to τ b .
Multiple flip angles were used to provide differential sensitivity to p b and τ b , as shown in Figure 3a-b.
The slice/slab select direction was placed along the superior-inferior direction (coronal slices) to ensure non-selective excitation of spins along the rostral-caudal direction to minimize T 1 inflow effects.


T 1,b (t = 0) and C b (t), and thus T 1,b (t), were measured from the superior sagittal sinus (SSS) using datasets B, C and E. SSS voxels were chosen as follows.
A slice containing the SSS was manually selected from the 4 th post-contrast volume (SSS appears bright).
A histogram of decay-corrected signals from this slice was generated and voxels with S(TE = 0) in the 99th percentile of all signals in the slice were selected.
Quality control checks were performed to ensure these voxels did indeed arise from the SSS, and not from other vessels in the brain.
Pre-contrast T 1 of blood, T 1,b (t = 0), was estimated from dataset B by taking the median T 1b value from selected SSS voxels.
C b (t) was estimated from the median SSS signal acquired during C and E, using knowledge of T 1,b (t = 0) estimated from dataset B.During dataset D, C b (t) was not measured directly, but inferred from a bi-exponential fit to C b (t) measured in C and E (Figure2d).
Therefore, the only unknowns during fitting of Eqn. 3 to dataset D were p b , τ b , and S 0 .


Ktrans , was estimated by fitting the Patlak model
All model fitting was done in statistical software package R (Version 3.1, R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria).


Our simulations show τ b and p b sensitivity varies with both excitatory flip angle (α) and repetition time (TR) (Figure 3a-b).
In both cases, sensitivity profiles for p b and τ b diverge, suggesting either approach (varying flip angle, or varying TR) could be used to estimate these parameters from MRI data.
Sensitivity to τ b was maximum at intermediate flip angles and at longer TRs.
Sensitivity to p b was maximum at large flip angles and short TRs.
Sensitivity to τ b was near zero at low blood contrast agent concentrations (C b ~ 0), and increased linearly with C b up to approximately 4mM, after which sensitivity increased more slowly (Figure 3c).
Sensitivity to p b plateaued at a lower C b than τ b .



Figure 5
Figure 5 shows the results of the post hoc protocol appraisal.
Estimating PS w using only two of the six available image repeats collected for dataset D did not significantly alter the central tendency (mean) (p = 0.22) or variance (precision) (p = 0.80) of PS w estimates.
Using 3 repeats also led to similar results (p = 0.21 and p = 0.22).


we have demonstrated MFAME-MRI can non-invasively detect subtle BBB permeability alterations in a rat model of AD, related to decreased expression of the BBB tight junction protein occludin.
Until now, MRI techniques have focused on measuring the leakage of hydrophilic passively dispersed exogenous probes.
However, when BBB breakdown is subtle, as may be the case in AD, such probes leak very slowly, resulting in low measurement sensitivity.
MFAME-MRI is a new promising tool to study subtle BBB damage, potentially enabling detection of cerebrovascular pathology far earlier in disease pathogenesis than previously possible.



Framework
Programme (FP7/2007-2013) under grant agreement n° HEALTH-F2-2011-278850 (INMiND) and Alzheimer Research UK network funds.
The breeding and maintenance of the TgF344-AD rat was supported by the European Union's Seventh Framework Programme (FP7/2007-2013) under grant agreement n° HEALTH-F2-2011-278850 (INMiND).
BD, MV as well as scanning of the TgF344-AD rats were funded by the EPSRC project EP/M005909/1.
The MRI facility is supported through an equipment grant from BBSRC UK (BB/F011350).



Figure 1 .
Figure 1.
The MRI protocol.
Dataset A: high resolution T 1 -RARE images for segmentation of key brain regions in conjunction with the Schwarz et al. rat atlas.
Dataset B: multi-repetition time (TR) multi-flip angle spoiled gradient recalled echo (SPGR) images for combined flip angle error (k) and pre-contrast T 1 mapping.
Datasets C and E: high spatial resolution dynamic SPGR images for estimation of K trans and monitoring contrast agent concentration in the superior sagittal sinus (SSS).
Dataset D: low spatial resolution multi-flip angle multi-echo (MFAME)-MRI SPGR images for estimation of PS w .
Abbreviations: CA, contrast agent; k, flip angle error; TR, repetition time; TE, echo time; n rep , number of image repetitions.



Figure 2 .
Figure 2. Analysis pipeline for estimation of PS w and K trans .
a A mono-exponential model is fit to multigradient echo signals to correct for T 2 * decay, producing estimates of MRI signal at zero echo time, S(TE = 0).
b Maps of flip angle error (k) and pre-contrast T 1 are estimated from short TR (red points) and long TR (black points) data by jointly fitting the spoiled gradient echo (SPGR) signal model, assuming the fast exchange limit for water exchange.
Red and black lines show the joint fit to this data.
c Median MRI signals, k and T 1 for each region are extracted by registering the T 1 -weighted



Figure 3 .
Figure 3. Sensitivity analysis and Monte Carlo simulations.
a-c Sensitivity plots showing the percentage increase or decrease in post-contrast MRI signal intensity due to a 50% increase in τ b (solid line) or p b (dashed line) as a function of flip angle, TR, and blood contrast agent concentration (C b ).
The dotted line denotes zero change in signal.
d Coefficient of variation (CoV) of p b , τ b , and PS w estimates (dotted line) as a function of noise-signal ratio for different unique flip angle and image repeat combinations estimated from Monte Carlo simulations.
Noise sd is the standard deviation of zero mean Gaussian noise, S 0 is the equilibrium signal.
Symbols indicate the noise-to-signal ratio of in-vivo rat data acquired with n α = 5 (* = hippocampus; + = cortex, $ = striatum, # = thalamus).
e The effect of flip angle error (k = α/α 0 ) on p b , τ b , and PS w when assuming the delivered flip angle (α) is equal to the prescribed flip angle (α 0 ) (black lines).
The overlapping red lines show bias in parameter estimates following flip angle error correction using multi-TR multi-flip angle data.
f The effect of nonzero K trans on p b , τ b , and PS w .



Figure 4 .
Figure 4. MRI and immunostaining results in TgF344-AD and wild-type rats.
a PS w is significantly higher (up to 2-fold) in TgF344-AD rats relative to wild-types (p < 0.05; two-way ANOVA).
b Trans-BBB leakage of contrast agent (K trans ) is unaltered between TgF344-AD rats and wild-types (p = 0.477; two-way ANOVA).
c Representative occludin and lectin immuno-stains.
Aspecific staining of amyloid-β was visually identified on the lectin snapshots and manually segmented as shown.



Figure 5 .Supplementary Figure 1 .M
Figure5.
Post-hoc protocol appraisal.
Bland-Altman plots show the difference in PS w estimates (∆PS w ) when fitting to dataset D with 6 versus 2 repetitions per flip angle.
In all regions, the use of 2 repetitions underestimated PS w relative to 6 repetitions, but differences were not statistically significant (p = 0.22).
Variance in PS w across both groups was also unaltered (p = 0.80).
Black dots represent TgF344-AD rats, while white dots represent wild-types.
The solid dotted lines denotes ∆PS w = 0, while the dotted horizontal lines denote the mean bias in ∆PS w between estimates using 6 vs 2 repeats.SupplementaryFigure 1. Representative claudin-5 and aquaporin-4 immuno-stains, and an example of lectin segmentation.
a Representative claudin-5 and lectin immuno-stains.
b Representative aquaporin-4 and lectin immuno-stains.
Aspecific staining of amyloid-β was visually identified on the lectin snapshots and manually segmented.
Segmented regions were then removed from calculation of snapshot statistics.
c An image of an entire sagittal section stained with lectin.
Each animal had 4


Figure 1



Table 1 . MFAME-MRI acquisition parameters.