Blood biomarkers for Alzheimer's disease and related disorders
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a progressive neurodegenerative disease, and the single commonest cause of dementia.
Many other diseases can, however, cause dementia and differential diagnosis can be challenging especially in early disease stages.
For most neurodegenerative dementias, accumulation of brain pathologies starts many years before clinical onset; the ability to detect these pathologies paves the way for targeted diseasemodifying prevention trials.
AD is associated with -amyloid and tau pathologies which can be quantified using cerebrospinal fluid and imaging biomarkers and, more recently, using highly sensitive blood tests.
While for the most part specific biomarkers of non-AD neurodegenerative dementias are lacking, non-specific biomarkers of neurodegeneration are available.
This review summarizes recent advances in the neurodegenerative dementia blood biomarker research, and discusses the next steps required for clinical implementation.

Background
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a progressive neurodegenerative dementia for which diseasemodifying treatments, likely to be the most effective in early disease stages (or even in primary prevention settings), are now being developed at a rapid pace.
AD-related pathologies, key amongst which are extracellular amyloid β plaques, intra-neuronal tau tangles and neurodegeneration, are evident in the brain decades before symptom onset; it is increasingly recognised that a pre-symptomatic phase whereby pathologies accumulate years before symptoms is a common feature of most neurodegenerative diseases.
As the field moves to treating ever earlier making a diagnosis on clinical grounds becomes ever more difficult; and, by definition, diagnostic criteria that rely on cognitive impairment preclude diagnosis in the pre-clinical phase.
While genetics plays a significant part in the development of AD and polygenic risk scores are emerging as a means of determining an individual's risk of developing AD,
In parallel with the development of novel treatments, intense research over many years means that we now have fluid and imaging biomarkers that may serve these purposes.
While reliable cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and imaging biomarkers for AD pathologies and neurodegeneration have been available for some time, the field has been galvanised in recent years by the development of blood-based biomarkers.
This overview paper summarises recent progress in the development of these blood tests, their strengths and limitations, and some thoughts about how they could best be utilised in clinical trials and clinical practice.

Blood biomarkers for amyloid β pathology
CSF Aβ42/Aβ40 is a robust biomarker for cerebral Aβ pathology.
Numerous clinical and research studies confirm that this biomarker has a clear bimodal distribution, with a relatively small overlap (grey zone) of results close to the cut-point for positivity.
A low Aβ42/Aβ40 ratio is seen in AD, reflecting selective reduction of Aβ42 in the CSF likely due to deposition in amyloid plaques within the brain.
Recent technological developments now mean than similar reductions in Aβ42/Aβ40 can be quantified in plasma.
Several immunoprecipitation mass spectrometry (IP-MS) methods have been developed to extract Aβ from plasma, which is then subjected to MS-based quantification.
5]
A range of immunochemical tests for plasma Aβ42/Aβ40 have been developed, which are easier than MS methodologies to implement in routine clinical chemistry laboratory settings.
However, in a head-to-head comparison, IP-MS methods significantly outperformed immunoassay-based techniques for detecting A pathology, with areas under the curve (AUCs) ranging from between 0.69-0.78
for the different immunoassays compared with 0.86 for the best performing IP-MS method.
Importantly, and as is the case in CSF, plasma Aβ42/Aβ40 reduction is consistently seen in cognitively normal A-positive individuals to a similar extent as seen in patients with cognitive impairment.
is paves the way for blood testing to be used to identify A-positive individuals for clinical trials in the preclinical phase of AD; and in due course perhaps even for population-based screening.
However, a major problem with using plasma Aβ42/Aβ40 as an index of Aβ pathology is the small difference between Aβ-positive and -negative individuals.
Aβ42/Aβ40 is reduced only of the order of 8-15% in plasma compared with 40-60% in CSF; and most amyloid-positive individuals' plasma values lie close to the positive/negative cut-off.
As opposed to CSF measures which are already in wide use, the reduced robustness of the plasma assays presents a significant challenge for these tests to be implemented in routine clinical practiceeven small drifts in assay performance over time risk individuals being misclassified.
Finding ways to improve the robustness of plasma Aβ tests that can be easily implemented in clinical laboratory practice is an important research topic.

Blood biomarkers for tau pathophysiology
CSF phosphorylated tau (P-tau) is an established biomarker for tau pathophysiology in AD.
These include assays for tau phosphorylation at various sites including at amino acids 181 (P-tau181), 217 (P-tau217) and 231 (P-tau231).
Neuropathology studies have shown that plasma P-tau concentration is related to both the density of Aβ plaques and tau tangles, and that concentrations of all of these different plasma P-tau variants can differentiate cases with significant AD brain pathology from those without.
3]
3]
Plasma P-tau levels are increased 2.5-6-fold in AD dementia compared with non-AD disorders.
While all the P-tau moieties perform well, the largest relative increases in the symptomatic stages of the disease seem to be observed with P-tau217.
It is more unclear how well different plasma P-tau variants preform in the pre-symptomatic phase of AD, but evidence suggests that plasma P-tau217 and P-tau231 become abnormal shortly after Aβ-PET becomes abnormal.
As opposed to plasma A42/40 where MS methods outperform immunochemical assays, all of the plasma P-tau isoforms mentioned above can be measured reliably using immunochemical methods, with a number of different research and commercial platforms now becoming available.
While this bodes well for clinical implementation, headto-head comparisons suggest that some commonly used assays have lower performance than others.
There remains considerable work to be done before plasma P-tau can be widely implemented as a clinical test, including not only choice of assay platform but also efforts to standardise methods between labs, ensure longitudinal stability, and determine appropriate clinical cut-points.
Plasma P-tau levels increase gradually over time as AD develops, perhaps relating to the number of AD-affected neurons that still manage to synthesize and secrete tau.
In particular, P-tau217 shows increases during both the preclinical and prodromal (mild cognitive impairment) stages of the disease.
As well as potential uses as a diagnostic and screening tool, another potential use of plasma P-tau is as a measure of tau pathophysiology in clinical trials, including those targeting A pathologies.
At AAIC 2021, Lilly reported reduction in plasma P-tau217 concentration in response to donanemab treatment (unpublished results), and during the Clinical Trials on Alzheimer's Disease (CTAD) conference in November 2021, similar results (in this case P-tau181 reduction) were presented for aducanumab (unpublished results).
Whilst not yet conclusive, these results have been interpreted as showing that removal of A has downstream effect on tau deposition, with implications for disease modification.

Blood biomarkers for neurodegeneration
For many years, CSF neurofilament light (NfL) has been used as a neuroaxonal injury marker, elevated in many different neurological disorders including a wide range of different neurodegenerative disorders.
The highest NfL concentrations in CSF are seen in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, frontotemporal dementia, atypical parkinsonian disorders, and HIV-associated neurocognitive dysfunction,
As well as in the CSF, NfL can be reliably measured using sensitive assays developed in the last few years in plasma (or serum); CSF and blood measures of NfL show very close correlation, and virtually all CSF findings have now been replicated in blood,
Thus, both familial AD and familial FTD mutation carriers show quite striking increases in blood NfL concentration around a decade before expected clinical onset, probably marking the onset of neurodegeneration; furthermore, the higher the increase, the more rapid clinical disease progression.
4]
9]
en it comes to measurement in routine clinical settings plasma NfL has many advantages, including being relatively unaffected by pre-analytical factors that influence many other assay.
3]
NfL results may however be less easy to interpret in older age groups and especially in people older than 70 years of age, due to age-related increase in plasma NfL.
These age-related changes are an important challenge when considering how to use the test clinically, resulting in the development of age-specific cut-points.
It is also relevant that a number of common pathologies can elevate NfL, including mild traumatic brain injury, 37 cerebrovascular insults,

Blood biomarkers for astrocytic activation
Glial activation appears to be a rapid response to the presence of Aβ pathology.
Blood-based markers of brain glial pathology have proven challenging to develop due to high extracerebral expression of many of the proteins, e.g., in macrophages, making the blood tests less reflective of brain changes.
One biomarker, glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP), has however shown promise in this context.
The highest levels of GFAP expression is seen in brain astrocytes, and its blood concentration therefore mainly reflects astrocytic activation, and in the context of AD, an astrocytic response to Aβ accumulation in the brain.
terestingly, the relationship with brain Aβ pathology appears stronger for plasma as opposed to CSF GFAP; and plasma GFAP is not associated with fibrillar tau pathology when adjusting for Aβ.
It is currently unknown to what extent different forms of Aβ deposits activate astrocytes, and there are so far no published studies on the kinetics of this response in terms blood GFAP increase.
Although GFAP is likely not AD-specific, the magnitude of change in non-AD neurodegenerative diseases, such as FTD, is relatively small compared with AD;

Conclusion
Rapid recent developments in instrument sensitivity combined with novel assay development now mean that it is possible to detect Aβ and tau pathology in blood with high diagnostic accuracy throughout the AD continuum, from pre-clinical through to established AD dementia.
Plasma Aβ42/Aβ40 measures show high diagnostic performance, but the small fold change between Aβ-positive and -negative individuals, large overlap in results between the groups, and more complex assay platforms required for optimal results (with MS outperforming immunoassays) are likely to prove challenging for widespread implementation.
Plasma P-tau assays detect both Aβ pathology and tau changes and are more robust than plasma Aβ42/Aβ40, showing greater fold change between patients with AD pathology and controls and are immunoassay-based and so likely to be easier to implement widely.
A potential limitation of P-tau is that elevation may occur a little later in response to amyloid accumulation than with Aβ42/Aβ40; however, robust changes are still seen prior to symptom onset, and this is not likely to be a problem unless it is imperative to detect the very earliest stage of Aβ accumulation.
P-tau may also be a useful outcome measure for clinical trials of drugs targeting AD-related pathologies.
For most other neurodegenerative dementias, we lack disease-specific biomarkers, but plasma NfL is a robust biomarker of axonal degeneration and is already finding utility in clinical practice and to monitor intensity of neurodegeneration intensity in clinical trials of novel disease-modifying drugs.
While much work remains in terms of assay optimisation and standardisation, blood tests show considerable promise either before, or in due course perhaps in place of, more complex and expensive CSF and imaging examinations to detect AD pathology.
The ease of sampling blood also raises the potential for testing in primary care, with appropriate caveats about patient selection, interpretation of results and diagnostic pathways, which are likely to still require the involvement of specialists and, for now at least, confirmation with other tests.
As with any biomarker, interpretation of blood-based biomarkers should be made in the correct clinical context; while there are moves in some research settings to define AD as a pure biomarker construct, in clinical practice they should be used as part of a diagnostic process to aid diagnosis in patients with cognitive symptoms.
Whilst blood biomarkers are being evaluated and used to pre-screen for clinical trials to enrich for individuals who are likely to have neurodegenerative disease, there is currently no role for their use in screening outside of clinical trials.


acknowledges the support of the National Institute for Health Research University College London Hospitals Biomedical Research Centre, Wolfson Foundation, Alzheimer's Research UK, Medical Research Council, British Heart Foundation, UK Dementia Research Institute and Alzheimer's Association