Accelerated Dystrophy and Decay of Oligodendrocyte Precursor Cells in the APP/PS1 Model of Alzheimer’s-Like Pathology
Myelin disruption is a feature of natural aging and Alzheimer's disease (AD).
In the CNS, myelin is produced by oligodendrocytes, which are generated throughout life by oligodendrocyte progenitor cells (OPCs).
Here, we examined age-related changes in OPCs in APP/PS1 mice, a model for AD-like pathology, compared with non-transgenic (Tg) age-matched controls.
The analysis was performed in the CA1 area of the hippocampus following immunolabeling for NG2 with the nuclear dye Hoescht, to identify OPC and OPC sister cells, a measure of OPC replication.
The results indicate a significant decrease in the number of OPCs at 9 months in APP/PS1 mice, compared to age-matched controls, without further decline at 14 months.
Also, the number of OPC sister cells declined significantly at 14 months in APP/PS1 mice, which was not observed in age-matched controls.
Notably, OPCs also displayed marked morphological changes at 14 months in APP/PS1 mice, characterized by an overall shrinkage of OPC process domains and increased process branching.
The results indicate that OPC disruption is a pathological sign in the APP/PS1 mouse model of AD.

INTRODUCTION
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the most common type of dementia and it is characterized by the formation of intracellular neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs) and extracellular amyloid-β (Aβ) plaques
White matter disruption is present at an early stage of AD pathology
Studies in human AD and mouse models indicate loss of oligodendrocytes and demyelination is most pronounced at the core of Aβ plaques
Hence, myelin loss is a feature of human AD and mouse models
In the adult brain, oligodendrocyte progenitor cells (OPCs) are responsible for the life-long generation of oligodendrocytes, required to myelinate new connections formed in response to new life experiences, and to replace myelin lost in pathology
OPCs are identified by their expression of the NG2 proteoglycan and are sometimes known as NG2-cells or NG2-glia
Before differentiating into mature myelinating oligodendrocytes, OPCs transition through an intermediate phase identified by expression of the G-protein coupled receptor GPR17
Notably, early changes in OPCs may be a pathological sign and underlie myelin loss in mouse models of AD-like pathology
This possibility is supported by immunostaining of post-mortem AD brain showing changes in NG2 immunoreactivity in individuals with high Aβ plaque load
The APP/PS1 transgenic mouse expresses familial AD-causing mutated forms of human APP (APPswe, Swedish familial AD-causing mutation) and presenilin1 (PS1dE9) and is used extensively as a model for AD-like pathology
The APP/PS1 mouse presents early Aβ plaque deposition in the hippocampus at 4-5 months of age and extensively throughout the forebrain by 8 months
Furthermore, several studies provide evidence that white matter and myelin disruption are early clinical signs of APP/PS1 mice
Also, there is evidence of increased NG2 cell numbers in the temporal lobe of 6 months old APP/PS1 mice
Here, we examined changes in OPCs in 9 and 14 months old APP/PS1 mice, compared to age-matched non-transgenic controls, and focused on the AD-relevant CA1 area of the hippocampus.
Our results indicate a premature decline in OPC numbers at 9 months in APP/PS1, whilst at 14 months OPCs displayed cellular shrinkage and increased process branching in APP/PS1, characteristic of reactive changes in response to pathology
This study identifies pathological changes in OPCs in the APP/PS1 mouse model of AD.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Ethics
The animal study was reviewed and approved by the University of Southampton Animal Welfare Ethical Review Body (AWERB).
All procedures were carried out following the Animals (Scientific Procedures) Act 1986 of the UK.

Animals and Tissue
Transgenic APP/PS1 mice were used that contain human transgenes for both APP (KM670/671NL, Swedish) and PSEN1 (L166P).
APPswe/PSEN1dE9 mice (APP/PS1) on a C57BL/6 background were originally obtained from The Jackson Laboratory and heterozygous males were bred at our local facilities with wild-type female C57BL/6J (Harlan).
Offspring were ear punched and genotyped using PCR with primers specific for the APP-sequence (forward: GAATTCCGACATGA CTCAGG, reverse: GTTCTGCTGCATCTTGGACA).
Mice not expressing the transgene were used as non-transgenic wild-type littermate controls.
Mice were housed in groups of 4-10, under a 12-h light/12 h dark cycle at 21 • C, with food and water ad libitum.
No mice were excluded and experimental groups contained a spread of sexes.
Mice weight was monitored throughout the experiment.
APP/PS1 mice and age-matched non-transgenic controls aged 9 and 14 months old were perfusion-fixed intracardially under terminal anesthesia with 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA), then post-fixed for 2 h with 4% PFA.
Sections were cut on a vibratome (Leica) at a thickness of 35 µm then stored in cryoprotectant at -70 • C until use.

Immunohistochemistry
Sections were treated for a blocking stage of either 10-20% normal goat serum (NGS) or normal donkey serum (NDS) or 0.5% bovine serum albumin (BSA) for 1-2 h, depending on the primary antibodies to be used.
Sections were washed three times in PBS and incubated overnight in primary antibody diluted in blocking solution containing 0.25% Triton-X: rabbit anti-NG2, 1:500 (Millipore); rabbit anti-Olig2, 1:500 (Millipore); rabbit anti-GPR17, 1:100 (Cayman Labs); rat anti-MBP, 1:300 (Millipore).
Sections were washed three times in PBS and incubated overnight in primary antibody diluted in blocking solution containing 0.25% Triton-X: rabbit anti-NG2, 1:500 (Millipore); rabbit anti-Olig2, 1:500 (Millipore); rabbit anti-GPR17, 1:100 (Cayman Labs); rat anti-MBP, 1:300 (Millipore).
Tissues were then washed three times in PBS and incubated with an appropriate fluorochrome secondary antibody (AlexaFluor 488, AlexaFluor 568, 1:400, Life Technologies), or biotinylated secondary antibody (Vector Labs) diluted in blocking solution for 1-2 h.
Finally, sections were washed three times with PBS before being mounted on glass slides and covered with mounting medium and glass coverslips ready for imaging.

Imaging and Analysis
Immunofluorescence images were captured using a Zeiss Axiovert LSM 710 VIS40S confocal microscope and maintaining the acquisition parameters constant to allow comparison between samples within the same experiment.
The acquisition of images for cell counts was done with ×20 objective.
Images for OPC reconstruction were taken using ×100 objective and capturing z-stacks formed by 80-100 single plains with an interval of 0.3 µm.
Cell counts were performed in the CA1 area in projected flattened images from z-stacks formed by 10 or 15 z-single plain images with 1 µm interval between them, and cell density was calculated as the total number of cells per unit area expressed as cells per mm 2 .
The relative density of MBP immunolabeling was measured within a constant field of view (FOV) using ImageJ.
For DAB immunostaining of Olig2+ oligodendrocytes, sections were examined on an Olympus dotSlide digital slide scanning system based on a BX51 microscope stand with an integrated scanning stage and Olympus CC12 color camera.
The cell coverage of OPCs was measured using ImageJ by drawing a line around the cell processes and measuring the area enclosed within the line and expressing the data relative to the area of the CA1 in each section.
For morphological analysis of single OPCs, cells were drawn using Neurolucida 360, and their morphology was analyzed using Neurolucida 360 explorer for measurements of the number of processes per cell, number of process terminals (end-points), number of nodes (branch points), and cell complexity; OPC cell complexity refers to the normalization and comparison of processes derived from the dendritic complexity index
For Sholl analysis, the interval between Sholl shells was 5 µm.
Data were expressed as Mean ± SEM and tested for significance by ANOVA followed by Tukey's post hoc test for cell numbers, myelin immunostaining, OPC cell domains, and neurolucida analyses of OPCs, and Sidak's multiple comparisons test for Sholl analysis, using GraphPad Prism 6.0.

RESULTS

Premature Decline of OPCs in the Hippocampus of APP/PS1 Mice
The hippocampus displays a high degree of adult oligodendrogenesis, which is important for learning and plasticity
Here, we used NG2 immunolabeling to identify adult OPCs
OPCs are uniformly distributed throughout the hippocampus at both 9 and 14 months, in APP/PS1 mice and
OPC duplets are recently divided sister-cells and their frequency is a measure of OPC cell division
Quantification confirmed a significant difference in the numerical density of NG2+ OPCs in APP/PS1 at 9 months compared to age-matched controls (Figure
The data indicated a 50% decrease in NG2+ OPCs at 9 months in APP/PS1 to a level observed at 14 months in natural aging (Figure
Also, there was a significant decrease in the numerical density of OPC sister cells at 14 months in APP/PS1 mice (Figure
Overall, the results indicate a premature decline in OPC numbers at 9 months in APP/PS1 mice.

Decline in Myelination in the Hippocampus of APP/PS1 Mice
The hippocampus displays a high degree of myelination, which is essential for cognitive function
Immunolabeling for MBP is prominent in the CA1 area at both 9 and 14 months in controls and in APP/PS1 (Figures
Between 9 and 14 months of age, we observed no significant changes in the numerical density of GPR17+ and Olig2+ oligodendrocytes, in controls or APP/PS1 (Figures
Significant age-related changes FIGURE 3 | OPC process domains in the CA1 area of the hippocampus of APP/PS1 mice.
Hippocampi of 9 months old and 14 months old APP/PS1 mice were examined, compared to age-matched controls, using immunofluorescence labeling for NG2 (green) to identify OPCs.
High magnification confocal projections of OPCs and their process domains (indicated by broken white lines) in the 9 months old hippocampus (Ai,Aii), and the 14 months old hippocampus (Bi,Bii), in controls (Ai,Bi) and APP/PS1 (Aii,Bii).
Scale bars = 20 µm.
(Aiii,Biii) Box-Whisker plots of the total area of OPC process domains.
Data are Mean ± SEM, * * * p ≤ 0.001, ANOVA, followed by Tukey's post hoc test; NS, not significant; n = 10 cells for WT-9 months and APP-9 months, n = 13 cells for WT-14 months and n = 17 cells for APP-14 months, from three animals in each group.
in MBP immunostaining were detected in the CA1 region and this was not observed in APP/PS1 mice (Figure
Overall, the results indicate MBP immunostaining is retarded at later stages of pathology in APP/PS1 mice.

OPC Exhibit Cellular Shrinkage at 14 Months in APP/PS1 Mice
The results above indicate OPC are disrupted in APP/PS1 mice, which is often associated with changes in OPC morphology in AD and other pathologies
Therefore, we examined OPC morphology in-depth, using high magnification confocal images and measuring the process domains of individual cells and the total coverage of NG2 cells within the CA1 (Figure
Significant differences were detected in the size of OPC process domains in 14 months APP/PS1 (Figure
The results indicate that at 14 months OPCs display a significant shrinkage in APP/PS1.

OPC Exhibit Increased Process Branching and Cellular Complexity at 14 Months in APP/PS1 Mice
The underlying morphological changes resulting in OPC shrinkage in APP/PS1 mice were examined in further detail using
The age-related changes in OPC complexity in APP/PS1 mice were examined further using Sholl analysis (Figure
Sholl analysis confirmed significant differences in OPC morphology in APP/PS1 mice between 9 and 14 months, with significant increases in the number of endpoints (Figure
Also, analysis of processes length in the different branch orders identified that OPCs displayed increased process length in the distal branches (Figure
In contrast to these changes in APP/PS1, no significant differences were found in OPC morphology in natural aging (Figure
It is important to note that the small number of cells analyzed by Neurolucida and Sholl may have introduced the possibility of bias.
Nonetheless, the measurements of OPC process domains, together with Neurolucida and Sholl analyses, all indicate that OPC shrinkage is a key feature in APP/PS1 at 14 months and is associated with increased process branching, giving OPCs a more fibrous appearance that is similar to ''reactive'' NG2 cells reported in human AD and AD models

DISCUSSION
Age-related loss of myelin is a pathological feature of human AD
We observed a decrease in MBP immunostaining at 14 months in the hippocampus of APP/PS1 mice, consistent with evidence that myelination is disrupted in this model of AD
The key findings of the present study are that there is a premature decrease in OPC density at 9 months in APP/PS1 mice and that at 14 months OPC displayed a shrunken and fibrous morphology, indicative of morphological dystrophy.
These findings indicate that changes in OPCs are potential factors in the progression of AD pathology.
Our data support previous studies that there is a decline in the number of OPCs in natural aging
Notably, this age-related loss of OPCs occurred at 9 months of age in APP/PS1, indicating a premature loss of OPCs in this model of AD.
The reduction in OPCs numbers at any point is a measure of changes in cell proliferation and/or death at earlier points, hence the reduction in OPC numbers at 9 months in APP/PS1 mice reflects an acceleration of the age-related loss of OPCs, which in natural aging occurs at later ages.
The decrease in OPCs at 9 months in APP/PS1 indicates their capacity for self-renewal, defined as maintaining OPC numbers relatively constant over time, was reduced at a point before this age, which is consistent with the evidence of advanced OPC senescence in 7.5-month-old APP/PS1 mice
We observed a reduction in OPC sister cells at 14 months in APP/PS1, which is a measure of recently divided OPCs
The changes in OPCs were associated with a reduction in MBP immunostaining at 14 months in APP/PS1 mice compared to controls.
MBP immunostaining, taken as a measure of the overall extent of myelination, was increased between 9 and 14 months in wild-type controls, but not in APP/PS1 mice, consistent with multiple lines of evidence that myelination is disrupted in AD-like pathology
We did not detect evident changes in GPR17+ and Olig2+ oligodendrocytes, and no conclusions can be drawn on the overall numbers of oligodendrocytes at this time.
The decrease in MBP immunostaining at 14 months in APP/PS1 mice may reflect changes in the number and lengths of myelin sheaths, which has been reported in aging
Myelin remodeling is important for nervous system plasticity and repair
(A) 3D morphology of NG2 immunolabeled OPC in the CA1 area of the hippocampus (generated using isosurface rendering with Volocity software, PerkinElmer), illustrating Sholl shells (concentric circles, 5 µm apart, with the cell body in the middle), and the morphological parameters measured; the points of process branching are termed nodes (blue dots), the points where the processes intersect the Sholl shells are termed intersections (yellow dots), the number of process terminals or endpoints, and the process branch order, with 1st order closest to the cell body (adapted from
(B-E) Graphs comparing OPC morphological parameters in AAP/PS1 mice aged 9 months ( ) and 14 months ( ), together with age-matched controls (insets); two-way ANOVA followed by Sidak's multiple comparisons test.
* p ≤ 0.05, * * p ≤ 0.01, * * * p ≤ 0.001, * * * * p ≤ 0.0001, n = 9 cells from three animals in each group.
2019), and the decline in myelination in APP/PS1 may be related to neuronal loss and learning dysfunction in these mice
The results provide evidence of OPC and myelin disruption in the hippocampus of APP/PS1 mice, suggesting key features of human AD are replicated in this mouse model.
Notably, the early loss of OPCs at 9 months in APP/PS1 hippocampus is followed at 14 months by a more fibrous appearance of NG2+ OPCs due to cell shrinkage and increased branching, similar to the fibrous morphology of ''reactive'' NG2-glia
Fibrous or reactive NG2-glia have been reported to be associated with amyloid-β plaques in human AD and mouse models
Since OPCs are the source of new myelinating oligodendrocytes in the adult brain
Furthermore, the underlying causes of OPC shrinkage in APP/PS1 are unresolved, but OPC are known to contact synapses in the hippocampus
Also, neuronal activity regulates myelination and myelin repair

CONCLUSION
Our findings demonstrate that OPCs undergo complex age-related changes in the hippocampus of the APP/PS1 mouse model of AD-like pathology.
We conclude that OPC disruption is a pathological sign in AD and is a potential factor in accelerated myelin loss and cognitive decline.

DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
The datasets presented in this article are not readily available because no datasets were generated in this study.
All data generated or analyzed during this study are included in this published article.
Requests to access the datasets should be directed to arthur.butt@port.ac.uk.

ETHICS STATEMENT
The animal study was reviewed and approved by the University of Southampton Animal Welfare Ethical Review Body (AWERB).



FIGURE 1 |
FIGURE 1 | Changes in oligodendrocyte progenitor cells (OPCs) in the CA1 area of the hippocampus of APP/PS1 mice.
Hippocampi of 9 months old and 14 months old APP/PS1 mice were compared to age-matched controls.
(Ai,Aii,Bi,Bii) Representative confocal images of immunofluorescence labeling for NG2 (green) to identify OPCs and counterstaining with Hoechst (blue) for nuclei, to identify OPC sister cells (some indicated by arrows), as illustrated at higher magnification (inset, Ai), from non-transgenic controls (Ai,Bi) and APP/PS1 mice (Aii,Bii), aged 9 months (Ai,Aii) and 14 months (Bi,Bii); scale bars = 50 µm in main panels and 10 µm in the inset.
(C,D) Bar graphs of the numerical density of NG2+ OPCs (C) and OPC sister cells (D).
Data are expressed as Mean ± SEM; * p ≤ 0.05, ANOVA followed by Tukey's post hoc test, n = 3 animals for each group.



FIGURE 2 |
FIGURE 2 | Changes in oligodendrocytes and myelin in the CA1 area of the hippocampus of APP/PS1 mice.
Hippocampi of 9 months old (Ai,Bi) and 14 months old (Bi,Bii) APP/PS1 mice (Ai,Bi) were compared to age-matched controls (Aii,Bii).
(Ai,Aii,Bi,Bii) Representative photomicrographs of immunolabeling for MBP (red in Ai,Aii,Bi,Bii main panels) to identify the extent of myelination, together with GPR17 for immature oligodendrocytes (green in upper insets in Ai,Aii,Bi,Bii) and Olig2 for the total number of oligodendrocyte lineage cells (brown in lower insets in Ai,Aii,Bi,Bii); scale bars = 50 µm, except upper insets = 20 µm.
(C-E) Bar graphs of numerical density of GPR17+ cells (C) and Olig2+ cells (D), together with MBP immunofluorescence density (E); data are expressed as Mean ± SEM; * p ≤ 0.05 ANOVA followed by Tukey's post hoc test, n = 3 animals for each group.


Neurolucida cell tracing.
Confocal images of 80-100 z-sections, each of 0.3 µm thickness, were captured using an x100 oil objective and reconstructed and analyzed using Neurolucida 360 and Neurolucida 360 Explorer (Figures 4Ai,Aii,Bi,Bii; n = 9 cells from three animals in each group).
Consistent with the results above, OPC morphology was significantly altered at 14 months in APP/PS1 compared to age-matched controls, with the average number of processes per cell being unaltered (Figure4C), whereas processes displayed increased branching, with a significantly greater number of process terminals or endpoints (Figure4D; ANOVA p ≤ 0.01, followed by Tukey's post hoc test, p ≤ 0.05) and several branch points or nodes (Figure4E; ANOVA p ≤ 0.01, followed by Tukey's post hoc test, p ≤ 0.01), with a consequent 3-fold increase in the Neurolucida measurement of cell complexity in 14 month APP/PS1 compared to age-match controls (Figure4F; ANOVA p ≤ 0.01, followed by Tukey's post hoc test, p ≤ 0.01).
In contrast, no changes in the morphological parameters of OPCs were detected between 9 and 14 months in wild-type mice (Figures4C-F) or in 9 month APP/PS1 OPC compared to age-matched controls (Figures



FIGURE 4 |
FIGURE 4 | OPC morphological changes in the CA1 of the APP/PS1 mouse model compared to an age-matched controls.
Data were generated by Neurolucida 360 analysis of NG2 immunostained cells (Ai,Aii,Bi,Bii).Box-whisker plots of (C) processes per cell, (D) number of end-points, (E) number of nodes, (F) cell complexity index.
Data expressed as Mean ± SEM.
ANOVA, followed by Tukey's post hoc test, * p ≤ 0.05, * * p ≤ 0.01; NS, not significant; n = 9 cells from three animals in each group.