Patient and Caregiver Benefit From a Comprehensive Dementia Care Program: 1‐Year Results From the UCLA Alzheimer's and Dementia Care Program
BACKGROUND/OBJECTIVES: Persons with Alzheimer disease and related dementias (ADRDs) require comprehensive care that spans health systems and community-based organizations.
This study examined the clinical outcomes of a comprehensive dementia care program and identified subgroups who were more likely to benefit.
DESIGN: Observational, baseline and 1 year after intervention.
SETTING: Urban, academic medical center.
PARTICIPANTS: A total of 554 persons with dementia and their caregivers who had 1-year follow-up evaluations and data on clinical outcomes.
INTERVENTION: Health system-based comprehensive dementia care management program using nurse practitioner dementia care managers.
MEASUREMENTS: Patient measures included the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE), the Functional Activities Questionnaire, Basic and Instrumental Activities of Daily Living scales, the Cornell Scale for Depression in Dementia, and the Neuropsychiatric Inventory Questionnaire (NPI-Q) Severity.
Caregiver measures included the Modified Caregiver Strain Index, the Patient Health Questionnaire-9, NPI-Q Distress, and the Dementia Burden Scale-Caregiver).
We used established minimal clinically important differences and lowest tertiles of baseline symptoms to define improving symptoms and maintaining low symptoms as clinical benefit for patients and caregivers.
RESULTS: At year 1, persons with ADRD improved on all scales, except MMSE and functional status measures; caregivers improved on all scales.
Using validated instruments, 314/543 (58%) of patients, 282/447 (63%) of caregivers, and 376/501 (75%) of patients or caregivers demonstrated clinical benefit.
In adjusted multivariate models, at year 1, more behavioral symptoms and fewer depression symptoms at baseline were associated with patient improvement; and fewer baseline depression symptoms were associated with maintaining low behavioral symptoms.
Male caregiver sex, higher baseline caregiver burden, and caring for patients with fewer baseline depression symptoms were associated with caregiver improvement.
Male caregiver sex and patients with fewer depression symptoms, fewer behavioral symptoms, and more functional impairment at baseline were associated with caregivers maintaining low burden at 1 year.
CONCLUSIONS: Health system-based comprehensive dementia care management is a promising approach to improving clinical outcomes, with benefits for both patients and caregivers.
T he clinical manifestations of Alzheimer disease and related dementias (ADRDs) are protean and devastating, including cognitive impairment, immobility and falls, swallowing disorders and aspiration pneumonia, and behavioral symptoms (eg, agitation, aggression, and hallucinations).
These sequelae often lead to caregiver stress, burnout, and medical illnesses.
Thus, ADRDs can be considered the archetype for a disorder with complex needs that span both the patient and caregiver, include medical and social domains, and require health system and community-based interventions.
In response, several dementia care programs have been developed to comprehensively meet the needs of patients and their caregivers.
Some have been based within healthcare systems and reach out to the communities,
The UCLA Alzheimer's and Dementia Care (ADC) Program, which adapted elements from an evidence-based collaborative ADRD care model,
The UCLA ADC Program is a health system-based comanagement model of nurse practitioner (NP) dementia care managers (DCMs) working with primary care and specialty physicians.
ncreasingly, clinical programs are being evaluated on their ability to meet the triple aim of better care, better health, and lower costs.
We have previously reported the effect of the UCLA ADC Program on the quality of dementia care
In this article, we report 1-year patient and caregiver clinical outcomes and predictors of clinical benefit of the program.

METHODS
This study describes 1-year patient and caregiver outcomes for the first 1091 participants in the UCLA ADC Program; reports the percentages who demonstrated patient, caregiver, or either benefit; and identifies predictors of who benefits.
The study was approved by the UCLA Institutional Review Board.

Participants
Patients in the UCLA ADC Program were referred to the program by their primary care or specialist physicians, who agreed to comanage care with the DCMs.
The only additional eligibility requirements were that they were UCLA patients and they did not live in a nursing home at the time of referral to the program.

Description of the Program
The UCLA ADC Program utilizes an NP DCM supervised by a physician dementia specialist to tailor and facilitate dementia care delivery in collaboration with the primary care physician (comanagement).
NPs can write orders, communicate directly through the electronic health record, and facilitate clinical care.
Dementia care is based in the healthcare system, which partners with community-based organizations to provide comprehensive, coordinated, patient-centered care.
Key components include:
• Structured needs assessments of patients and their caregivers.
• Creation and implementation of individualized dementia care plans.

Measures
Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) measures cognition with ranges from 0 to 30, with lower scores indicating greater cognitive impairment.
unctional Activities Questionnaire (FAQ) measures functional status and ranges from 0 to 30, with higher scores indicating more functional dependence.
ornell Scale for Depression in Dementia is a 19-item validated tool used to assess depressive symptoms in patients with dementia.
Scores range from 0 to 38, and a score of 11 or greater indicates probable depression.
unctional status was measured using Basic Activities of Daily Living (ADLs)
We also administered the FAQ, which measures functional status and ranges from 0 to 30, with higher scores indicating more functional dependence.
europsychiatric Inventory Questionnaire (NPI-Q) 16 is a validated survey that assesses the caregiver's perception of the severity of 12 dementia-related psychiatric and behavioral symptoms and the level of distress experienced by the caregiver as a result of these symptoms.
NPI-Q Severity score ranges from 0 to 36, and NPI-Q Distress score ranges from 0 to 60, with higher scores indicating more severe symptoms and distress, respectively.
In a nursing home population, the minimal clinically important difference was determined to be 2.8 to 3.2 points for severity and 3.1 to 4.0 points for distress.
odified Caregiver Strain Index (MCSI)
The index targets financial, physical, psychological, and social aspects of strain and is scored from 0 to 26, with higher scores indicating greater levels of strain.
Patient Health Questionnaire-9 (PHQ-9)
Dementia Burden Scale-Caregiver (DBS-CG)
The minimal clinically important difference for the DBS-CG is five points.

Definition of Clinical Benefit
We captured benefit in two ways: (1) for those in the two worst tertiles at the baseline, improvement by the minimal clinically important difference over 1 year (yes/no) or (2) for those who were in the lowest symptom tertile at the baseline, by maintaining low symptoms at baseline and 1 year (yes/no) (Table
We measured patient symptoms using the NPI-Q Severity scale (the only patient outcome measure anticipated to benefit from the program) and caregiver symptoms using the DBS-CG scale.
Benefit on the NPI-Q severity scale was defined as improving by at least three points, the minimal clinically important difference,
DBS-CG benefit was defined as improving by at least five points, the minimal clinically important difference,
Defining benefit in this manner allowed us to capture both improvement (by the minimal clinically important difference or more) and maintenance of low symptoms (baseline and 1-year symptoms are low).

Analyses
Baseline characteristics of the cohort who survived to 1 year, stratified by missing at year 1, were described using proportions for categorical variables and means with SDs or medians with interquartile ranges for continuous variables.
Differences between missing/not missing were tested using the χ 2 test for categorical variables and the Student t-test or Wilcoxon test for continuous variables, depending on whether mean or median was reported.
We used item-level data from FAQ, MMSE, Cornell, and IADLs to impute full predictor scales for patients who had at least one item on the scale.
For missing outcomes, we required at least one item in the NPI-Q Severity scale and at least one item in each of the three component scales (NPI-Q Distress, PHQ-9, and MCSI) to impute DBS-CG scores.
One-year changes in NPI-Q Severity and DBS-CG among patients and caregivers were used to measure the benefit from the program.
To adjust for the bias that could arise from systematic differences between complete cases and patients with missing data, we used inverse probability weighting (IPW).
The estimated probability of being a complete case was calculated, performing a logistic regression modeling missing patient or caregiver outcomes at year 1 (yes/no), adjusting for patient's and caregiver's baseline demographic and clinical characteristics.
The predictors of being a complete case include patient's age, sex, race, education, dementia type, and MMSE category and the tertiles of FAQ, Cornell, and NPI-Q Severity; and the caregiver's sex, relation to patient, and the tertiles of MCSI, PHQ-9, and NPI-Q Distress.
The tertiles were modeled as continuous variables (test of trend).
We examined the distribution of the estimated inverse probability of being a complete case, and there were no influential weights.
Continuous outcomes were modeled performing IPW linear regression.
For binary outcomes, we used IPW univariable and multivariable logistic regressions to calculate unadjusted and adjusted odds ratios and their 95% confidence intervals, respectively.
To model clinical benefit (improving [yes/no] by the minimal clinically important difference or maintaining low symptoms [yes/no]), for patients and caregivers, we included predictors that were significant in univariable logistic regressions plus the clinically relevant covariates.
As a sensitivity analysis, all the models were redone without applying IPW.
All tests were two sided, and P < .05 was considered statistically significant.
Analyses were performed using SAS, version 9.4 (SAS Institute Inc).

RESULTS
From July 1, 2012, to December 2014, 1091 patients and their caregivers entered the program; 991 patients survived for at least 1 year in the program, and 554 patients (56%) and 469 caregivers (47%) caregivers had completed outcome measures at year 1.
Loss to follow-up at year 1 included 247 patient-caregiver dyads who were not actively involved in the program due to relocation, change in eligibility (eg, living in a nursing home or enrolled in hospice), or failing to respond to program outreach efforts as well as 190 patients and 275 caregivers who remained in the program but did not complete 1-year surveys.
Baseline sociodemographic characteristics of patients and their caregivers with outcome data were similar to the sample missing outcomes but had slightly better baseline scores on the FAQ, Cornell Scale for Depression in Dementia, and both subscales of the NPI-Q that were statistically, although not clinically, significant (Table
After 1 year in the program, patients' cognition (MMSE) and functional status (FAQ) worsened, but behavioral and psychological symptoms (NPI-Q Severity) and depressive symptoms (Cornell) improved (Figure
At 1 year, all caregiver outcomes improved significantly (Figure
In multivariable linear regression models (Table
Predictors of caregiver change scores on the NPI-Q Distress scale included baseline NPI-Q Severity and baseline MCSI (worse baseline scores predicted better 1-year scores).
Predictors of change scores on MCSI were black race (predicted better 1-year score vs white race) and functional status measured by FAQ (worse baseline scores predicted better 1-year scores).
Predictors of PHQ-9 improvement were child caregiver (predicted better 1-year score vs spouse) and baseline MCSI (worse baseline scores predicted better 1-year scores).
Using the above definitions of clinical benefit (Table
When considering benefit as for the patient, the caregiver, or both, 376/501 (75%) demonstrated benefit at 1 year.
Among patients who derived benefit at 1 year, 188/314 (60%) was symptom improvement and 127/314 (40%) was maintaining low symptoms.
Among caregivers who benefited at 1 year, 176/282 (62%) was by improving symptoms and 106/282 (38%) was maintaining low symptoms.
Unadjusted bivariate baseline predictors of 1-year clinical benefit are presented in Supplementary Table
In adjusted multivariable models (Table
Being a male caregiver, caring for a patient with fewer depressive symptoms, and higher baseline caregiver burden were associated with caregiver improvement.
Being a male caregiver and more baseline patient functional impairment, fewer patient depressive symptoms, and fewer patient behavioral symptoms were associated with caregivers who were more likely to maintain low burden at 1 year.
In the sensitivity analyses using unweighted multivariable logistic models (Supplementary Table
Specifically, patient depressive symptoms were not statistically significant in predicting patient improvement; and in the model predicting caregiver maintaining low symptoms, caregiver sex, functional impairment, and patient behavioral symptoms were no longer statistically significant.

DISCUSSION
Despite progression of cognitive and functional decline, most patients and caregivers participating in a health system-based comprehensive ADRD care program demonstrated clinical benefit at 1 year.
Slightly more than half of patients and caregivers benefited by improvement of symptoms by at least the establishedminimal clinically important differences of the clinical symptom scales, and slightly less than half benefited by maintaining low symptoms.
Thus, the program may benefit patient-caregiver dyads by both improvement of symptoms and maintenance of low symptoms.
Persons with ADRD who had worse behavioral symptoms were more likely to improve, suggesting that the delivery of high-quality dementia care
Caregivers who had more burden (a composite of distress, strain, and depression symptoms) benefited in a progressive manner (ie, those with the worst tertile of symptoms benefited more than those in the middle tertile), suggesting the importance of specific interventions aimed at caregivers.
Unexpectedly, we found that male caregivers were also more likely to benefit.
Although our data cannot provide an explanation for this finding, perhaps because of cultural norms (eg, caregiving provided more often by women), men may have had less experience in this role and benefitted more from teaching and support.
This research builds on and extends previous clinical trial data
This study confirms that similar benefits on patient psychological and behavioral symptoms and caregiver distress can occur when implemented in a predominantly fee-for-service Medicare practice setting
Moreover, we were able to use minimal clinically important differences, which were not available at the time of the Indiana trial, to classify individual patients as having clinical benefit.
Finally, as a result of the larger sample size, we were able to identify predictors of benefit that can be used to prioritize patients when resources are limited.
These findings must be considered in light of the study's limitations.
The UCLA ADC Program is a clinical program, and the evaluation did not follow a rigorous controlled trial research design.
Rather, an observational design with assessments at the time of enrollment and 1 year later was employed.
Accordingly, the maintenance of low symptoms or improvement of symptoms could have been a reflection of the natural history of ADRD in a subset of patients and unaffected by the program.
However, randomized trial data have demonstrated that patients receiving usual care show deterioration on many of the same measures,
In addition, the decline in cognitive status on the MMSE in the program is consistent with published rates of decline.
The discordance between decline on a clinical measure that would not be expected to improve by the intervention (MMSE) and improvement on measures that would be expected to improve (NPI-Q Severity and Distress, MCSI, PHQ-9, and DBS-CG) also supports the validity of the findings.
A second limitation was loss to follow-up was larger than would be expected in a clinical trial.
Because of the clinical characteristics of ADRD and associated caregiver strain, follow-up rates tend to be lower.
For example, only 67% of participants in the National Alzheimer's Coordinating Center Uniform Data Set had more than one visit.
Nevertheless, sociodemographic and clinical characteristics of those who had and who were missing 1-year outcomes were similar.
We performed inverse proportional weighting to adjust for the high rates of loss to followup and conducted sensitivity analyses without applying weighting.
The results of these sensitivity analyses were similar to models with weighting.
Finally, the program was implemented at one site, and it is unknown whether replication sites would achieve the same findings.
Yet, the implementation of the program was pragmatic and integrated into real-world clinical practice.
In summary, the UCLA ADC Program, a health system-based comprehensive dementia care program, was associated with improved scores on measures of patient and caregiver symptoms.
Three-fourths of patient-caregiver



Figure 1 .
Figure 1.
Baseline and 1-year patient and caregiver outcomes measures.
A, Patient outcome measures.
B, Caregiver outcome measures.
Cornell indicates Cornell Scale for Depression in Dementia; DBS-CG, Dementia Burden Scale-Caregiver; FAQ, Functional Activities Questionnaire; MCSI, Modified Caregiver Strain Index; MMSE, Mini-Mental State Examination; NPI-Q, Neuropsychiatric Inventory Questionnaire; PHQ-9 = Patient Health Questionnaire-9.



Table 1 .
Definitions of Clinical Benefit



Table 2 .
Patient and Caregiver Baseline Characteristics of Cohort, Those Completing 1-Year Outcomes, and Those Missing 1-Year Outcomes



Table 3 .
Adjusted Predictors of 1-Year Change Scores for NPI-Q, Severity and Distress, MCSI, and PHQ-9 Note: An increase in tertile (lowest to middle tertile or middle to highest tertile) is associated with the reported change.
Abbreviations: Cornell, Cornell Scale for Depression in Dementia; FAQ, Functional Activities Questionnaire; MCSI, Modified Caregiver Strain Index; MMSE, Mini-Mental State Examination; NPI-Q, Neuropsychiatric Inventory Questionnaire; PHQ-9, Patient Health Questionnaire-9.



Table 4 .
OR and 95% CI From Multivariable Adjusted Logistic Regressions for Patient and Caregiver Benefit at Year 1 had patient and/or caregiver clinical benefit.
Although clinical trial data are not yet available, ADRD comanagement by NPs may be a model for providing dementia care that meets the triple aim of quality care, lower-cost expenditures, and better clinical outcomes.