Clinical and pathological benefit of Twendee X in Alzheimer's disease transgenic mice with chronic cerebral hypoperfusion
chronic cerebral hypoperfusion (CCH); cortex (CTX); dentate gyrus (DG); hippocampus (HI); months (M

Introduction
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the most common cause of dementia, accounting for 69% in all dementia among the people older than 75 years.
Although pathogenesis of AD is complex,
Our recent studies showed that CCH strongly enhanced the AD pathology in mice,
Twendee X (TwX) is an anti-oxidant mixture that contains multiple ingredients, such as coenzyme Q10, ascorbic acid, L-glutamine and cystine.
Our previous study demonstrated neuroprotective effects of TwX in an acute cerebral ischemia model in mice by reducing ischemic infarct and attenuating both oxidative stress and inflammatory markers.
the present study, therefore, we investigated a possible therapeutic effect of TwX on cognitive function, Aβ pathology, inflammatory and oxidative stresses in an AD mouse model with CCH.

Materials and Methods

Mouse model
All procedures were approved by the guidelines of the Animal Committee of the Graduate School of Medicine and Dentistry of Okayama University (OKU-2014-095).
APP23 mice overexpress human APP751 isoform carrying the Swedish double mutation (KM670/671NL) under the control of the murine Thy1 promoter. 10
APP23 male mice were obtained from Dr.
Takashi Saito (RIKEN Brain Science Institute, Saitama, Japan) and maintained as hemizygotes by mating APP23 male mice with C57BL/6J female mice (CLEA Japan, Tokyo, Japan).
The offspring were genotyped using a PCR assay with DNA obtained from tail tissue samples.
Wild type (non-transgenic) littermates were used as controls.
Mice were housed in 12:12-hour lightdark cycle with controlled temperature and free access to food and water.
Four groups of mice were used in this study: wild type mice (WT + sham surgery, n = 10), APP23 group (APP23 + sham surgery, n = 10), CCH group (APP23 + CCH, n = 12) and TwX group (APP23 + CCH + TwX, n = 13).
Groups comprised approximately equal numbers of male and female mice.
For the CCH and TwX mice, ameriod constrictors (ACs) were applied to the bilateral common carotid arteries (BCCAs) at 4 months (M) of age, and cerebral blood flow (CBF) was measured with a laser-Doppler flowmeter (FLO-C1, Omegawave, Tokyo, Japan) before and 1, 3, 7, 14 and 28 d after surgery as our previously report.
X is a mixture containing multiple antioxidants,
TwX was given to the mice in TwX group by oral gavage once daily 20 mg/kg per day from 4.5 M of age until sacrifice.

Behavioral analysis
Rotarod test was used to assess sensorimotor coordination of mice at ages of 2, 5, 7, 9 and 11 M, and evaluation criteria is the time that mice spent on the rotating rod (MK670; Muromachi Kikai Co., Tokyo, Japan) before falling as our previous report.
In brief, the rotarod test began with mice trying to stay on a rod rotating at 4 rpm, the speed was then increased to 40 rpm in a period of 60 seconds, and then kept the speed of 40 rpm.
The latency to fall (up to a maximum of 400 seconds) was recorded.
Six trials were performed in each measurement, and the best result was recorded.
8-arm radial maze test was performed when mice aged 3, 6, 8, 10 and 12 M as our previous reports.
riefly, dietary restriction over 7 days was carried out which led to an 85% decrease of free-feeding body weight in all mice.
Then mice were allowed to explore the baited arms of the maze for 10 min in 2 days habituation sessions.
After adaptation, each mouse was left in the maze until either all pellets in 4 of the arms (1, 3, 4, and 7) were obtained or 5 min elapsed.
Re-entry into the baited arms previously visited was recorded as a working memory error.

Tissue preparation
Mice aged 12 M were deeply anesthetized and then perfused with 20ml chilled phosphatebuffered saline (PBS, pH 7.4), followed by 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) in PBS.
After postfixed in 4% PFA overnight, the brains were transferred into 10, 20 and 30% (wt/vol) sucrose in PBS for 24h, respectively.
Coronal brain sections (20 μm) were cut on a cryostat at -20°C and mounted on silane-coated glass slides.

Histochemistry and immunohistochemistry
For Nissl staining, brain sections were incubated in 0.1% cresyl violet (CV) for 5 min at room temperature, dehydrated gradually in ethanol, and coverslipped with microcoverglass.
For single immunohistochemistry, after incubation in 0.3% hydrogen peroxide/methanol followed by 5% bovine serum albumin (BSA), the sections were strained overnight at 4°C with the following primary antibody: mouse anti-4G8 antibody (1:1000, Biolegend, San Diego, CA, USA), rabbit anti-A11 antibody (1:200, Invitrogen, Camarillo, CA, USA), goat anti-NLRP3 antibody (1:100, Abcam, Cambridge, MA, USA), mouse anti-caspase-1 antibody (1:200, Adipogen, San Diego, CA, USA), goat anti-IL-1β antibody (1:100, R&D Systems, Minneapolis, MN, USA), rabbit anti-Iba-1 antibody (1:1000, Abcam), rabbit anti-TNFα antibody (1:200, Abcam), mouse anti-4-HNE antibody (1:40, JaICA, Shizuoka, Japan), mouse anti-8-OHdG antibody (1:20, JaICA) and rabbit anti-Nitrotyrosine antibody (1:200, Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA).
After washed with PBS, brain sections were treated with suitable biotinylated secondary antibodies (1:500; Vector Laboratories) at room temperature for 2 h.
Then the sections were incubated with the avidin-biotin-peroxidase complex (VECTASTAIN Elite ABC Kit; Vector Laboratories) for 30 min and visualized with 3,3′-diaminobenzidine (DAB).
Negative control sections were stained in the same way as described above except for the primary antibodies.
3 sections per brain and 5 random selected regions were then analyzed with a light microscope (Olympus BX-51, Tokyo, Japan) for each measurement.
Cerebral cortex (CTX), hippocampus (HI), and thalamus (TH) were measured for semiquantitative analysis of Nissl, A11, NLRP3, caspase-1, IL-1β, Iba-1, TNF-α, 4-HNE, 8-OHdG and nitrotyrosine staining intensity.
The number of 4G8-positive plaques was expressed per 1 mm 2 .

Double immunofluorescent histochemistry
After incubation in 5% BSA in PBS with 0.1% triton at room temperature for 1 h, the sections were incubated at 4 °C overnight with primary antibody.
Antibodies were as follows: rabbit anti-A11 antibody (1:200, Invitrogen), goat anti-NLRP3 antibody (1:100, Abcam), mouse anti-Aβ40 antibody (1:100, Wako, Osaka, Japan), and mouse anti-αSMA antibody

Statistical analysis
Data are expressed as mean ± standard deviation (SD).
Statistical comparison was performed using one-way ANOVA analysis followed by Tukey-Kramer test.
p < 0.05 was considered significant.

Results

Changes of CBF with ameroid constrictors implantation
CBF gradually decreased in CCH and CCH + TwX groups from 1 d after surgery, reached a minimum at 7 d and then became stable until 28 d (Fig.
There was no significant difference between CCH and TwX groups.

Behavioral analysis after CCH
CCH and CCH + TwX groups showed significant impairment of rotarod test at 5, 7, 9 and 11 M after surgery compared to WT and APP23 groups, and TwX treatment (CCH + TwX) significantly improved the rotarod time at 9 M compared with CCH group (Fig.
In 8-arm radial maze test, CCH + TwX group showed significant improvement in errors at 8, 10 and 12 M compared with CCH group (Fig.

Neuronal loss after CCH
Nissl staining showed significant lower density of neurons in subiculum, CA1, dentate gyrus (DG) and TH regions of 3 APP23 groups than in WT mice (Fig.
However, TwX treatment significantly suppressed these neuropathological changes in the hippocampus and TH (Fig.

Parenchymal and vascular Aβ deposits
The numbers of 4G8 positive-amyloid plaque (Fig.

Immunofluorescent analysis showed a colocalization of Aβ oligomer with NLRP3 both in
Aβ plaque and neural cell (Fig.
Aβ was also accumulated in cerebral vessels in CCH group than APP23 group, which was attenuated by TwX treatment (Fig.

Neuroinflammation after CCH
NLRP3, caspase-1 and IL-1β were evidently increased in 3 APP23 groups (Fig.
The expression of the microglial Iba-1 was also increased in APP23 and APP23 + CCH, especially in the cerebral cortex, but was inhibited by TwX treatment (Fig.
The expression of pro-inflammatory cytokine marker TNF-α was increased significantly in the CTX, CA3 and TH, which was recovered by TwX treatment (Fig.

Oxidative stress change after CCH
As shown in Fig.
These oxidative stress markers were all attenuated in CCH + TwX group compared with CCH group (Fig.

Discussion
The present study showed that the administration of antioxidative mixture TwX improved motor coordination and working memory (Fig.
CCH is one major cause of vascular dementia, but is also an important risk factor of AD progression.
Our previous studies suggested that CCH enhanced neurodegenerative processes by promoting oxidative stress and neuroinflammation.
Since hippocampal neurons are critically important for memory function,
In the present study, TwX significantly reduced amyloid plaques, Aβ oligomer formation, and CAA in the brain (Fig.
We also observed an anti-inflammatory effect of TwX by reducing the expression of these inflammatory markers (Fig.
Aβ oligomer induces the activation of the NLRP3 inflammasome, which then trigger downstream caspase-1, IL-1β,
Thus the present results revealed the suppression of Aβ pathology based on the anti-inflammatory effects of TwX.
Oxidative stress is an early event in AD, and also plays a key role in the progression of AD pathology.
8]
Several studies have reported that antioxidants have potential therapeutic roles against AD.
1]
Our previous study also showed the neuroprotective effects of TwX in an acute cerebral ischemia mouse model.
summary, the present study revealed that CCH enhanced primary AD pathology of APP23, and TwX improved motor and memory functions, reduced such primary AD pathology disease treatment and prevention.
Am J Alzheimers Dis Other Demen 2013; 28: 120-125.

23.
Inufusa H. Composition for protection against celldamaging effects, US Patent: 9089548 B2. issued date July 28th, 2015.



( 1 :
100, Sigma-Aldrich).
Following washes, sections were incubated with fluorescent secondary antibody, and the fluorescent signals were visualized by confocal microscope (LSM-780; Zeiss, Jena, Germany).



Fig. 1 )
Fig.1) Twendee X (TwX) improved behavioral deficits of Alzheimer's disease (AD) mice



Fig. 2 )
Fig. 2) (A) Nissl stainings in cerebral cortex (CTX), hippocampus (HI), and thalamus (TH) of



Fig. 3 )
Fig. 3) TwX ameliorated amyloid-β (Aβ) pathology in AD mice model with CCH.
(A) 4G8



Fig. 4 )
Fig. 4) Immunohistochemical staining of NLRP3 in AD mice model with CCH.
(A) NLRP3



Fig. 5 )
Fig. 5) Immunohistochemical staining of caspase-1 in AD mice model with CCH.
(A) caspase-



Fig. 6 )
Fig. 6) Immunohistochemical staining of IL-1β in AD mice model with CCH.
(A) IL-1β



Fig. 7 )
Fig. 7) Immunohistochemical staining of Iba-1 in AD mice model with CCH.
(A) Iba-1 staining



Fig. 8 )
Fig. 8) Immunohistochemical staining of TNF-α in AD mice model with CCH.
(A) TNF-α



Fig. 9 )
Fig. 9) Immunohistochemical staining of 4-HNE in AD mice model with CCH.
(A) 4-HNE



Fig. 10 )
Fig. 10) Immunohistochemical staining of in AD mice model with CCH.
(A) 8-OHdG



Fig. 11 )
Fig. 11) Immunohistochemical staining of nitrotyrosine in AD mice model with CCH.
(A)