Doxycycline for Alzheimer’s Disease: Fighting β-Amyloid Oligomers and Neuroinflammation
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the most widespread form of dementia, affecting about 45 million people worldwide.
Although the β-amyloid peptide (Aβ) remains the most acknowledged culprit of AD, the multiple failures of Aβ-centric therapies call for alternative therapeutic approaches.
Conceivably, the complexity of the AD neuropathological scenario cannot be solved with single-target therapies, so multiple-target approaches are needed.
Core targets of AD to date are soluble oligomeric Aβ species and neuroinflammation, in an intimate detrimental dialogue.
Aβ oligomers, the most neurotoxic species, appear to induce synaptic and cognitive dysfunction through the activation of glial cells.
Anti-inflammatory drugs can prevent the action of Aβ oligomers.
Neuroinflammation is a chronic event whose perpetuation leads to the continuous release of pro-inflammatory cytokines, promoting neuronal cell death and gross brain atrophy.
Among the possible multi-target therapeutic alternatives, this review highlights the antibiotic tetracyclines, which besides antimicrobial activity also have pleiotropic action against amyloidosis, neuroinflammation, and oxidative stress.
A particular focus will be on doxycycline (Doxy), a second-generation tetracycline that crosses the bloodbrain barrier more easily and has a safer clinical profile.
Doxy emerged as a promising preventive strategy in prion diseases and gave compelling pre-clinical results in mouse models of AD against Aβ oligomers and neuroinflammation.
This strongly supports its therapeutic potential and calls for deciphering its exact mechanisms of action so as to maximize its effects in the clinic.

INTRODUCTION
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a subtle and so far incurable neurodegenerative disease that makes patients completely unable to run their daily life activities, remember their past and relatives
It affects about 45 million people worldwide with an enormous socio-economic burden, likely to increase further because of longer life expectancy, and aging as a major risk factor
The brains of AD patients present two main lesions: extracellular senile plaques and intracellular neurofibrillary tangles.
Senile plaques, rich in aggregates of the β-amyloid peptide (Aβ), act both as a reservoir of the most neurotoxic Aβ soluble species, namely Aβ oligomers (AβOs), and a determinant of neuritic dystrophy and neuronal network interruption
Neurofibrillary tangles are rich in hyperphosphorylated tau protein, which dissociates from microtubules, causing their destabilization.
Mitochondria are also compromised
Neuroinflammation is a chronic neurotoxic event
On the functional level, synaptic activity is severely impaired and responsible for the onset of cognitive deficits
Progressive neuronal loss culminates in gross brain atrophy
The drama of AD lies in the fact that when cognitive deficits arise bringing patients to clinical attention, their brain is already severely compromised and the pathology has progressed for about 10-15 years.
This makes the identification of an efficacious therapy a very hard challenge and suggests that the complexity of AD means we must abandon single-target therapies and move on to multi-level approaches.
All the single-target "Aβ-centric" clinical trials so far have failed to produce significant benefits
The present review will focus on two vital therapeutic AD targets, AβOs and neuroinflammation, that have recently attracted much attention among scientists fighting AD.
We highlight the possibility of counteracting AβOs' detrimental activities and neuroinflammation with doxycycline (Doxy), a second generationtetracycline antibiotic, which has anti-AβOs, anti-inflammatory activities

Aβ OLIGOMERS: THE MOST DANGEROUS SYNAPTIC ENEMY
The amyloid cascade hypothesis was first put forward by Hardy and Higgins in 1992, stating that: "Deposition of the Aβ peptide, the main component of senile plaques, is the primary event in the pathogenesis of AD"
About 10 years later this theory underwent a significant revision, with Aβ plaques overtaken by smaller and soluble AβOs
AβOs are the first species originating from the amyloidogenic process, by which the Aβ peptide, with its remarked hydrophobicity and overload in AD brains, aggregates, leading to the formation of different-sized polymers including soluble oligomers, protofibrils, and insoluble fibrils.
AβOs are the small, soluble aggregates and the most potent toxic conformers of AD
The number of Aβ plaques detectable many years before the onset of clinical symptoms
Many experimental data have supported the important role of AβOs in synaptic dysfunction.
From transgenic mouse models of AD, it emerged that the onset of synaptic and cognitive dysfunction preceded plaque deposition
Ultrastructural examination of AD mouse brains revealed the presence of AβOs in the synaptic compartment before plaque deposition
In vitro and in vivo data also indicated that the application of well-characterized synthetic AβO-enriched solutions, as well as oligomeric species extracted from patient brains or derived from AD mutated cell lines, abolished the formation of new dendritic spines, inhibiting synaptic plasticity and remodeling, thus impairing learning and memory when delivered in the brain of naive mice or rats
Also in humans, biochemical and morphological analyses indicate that AD represents, at least at the more initial stages of the pathology, an attack at the synapses.
Indeed, the degree of cognitive decline has been correlated with a decrease of the presynaptic marker synaptophysin in the hippocampal area and associated cortices.
Notably, a 25% reduction in the expression of synaptophysin was described in the cortex of MCI or very mild AD subjects compared to aged-matched healthy controls
In a virtual scenario, AβOs must be visualized as undisturbed dynamic entities, either newly formed or traveling in and out of plaques, perturbing the CNS at many functional levels
For many years, synapses have been considered the main AβO target.
Initial work supported this, by describing the ability of AβOs to interfere with post-synaptic receptors such as N-methyl D-aspartate receptors (NMDARs)
Action in the pre-synaptic compartment was also described, through an interaction with the nicotinic acetylcholine receptors α7-nAcChR
The cellular prion protein (PrP C ) has been suggested to mediate AβO effects, although this remains controversial since we and others have confirmed direct binding between PrP C and AβOs, but not a functional contribution
Activation of the apoptotic machinery was also described as an AβO-mediated mechanism for synaptic loss
However, compelling new theories have emerged in more recent years, bringing to light an intimate mutual interaction between AβOs and glial cells, responsible for synaptic perturbation and loss.

NEUROINFLAMMATION: THE OTHER SPECIAL CULPRIT TO WATCH OUT FOR
Neuroinflammation has re-emerged as a driving force of neurodegeneration
Microglia are important in brain tissue homeostasis, secreting neurotrophic factors, and patrolling the microenvironment through the release of cytokines and chemokines that influence astrocytes and neurons, particularly after infection or cell injury.
This triggers inflammatory events normally calling a transient immune response followed by tissue repair.
Under pathological conditions, resolution
Microglia are found in a chronic activated state in AD around senile plaques, and through the continuous release of proinflammatory cytokines they drive neuropathology from the very early disease stages
Neuroinflammation in the AD brain is chronic presumably because it is never resolved, as indicated by studies showing low levels of specialized proresolving mediators
A relation between the detrimental action of AβOs and microglial cells is illustrated by the fact that microglia are also crucial in the control of synapse modelling and activity, and consequently of cognitive functions.
Resting-state microglia survey neuronal activity by establishing intimate contacts with neurons.
They are highly dynamic and plastic cells which continuously extend and retract their processes and contact synapses in an activity-and experience-dependent manner
However, under pathological conditions, when microglial cell activation is chronic as in AD, synaptic surveillance is lost and cognitive functions are perturbed.
Substantial data have corroborated the existence of a "dangerous liaison" between AβOs and microglial cells, by which they mutually sustain their detrimental effects on synapses.
A series of studies comparing the effect of AβOs with that of Aβ fibrils demonstrated that AβOs foster microglial activation to a greater extent and apparently in a conformation-dependent manner
Then,
They also showed that AβOs increased the expression of toll-like receptor-4 (TLR4) and TNFα.
TLR4 belong to a well-known family of pattern recognition receptors initiating the innate immune response and are critically involved in AD
Using an AβO-induced acute mouse model, we also demonstrated that a single intracerebroventricular injection (ICV) of AβOs in C57BL/6 naive mice induced a transient memory impairment in the novel object recognition test
Pre-treatment with anti-inflammatory drugs abolished the AβO-mediated memory impairment.
While seeking further insight on the molecular mechanisms linking AβOs and microglial activation toward memory impairment, we also confirmed that TLR4 are vital, since neither memory impairment nor glial activation was observed in TLR4 null mice receiving AβOs ICV
Beside synaptic dysfunction and cognitive deficits, microglia activation also comes on stage to explain synapse loss.
In a very elegant paper,
C1q is the initiating protein of the classical complement pathway and, together with C3, localizes on synapses to mediate synaptic pruning through microglial phagocytosis
In pathological conditions, such as AD, their expression is increased and localized on postsynaptic proteins, exacerbating synapse loss.
The fact that this phenomenon was detectable at very early pre-plaque ages in AD-mutated mice suggested that most likely soluble Aβ species were involved.
This was confirmed by specifically injecting AβOs ICV in wild-type mice and demonstrating an increase in C1q synaptic deposition, as well as the C1q-mediated C3 opsonization marking synapses for their elimination

TETRACYCLINES IN THE THERAPY OF AD: NOT ONLY ANTIBIOTICS
One of the most difficult challenges in AD is identifying an efficacious therapy to delay the onset, halt its progression, and prevent or reverse cognitive dysfunction.
To date most attempts have focused on the Aβ peptide, with scarce or no beneficial effects
There might be several reasons to explain these multiple failures: wrong treatment timing, inappropriate treatment regimen, and poor or inadequate selection of patients.
Although they are all valid possibilities, one of the main problems limiting therapeutic success may lie in the multi-factorial nature of AD, probably requiring multi-target therapies.
We therefore propose the antibiotic tetracyclines as a promising multi-target therapeutic approach, with a special focus on Doxy, a second-generation tetracycline with a safer pharmacological profile and a better passage across the BBB.
Interest in the tetracyclines in AD raised around the early 2000s when it was found, using cell-free approaches, that tetracyclines could inhibit the aggregation of both the synthetic PrP residues 106-126 and 82-146 of human PrP and the Aβ peptide.
Facilitation of PrP and Aβ disaggregation as well as the sensitivity of their aggregates to proteases were also described
These anti-amyloidogenic effects were later confirmed for a series of other misfolding proteins responsible for neurodegenerative disorders, including Huntington's and Parkinson's disease (reviewed in
Neuroprotective activities of tetracyclines were first demonstrated against PrP in vitro, and in vivo again using the synthetic PrP residues 82-146 and 106-126 and through infection with the pathological form of the PrP, namely PrP scrapie (PrP sc ).
In vitro, tetracycline prevented the PrP 106-126-mediated neurotoxicity and astroglial proliferation
Incubation of 263K PrP scinfected brain homogenate with 1 mM tetracycline or doxycycline resulted in more than 80% reduction in the PK-resistant core of PrP sc .
It was also reported that these compounds can interact with partially purified PrP sc from patients with the new variant of Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD)
At the clinical level, Doxy gave positive results in the initial observational studies in CJD patients, which, however, were not confirmed in a double blind against placebo trial in subjects with a diagnosis of definitive or probable sporadic CJD or genetic forms of the disease
Later it was reported that an asymptomatic CJD patient given Doxy for 4 years survived longer
In AD, Doxy has been tested in two clinical trials in mild to moderate patients, yielding both positive and negative results
In the first study there was less decline in cognitive abilities and functional behavior, whereas no benefits were obtained in the second one.
The two trials were comparable in terms of patients' stage of disease at enrolment.
Doxy was given orally at the dose of 200 mg/day together with rifampin 300 mg/day in the first study.
The same doses were used in the second trial, with the sole difference that Doxy was given at the dose of 100 mg twice a day, rather than one.
The main difference lies in the fact that in the former, patients were treated for 3 months, whereas in the latter one, treatment continued for 12 months.
As stated by the authors, one possible explanation for the failure in the later study is that Doxy might have some negative properties that become evident when treatment is longer than 3 months.
Unfortunately, the therapeutic effects were investigated only at the behavioral and functional levels, with no assessment of Aβ and tau levels in plasma and/or CSF, or of the inflammatory state.
Despite these controversies at the clinical level, preclinical studies indicated the therapeutic potential of Doxy.
Initial investigation was done in two simple in vivo models.
elegans), a simplified invertebrate model of AD where intracellular Aβ deposits caused C. elegans paralysis.
Doxy protected against this damage by directly interacting with the Aβ aggregates and reducing the load of AβOs.
Subsequently,
We recently found that Doxy had beneficial effects in acute and chronic mouse models of AD
Chronic treatment with 10 mg/kg Doxy for 20 days or 2 months, injected intraperitoneally in APP/PS1dE9 transgenic mice, significantly restored memory independently of plaque reduction, but lowered the expression of the 18-mer oligomeric species.
Interestingly, an acute treatment also led to memory recovery.
On the basis of this evidence, and the lack of changes in plaque number, we assumed that Doxy was restoring memory by interfering with the oligomeric species.
This was confirmed in the AβO-induced acute mouse model described above
Moreover, because of the close relation between microglial activation and AβO detrimental cognitive effects
The anti-inflammatory effect of Doxy together with memory recovery was also proved in the APP/PS1dE9 mice chronically treated with Doxy, and in LPS-treated mice, which present an AβO-independent inflammatory context
The anti-inflammatory effect of Doxy has been demonstrated in a series of other pathological contexts (reviewed in
Figure 1 depicts all Doxy effects described above in our AD mouse models.
Although we did not find direct AβO-Doxy binding, we assume that-as described for AβOs and tetracycline-an atypical supramolecular interaction might occur, which will result in the formation of colloid structures sequestering and abolishing AβO toxicity in vitro
Accordingly,
Figure
FIGURE 1 | Doxy-mediated effects in AD mouse models.
AβOs are the most powerful toxic species in AD brain, which are responsible for the memory impairment.
Such detrimental effect is associated with microglial cell activation, a chronic event in AD responsible for both cognitive dysfunction, synaptic loss, and neurodegeneration.
Doxy apparently interferes with either the action of AβOs by directly neutralizing their effects at both neuronal and glial level, and/or exerting a direct anti-inflammatory effect.
All these actions culminate in a positive outcome at the cognitive level by restoring memory to normal.
Beside their anti-amyloidogenic and anti-inflammatory effects, tetracyclines also have anti-oxidative and anti-apoptotic activities
Oxidative stress and apoptosis are typical features of AD, whose resolution in the intricate pathological scenario will help to better restore brain physiology.
This evidence and the favorable pharmacological features of Doxy in a translational prospect suggest that this drug holds a considerable therapeutic potential for AD and other neurodegenerative diseases.
A recently published comprehensive review describes well the protective effect of Doxy also in Parkinson's disease and multiple sclerosis
Despite the beneficial effects of Doxy, clinical trials tell us that not all treatment protocols are effective, or stages of disease adequate for patient enrollment.
Patients with too advanced disease are apparently unlikely to respond
This does not necessarily imply that the drug is ineffective, just that it must be used more appropriately.
Because of this, Doxy deserves one more chance in AD therapy, more likely with application at a prodromal stage, and a "precision medicine" approach.
The latter is strongly recommended, since it will enable us to define the clinical profile (i.e., inflammatory profile) of responders compared to non-responders.