Plasma hydrogen sulfide: A biomarker of Alzheimer's disease and related dementias
While heart disease remains a common cause of mortality, cerebrovascular disease also increases with age, and has been implicated in Alzheimer's disease and related dementias (ADRD).
We have described hydrogen sulfide (H 2 S), a signaling molecule important in vascular homeostasis, as a biomarker of cardiovascular disease.
We hypothesize that plasma H 2 S and its metabolites also relate to vascular and cognitive dysfunction in ADRD.
We used analytical biochemical methods to measure plasma H 2 S metabolites and MRI to evaluate indicators of microvascular disease in ADRD.
Levels of total H 2 S and specific metabolites were increased in ADRD versus controls.
Cognition and microvascular disease indices were correlated with H 2 S levels.
Total plasma sulfide was the strongest indicator of ADRD, and partially drove the relationship between cognitive dysfunction and white matter lesion volume, an indicator of microvascular disease.
Our findings show that H 2 S is dysregulated in dementia, providing a potential biomarker for diagnosis and intervention.

PART I. NARRATIVE
Because Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the most common form of age-related neurological disability, identifying, and treating its underlying causes is a critical health challenge.
The etiology of AD is complex and multifactorial, and there is accumulating evidence that cerebrovascular dysfunction makes a significant contribution to dementia pathophysiology.
While the amyloid cascade hypothesis suggests that accumulation of amyloid "plaques" and phosphorylated-Tau (p-Tau) "tangles" play mechanistic roles in AD,
However, there is evidence linking the accumulation of amyloid and p-Tau with cerebrovascular dysfunction.
Cerebrovascular disease has been reported in up to 70% of dementia patients upon postmortem examination,
Furthermore, the incidence of both dementia and stroke appear to be increasing in tandem worldwide,
The "vascular dysregulation hypothesis"
The current thinking is that cerebrovascular dysfunction occurs early in ADRD,
I Similarly, a recent review by Emrani et al. concluded that vascular risk factors represent initial precedent insults.
For instance, in ADRD, vascular dysfunction can drive inflammation which weakens the blood brain barrier (BBB), potentially initiating a cascade of pathophysiologies leading to AD progression.
Specifically, disturbances in BBB integrity may set off a cascade of events including excitotoxic calcium signaling (the "calcium hypothesis" of AD
Consequently, AD and vascular dementia appear to be overlapping and potentially linked clinical phenomena, rather than discrete disease categories.
In fact, Hachinski et al. ( 6 , see Figure
Further, the importance of vascular contributions to ADRD was recently recognized by the National Institute on Aging and the Alzheimer's Association.
While brain imaging and cerebrospinal fluid analyses were included in the NIAA comprehensive AT(N) (amyloid, p-Tau, and neurodegeneration) biomarker panel, in 2018 the NIAA recommended adding vascular biomarkers to this panel.
Here, we hypothesize that plasma hydrogen sulfide (H 2 S) represents a novel vascular biomarker whose concentration is tightly associated with cognitive dysfunction and disease activity in ADRD.

HIGHLIGHTS
• We used novel biochemical methods to measure plasma hydrogen sulfide metabolites in ADRD.
• Levels of total H 2 S and specific metabolites were increased in ADRD versus controls.
• Cognition, brain volume, and microvascular disease indices were correlated with H 2 S levels • H 2 S is dysregulated in dementia, providing a potential biomarker for diagnosis and intervention.

RESEARCH IN CONTEXT

Hydrogen sulfide and its metabolites in vascular dysfunction and neuropathology
There is a growing appreciation for the roles of H 2 S and its metabolites in the regulation of both vascular and neuronal homeostasis.
Plasma H 2 S and its metabolites have been well described as vascular disease blood biomarkers,
In the brain, H 2 S acts as a neurotransmitter/second messenger produced following nerve excitation,
Several cell types within the brain and its vasculature generate H 2 S from cysteine.
In the brain parenchyma, H 2 S is produced by the enzyme cystathionine β-synthase (CBS), while cystathionine γ-lyase (CSE) generates H 2 S derived from cerebral microvessels.
Additionally, three biochemical forms of reactive sulfur pools exist: free H 2 S, acid-labile (eg, iron-sulfur clusters) and bound sulfide (eg, persulfides, polysulfides).
We and others have previously described defensive roles for H 2 S in preserving normal brain vasomotion,
Conversely, H 2 S and its metabolites have been shown to contribute to neurological stress and vascular dysfunction, a deleterious role consistent with our current findings.
Here, for the first time we have shown that plasma H 2 S and H 2 S metabolites are elevated in ADRD (Figure
Neuroimaging evidence of microvascular disease is indirect and includes FLAIR white matter lesion volume and brain volume measures of atrophy.
These findings indicate that the link between H 2 S imbalance and ADRD may be due, at least in part, to microvascular dysfunction.
When we tested this possibility using mediation analysis (Figure
In addition, H 2 S and its metabolites had significant ADRD diagnostic utility (Figure
A threshold of 1.64 μM plasma H 2 S yielded a classification accuracy = 0.930 and a sensitivity of 0.80 (Figure
It is noteworthy that plasma H 2 S alone was a powerful discriminator between ADRD and controls, and that a combined approach, including imaging and demographic data, did not further improve the sensitivity and specificity of our decision tree classification model.
The apparent contradictory findings for the role for H 2 S in brainrelated pathologies are consistent with literature on other gasotransmitters such as nitric oxide, where in some pathologies excess nitric oxide has been shown to be deleterious, while in others decreased nitric oxide bioavailability has been reported.
The fact that both too little and too much H 2 S can be detrimental to brain health may represent a neuroprotective system that breaks down under pathological conditions.
Our work is consistent with studies of Downs' syndrome, a condition with several AD-related features and mechanisms, where elevated H 2 S production has been observed.
Schizophrenia models also show elevated levels of the H 2 S/polysulfide producing enzyme "Mpst", and C3H schizophrenic mice which display behavioral deficits show elevated sulfides,
These previous studies support our hypothesis that H 2 S may become dysregulated in ADRD, where vascular and cognitive functions are intimately linked.
One possible mechanism through which H 2 S levels are elevated is suggested by the "vascular dysregulation hypothesis," which predicts that cerebral hypoxia contributes to ADRD pathogenesis.
Because hypoxia and ischemia are potent inducers of CSE expression and function,
Furthermore, hypertension and disturbances in cerebrovascular flow, often seen in ADRD
Thus, oxygenation abnormalities may drive H 2 S links to a "vascular dysregulation hypothesis," and anticipate associations between the vascular dysfunction observed in the brain and alterations in circulating H 2 S metabolites in ADRD.

Pathways through which hydrogen sulfide disrupts brain microvasculature
How might ADRD disease activity, cognitive dysfunction and neuroimaging be related to sulfides?
The answer may lie in early, "silent" BBB disturbances driven by abnormal H 2 S homeostasis.
Our group, over the last decade, has investigated several gasotransmitters including H 2 S, nitric oxide and their metabolites as contributors to vascular endothelial barrier failure.
We showed that exogenous polysulfide donors (not free sulfide donors) act on endothelial junctions to depress vascular barrier in vitro.
We have evidence that such a damaging role for H 2 S metabolites also applies to the BBB, where barrier disruption early after stroke is mediated by H 2 S species.
Specifically, our reports on the impact of H 2 S on the brain vasculature revealed a role for CSE-derived H 2 S metabolites in ischemic stroke induced vasodilation/hyperemic response and barrier permeability early during reperfusion.
It should be noted that polysulfides can be generated endogenously both by the oxidation of H 2 S, and directly from CSE.
Therefore, we examined the role of CSE in basal vascular integrity.
Using CSE-deficient mice, we observed a significant reduction in small was not specific to the brain, as we saw a similar response in the lungs (Figure
This multi-organ finding, along with the fact that CSE is primarily found in the vasculature, represents a first step in proving our hypothesis that a vascular source of CSE-derived H 2 S is responsible for the imbalance in H 2 S homeostasis in ADRD.
Although still in need of larger studies, our findings are consistent with a scheme where elevated levels of H 2 S and its metabolites drive barrier disturbances which underlie excitotoxic stress and cognitive injury, particularly in ADRD.
In ADRD, disturbances in brain endothelial barrier function can flood the brain interstitium with toxic neurotransmitters, immune components, and iron, each potentially able to trigger a progressive, and calcium-dependent, excitotoxicity ("calcium hypothesis"
Over the course of years, these changes could lead to structural and functional derangement seen in longstanding ADRD.
Our findings reveal that sulfide stress may represent an important indicator of ADRD disease activity which links brain vascular disturbances to cognitive dysfunction, and could provide valuable novel diagnostic, prognostic, and mechanistic insights into ADRD.

Limitations
We recognize that this study is limited by participant AD diagnosis that is unconfirmed by autopsy.
However, even with the possible   We also ran the analysis using only the records containing MRI data for comparison (MRI-only).
The "All" and "Total H 2 S" facets have duplicated accuracy statistics because in both of these, the same decision tree was generated.
We used several measures to classify the accuracy of the classifier.
Accuracy describes the probability that the classifier arrives at a correct prediction.
Sensitivity describes the probability of correctly predicting a positive condition.
Specificity describes the probability of correctly predicting a negative condition.

Future directions for hydrogen sulfide as a biomarker for ADRD
Our initial biomarker studies are highly promising.
The well-defined association between blood H 2 S levels and microvascular disease suggest the testable hypothesis that increased generation of H 2 S from CSE, abundant in cerebral microvessels, may drive ADRD progression.
Our results showed that total sulfide mediated the relationship between cognitive performance and microvascular related outcomes, F I G U R E 5 CSE knockout mice exhibit reduced vascular permeability.
Sodium fluorescein permeability was significantly reduced in the brains (top) and lungs (bottom) of CSE knockout mice compared to wild type controls (*significant P < .05,
student's t-test, n = 5/group) supporting a causal role for H 2 S dysregulation in ADRD.
Our study indicates that at least some of these H 2 S metabolites, such as oxidized H 2 S, may accumulate in the circulation with deleterious consequences.
The fact that powerful group discrimination could be obtained using only a single plasma analyte is remarkable in the ADRD field.
These findings suggest further steps are warranted to verify biomarker sensitivity and specificity (see Frisoni et al.
Table
The specificity of H 2 S as a marker of AD as opposed to other forms of dementia, as well as other proteinopathies such as Parkinson disease remains to be determined.
Our work also anticipates longitudinal studies for the evaluation of early detection and progression monitoring.
The linear nature of the relationships among cognitive, brain volume, and lesion volume measures with total sulfide, as well as acidlabile and bound sulfide pools suggest that H 2 S metabolites may reflect disease progression and could thus have prognostic value.
Determining the required interval to detect change for repeated testing, and marker efficacy for early detection are critical goals of future studies for biomarker identification.
Based on our observations, it is possible that modulation of plasma sulfides might also represent a therapeutic opportunity in ADRD.
It is not clear whether our results will reveal "at-risk" individuals who may go on to develop earlier or more severe disease.
However, if modifiable risk factors do contribute to ADRD progression, earlier intervention in such "at-risk" individuals could limit or prevent inevitable progression into clinical ADRD.
Because blood sampling remains the easiest, most repeatable and inexpensive method of evaluating biospecimens, reliable blood-based diagnostics for ADRD, as described here, would have an enormous impact in combatting ADRD.

PART II. CONSOLIDATED RESULTS AND STUDY DESIGN

2.1
Hydrogen sulfide and its metabolites in ADRD and associated cognitive impairment
The physiology of H 2 S and H 2 S metabolites in ADRD and related neuropathology is not well understood.
Since the most accessible pools of H 2 S are in the circulation, our first step was to determine if plasma levels of H 2 S and its metabolites were different in people with and without ADRD.
We enrolled 15 participants with ADRD and 42 controls for cognitive and blood testing, and, of these, 12 ADRD and 19 control participants also had MRI (Table
We found that total H 2 S levels increased with ADRD, and that this increase was primarily due to elevations in both acid-labile bound sulfide pools, not free sulfide (Figure
This finding is in contrast to our observations from cardiovascular disease, showing a decline in plasma total, bound, and acidlabile H 2 S levels,
Furthermore, our findings disagree with the only previous study on H 2 S in human AD and vascular dementia, which reported decreased H 2 S levels in plasma.
While these apparently conflicting results are consistent with a dual role for 2 S where both deficient and excessive levels are pathological, our findings also indicate that a redistribution between H 2 S pools may be a critical determinant in the pathological consequences, which none of the previous studies have measured.
However, it is also possible some of these conflicting findings relate to the populations studied or the methods used to measure H 2 S. We used an advanced "state of the art" precise method of H 2 S measurement developed by our group which was designed to address limitations of the method used by many others.
importance from a mechanistic perspective was whether circulating H 2 S metabolite levels correlated with cortical volume and/or white matter lesion volume, both indicators of microvascular health.
To better understand the relative roles for H 2 S in these two interrelated components of ADRD, we used typical diagnostic indices, and correlated them with plasma H 2 S levels.
MRI has been widely applied to identify cerebral ventricular and hippocampal volumes as a measure of AD status
As expected, our ADRD population showed decreased hippocampal and increased ventricular volumes.
While neither of these indices correlated with levels of H 2 S or individual sulfide pools, there was a clear, inverse relationship between total brain volume and H 2 S levels (Table
In addition, the MRI based lesion outcome measure was strongly correlated with both acid-labile and total H 2 S (Table
Of primary importance from a clinical perspective was quantifying the cognitive impairment that characterizes ADRD.
Using the Alzheimer's disease Assessment Scale (ADAS-Cog) score as a measurement of cognitive function, we linked higher ADAS-Cog scores in ADRD, indicative of cognitive dysfunction, with higher H 2 S levels in Total H 2 S was found to drive half of the effect of lesion volume on cognitive function (Figure
This finding indicates that H 2 S metabolites may be mechanistically significant as a contributor to ADRD.
Importantly, these findings are consistent with cognitive and structural disturbances related to sulfides that originate in the vascular space and act to disrupt vascular homeostasis, leading to downstream neurodegeneration.

Sensitivity and specificity of sulfides in ADRD
ADRD diagnostic tools remain somewhat unreliable and differ in their specificity and sensitivity.
The current mainstay of AD diagnosis, the ADAS-cog score has good sensitivity and specificity at 90.09% and 85.88% respectively
While widely applied, ADAS-cog requires trained operators, is time-consuming and is subject to variability based on patient performance.
Hippocampal and ventricular changes on MRI also predict disease activity
Although we found significant diagnostic performance for acid-labile, bound, and total sulfide (Figure
Plasma β-amyloid has also been widely studied as an AD biomarker
Overall, its diagnostic accuracy was good, but not ideal (86%) [43].
The problem with such approaches is that AD diagnosis still remains probabilistic, with the most definitive confirmation only available at autopsy.
Low diagnostic accuracy in AD may be related to its complex nature, long course, and variable etiopathogenesis.
Thus, the most accurate approach may be a biomarker panel.
For example, Brickman et al.
Furthermore, Fink et al.
In order to maximize the discriminative power of our blood, MRI and behavioral data, we performed classification analysis to create a decision tree.
decision tree analysis yields a graphic representation of alternative solutions based on probability analysis.
We included all MRI and H 2 S variables as indicators of ADRD.
This analysis provided a decision tree that had a single level consisting of total sulfide (Figure
The tree had an accuracy of 93.0%, a sensitivity of 80%, a positive predictive value of 92.3% and a negative predictive value of 93.2% (Fig-
These findings indicate that total H 2 S alone accurately reflects the contribution of brain volume, white matter lesion and H 2 S metabolite abnormalities to cognitive disturbance in ADRD.
While it remains to be seen if the addition of β-amyloid or p-Tau outcomes can improve diagnostic power of total plasma H 2 S, our findings reveal that H 2 S, when used alone, is a very powerful predictor of ADRD.

PART III. DETAILED METHODS AND RESULTS

Methodological and technical specifics of human studies

Subjects
Written informed consent was obtained according to the policy of the

Cognitive assessments
Cognitive status was evaluated using the MMSE.
Dementia was defined as an ADAS-cog score of > 17.

Hydrogen sulfide analysis
Blood was collected in lithium-heparin vacutainer tubes and processed within 15 minutes.
Samples were centrifuged at 1400 RCF for 4 minutes.
Plasma was combined in a 5:1 ratio of plasma to stabilization buffer (degassed 100 mM Tris-HCl buffer, pH 9.5, 0.1 mM diethylene triamine pentaacetic acid), quickly frozen, and stored in liquid nitrogen until analysis.
The sulfide pools were isolated according to analytical high pressure liquid chromatograph (HPLC) procedures previously established in our lab.
Derivatization of sulfide with excess monobromobiamine was performed under specific reaction conditions for all three pools (free, acid-labile, and bound) using the monobromobiamine method of Shen et al.
FLAIR lesion volume was calculated using the lesion growth algorithm
for SPM.
Our computations were completed with MATLAB R2019a and SPM12.
T1 images were co-registered to the FLAIR image and lesion maps were calculated based on a user-determined threshold (kappa, 0.3).
Lesion volume outcome is reported as a percentage of lesion volume over total brain volume.

Statistical analysis
All variables were evaluated across disease groups using multivariate analysis of variance (MANOVA).
Pearson correlation was used to evaluate the relationship between H 2 S metabolites and cognitive and imaging outcome measures.
These analyses were performed using SPSS version 26.
We used mediation analysis to test the hypothesis that the effect of a predictor variable (% lesion volume) on an outcome (ADAS score) operated fully or in part through an intervening mediator (total sulfide
Mediation analysis was performed using the PROCESS SPSS macro provided by Hayes and Preacher to perform such analysis.
also performed ROC analysis to illustrate the ability of H 2 S metabolites to distinguish ADRD and control groups using GraphPad Prism v8.4.2 (GraphPad Software, San Diego, California USA).
An alpha level of 0.05 was used to determine statistical significance.
Outliers were defined as any data point that was > 3SD from the group mean.
To generate decision trees,
In addition, we produced a decision tree based on the H 2 S variables alone.
Because the control group was larger than the ADRD group the decision tree analysis was performed again using the MRI subgroup.

Sodium fluorescein (Na-F) extravasation in mice
In vivo endothelial barrier function was evaluated in C57BL/6 J wildtype and CSE knockout mice
#F-6377) extravasation as described
All procedures for handling animals complied with the Guide for Care and Use of Laboratory Animals and were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of LSU Health Sciences Center-Shreveport.
All animals were cared for according to the National Institutes of Health guidelines for the care and use of laboratory animals.
Briefly, mice under isoflurane anesthesia were injected with 5% Na-F in saline via tail vein (0.4 mg/kg) and were humanely euthanized after 20 minutes.
Blood was collected from the inferior vena cava, and the vasculature was thoroughly perfused via the heart with phospate buffered saline (PBS).
The brain and lungs were dissected and homogenized in PBS (1 ul/mg) using a tissue homogenizer (Thomas scientific, Swedesboro, NJ).
Lysates were mixed with equal volumes of 50% trichloroacetic acid (Sigma, Cat# T-6399), and plasma was mixed with 9 volumes of 20% trichloroacetic acid.
All samples were held at 4 • C overnight to precipitate protein and were then centrifuged at 12,000 g for 20 minutes.
Two volumes of 1X Tris-borate-EDTA buffer (Sigma, Cat# T4415) were added to every volume of supernatant, and pH adjusted to 7.5 to 8.5 using NaOH.
Two-fold dilutions were prepared for each sample in Tris-borate-EDTA buffer and fluorescence measured at 485/538 nm and compared to known Na-F standards.
The amount of Na-F in samples was calculated in samples where fluorescence was in the linear range.
Final results were normalized to plasma and presented as fold changes.

3.3
Detailed results

Participant characteristics
Participant characteristics are shown in Table
One outlier ADRD subject was excluded based on MRI; therefore, final sample sizes were 15 ADRD and 42 controls.
We had an MRI subset of 12 ADRD and 19 controls after one ADRD subject was excluded due to contraindications for MRI and two because of an appointment that was canceled due to COVID-19 closures.
There were no significant differences between ADRD and control subjects for age (F(1, 55) = 0.12, P = .73)
or years of education (F(1,55) = 2.54, P = .12).
The ADRD group had significantly higher ADAS-cog scores (F(1,55) = 93.75,
P < .001),
indicating poorer cognitive performance.

Group differences in H 2 S metabolites imaging and outcomes
The ADRD group had significantly increased levels of H 2 S metabolites (Figure
Acid-labile (F(1,55) = 25.99,
P < .0022),
bound (F(1,55) = 29.69,
P < .0001),
and total sulfide (F(1,55) = 79.12,
P < .0001)
were all elevated in the dementia group compared to controls.
Free sulfide was not significantly different across groups (F(1,55) = 5.11, P = .31).
We found differences across groups in MRI outcome measures.
Total brain volume was significantly reduced in ADRD (939 (105) mm 3 ) compared to controls (1029 (101) mm 3 ; F(1,30) = 5.73, P = .023).
We therefore normalized hippocampal, total gray, and white matter, FLAIR lesion and ventricular volumes by dividing these measures by total volume to obtain a percentage.
The ADRD group (Mean(SD) = 0.67 (.073)%) had significantly reduced % hippocampal volume compared to controls (0.72 (.053)%; F(1, 30) = 5.89, P = .022)
as well as increased ventricular size (ADRD = 3.61 (1.9)%,
Control = 2.12 (1.6)%; F(1,30) = 7.360, P = .011).
There were no significant differences across groups for % gray matter (ADRD = 54.68
F(1,30) = 2.61, P = .114).
Percent FLAIR lesion volume was significantly larger in the ADRD group (0.76 (0.72)%) versus controls (0.17 (0.16)%; F(1,30) = 11.99,
P = .002).

Correlation and classification
Correlation analysis revealed a significant relationship between H 2 S metabolites and cognitive function (Figure
ADAScog score was significantly positively correlated with acid-labile (r(56) = 0.596, P < .0001)
and bound sulfane sulfur (r(56) = 0.436, P = .001),
as well as total sulfide pools (r(56) = 0.681, P < .0001)
(Figure
FLAIR lesion volume was significantly correlated with ADAS-cog score (r(30) = 0.687, P < .0001)
(Table
Lesion volume was also significantly positively correlated with acid-labile (r(30) = 0.588, P < .0001)
and total sulfide (r(30) = 0.452, P < .011)
(Figure
Importantly, neither ADAS-cog nor lesion volume were correlated with free sulfide (Figure
Mediation analysis revealed that total H 2 S mediated the effect of lesion volume on cognitive function (Figure
First, linear regression results showed that the relationship between % FLAIR lesion volume and total H 2 S was significant (a' , b = 0.0036, SE = 0.0013, P = .0107).
Second, the relationship between total sulfide and ADAS-cog score was ROC curve analysis revealed significant diagnostic performance for acid-labile, bound, and total sulfide (Figure
Free sulfide ROC curve analysis results were not statistically significant (area under the curve AUC = 0.58; 95% confidence interval: 0.42 to 0.75) (panel 3A).
Discriminative capability for acid-labile H 2 S was significant with AUC = 0.76, 95% confidence interval: 0.59 to 0.92 (panel 3B).
However, much higher discriminative ability was noted with bound (AUC = 0.89, 95% confidence interval: 0.80 to 0.97; panel 3C) and total sulfide (AUC = 0.94, 95% confidence interval: 0.92 to 1.000; panel 3D), respectively.
Classification analysis using all variables (12 variables including demographic, MRI, and H 2 S metabolites) provided a decision tree that had a single level consisting of total sulfide (Figure
The tree had an accuracy of 93%, a sensitivity of 80%, a specificity of 98%, a positive predictive value of 92% and a negative predictive value of 93% (Fig-
Removing MRI variables yielded an identical result.
Reducing the number of subjects to those who underwent MRI in order to reduce oversampling of control subjects resulted in slightly reduced accuracy of 90.3%, a positive predictive value of 91%, and a negative predictive value of 90% (Figure
Again, exclusion of the MRI variables did not change model performance.

CSE knockout mice exhibit reduced vascular permeability
Using Na-F solute permeation as a measure of vascular barrier function, we found striking improvements in blood-brain barrier of CSE knockout mice compared to wild-type controls (Figure
Interestingly, these improvements in barrier were also seen in the lung and therefore appear to reflect a generalized improvement in vascular barrier, which is not limited to the central nervous system, produced by reduction in H 2 S and its metabolites.
Mice with this phenotype also have significant reductions in circulating sulfide species.
When taken together with our previous report
Consequently, the finding that our ADRD subjects have significantly higher plasma sulfides is consistent with a hypothesis in which sulfides in the vascular compartment might drive BBB disturbances that contribute to the initiation and progression of ADRD cognitive dysfunction.
Our finding that FLAIR signatures in ADRD are consistent with microvascular derangement also fit this "sulfide" model, however future, prospective studies which can validate relationships between the extent of clinical sulfide burden and ADRD disease severity are still required.



1 .
Systematic review: The authors reviewed the literature using traditional sources including PubMed, Web of Science and Google Scholar, as well as meeting abstracts from the Society for Neuroscience and the International Society for Neurovascular Disease.
Previous work on hydrogen sulfide and its metabolites has focused on the cardiovascular system.
ADRD are intensively studied research targets.
We have set our work in the context of this existing research and the relevant citations are appropriately cited.
2. Interpretation: Our findings suggest that plasma hydrogen sulfide is elevated in dementia and is strongly correlated with cognitive dysfunction.
Furthermore, hydrogen sulfide mediated the relationship between cognitive dysfunction and MRI measures of chronic cerebral microvascular disease.
3. Future directions: Our study indicates that hydrogen sulfide is an important biomarker of cognitive dysfunction in ADRD.
This finding suggests new hypotheses and warrants the pursuit of additional studies such as: (a) determining the specificity of these markers for ADRD over other neurodegenerative diseases, (b) examining longitudinal relationships between hydrogen sulfide and cognitive decline in AD, and (c) evaluating therapeutic benefits of altering hydrogen sulfide metabolism on the course of ADRD disease activity.



1
Violin plot of the median and distribution densities of plasma H 2 S metabolite measures in control (C) and Alzheimer's Disease related dementia (A) participants.
The violin plot is a nonparametric representation of all data points.
The solid line is the group median, while the width of each plot represents subject density.
Dashed lines indicate the interquartile range



2
Scatterplots of cognitive function, H 2 S and lesion volume outcomes.
Strong relationships were observed between H 2 S metabolites (particularly acid labile and total sulfide) and both the cognitive outcome measure (A) and an indicator of chronic microvascular disease (B).
(C) Scatterplot showing the strong relationship between cognitive function and an indicator of microvascular disease.
(D) Model of mediation analysis (left) and mediation analysis results (right).
Total sulfide mediated the relationship between the measure of cognitive function and an indicator of chronic microvascular disease solute (sodium fluorescein) permeability in the brain, indicating that the barrier function was enhanced in the absence of CSE.
This effect



3
Receiver-operating characteristic (ROC) curve analysis demonstrate that H 2 S metabolites are indicators of ADRD.
Panel A reports ROC of free sulfide, panel B shows ROC for acid labile sulfide, panel C illustrates ROC for bound sulfide, and panel D shows ROC for total sulfide.
Area = area under the curve



4
Tree Classifier.
(A) Decision tree showing total sulfide as the most effective classifier, with a cut off value of 1.64 μM H 2 S; AD: Alzheimer's Disease related dementia; CT: control.
(B) Classifier performance metrics for the tree classifier according to their ability to predict diagnosis (see methods for description of classifier metrics).
A single dimension was chosen (Total Sulfide) by the classifier despite the number of candidate dimensions.


institutional review board of Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center, Shreveport.
We studied 16 individuals who met the criteria for "ADRD" (ADAS-cog score > 17 or clinical diagnosis of AD (1 subject, ADAS-cog score = 10)) and 42 age-similar controls.
Inclusion criteria were age > 50 years (mean 67.8 yrs.) with English as their primary language.
A subset of participants (n = 12 ADRD, 19 controls) met inclusion/exclusion criteria and underwent MRI.
Cognitive evaluation (ADAS-cog) tests, and blood draws were performed at the same visit, with MRI performed an average of 42 days after neuropsychological testing.



3. 1 . 4
Brain imaging Participants underwent a 1 hour MRI on a 3T Philips Ingenia scanner.
During image acquisition, subjects were instructed to keep their eyes closed and move as little as possible.
Scans included a 3D MP-RAGE (FOV 250 × 250 × 181 mm, Acq Matrix: 228 × 227 mm, Recon Matrix:240 mm, TE = 3400, TR = 7400), and a 3D fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) image (FOV 270 × 270 × 168 mm, Acq Voxel: 1.13 × 1.13 × 1.12 mm, Recon Voxel: 0.56 × 0.56 × 0.56 mm, TE = 328, TR = 4800, TI = 1650).
Diffusion, pCASL and T2* GRE images were also collected but were not included in this analysis.3.1.5
Image processing For volume measurement, T1-weighted images were subjected to automated cortical reconstruction implemented in version 6.0 of the FreeSurfer image analysis suite (surfer.nmr.mgh.harvard.edu).
Images were then processed for motion correction, intensity normalization and acquisition artifacts.
Images were transformed and stripped of non-brain tissue for normalization into Talariach space for morphometric estimations.
Images underwent cortical surface parcellation and subcortical volume-based segmentation.
Estimates of cortical and hippocampal volume were obtained using this automated algorithm of subcortical segmentation.
Data were visually inspected at key steps for errors preceding the analyses.



( 2 .
96)%, Control = 55.99 (1.48)%; F(1,30) = 2.65, P = .116)
nor % white matter volume (ADRD = 42.49
(2.81)%,
Control = 41.26 (1.43)%;


significant (b' , b = 1523, SE = 406, P = .0008).
Finally, lesion volume was a significant predictor of ADAS-cog score (c' , b = 11.2,
SE = 3.2, P = .002).
Using a bootstrap estimation approach with 5000 samples 62 we determined that the indirect coefficient was significant (b = 638.4,
SE = 299.7,
95% CI = 53.9-1268.4).
Our findings indicate partial mediation, with a large (49%) proportion of the effect of lesion volume on ADAS-cog score operating indirectly through total sulfide.


Demographic data for the total sample (Total) and the MRI subgroups (MRI)


Correlation matrix of demographic, cognitive, MRI, and H 2 S variables