Reactive astrocytes as treatment targets in Alzheimer's disease—Systematic review of studies using the <scp>APPswePS1dE9</scp> mouse model
Astrocytes regulate synaptic communication and are essential for proper brain functioning.
In Alzheimer's disease (AD) astrocytes become reactive, which is characterized by an increased expression of intermediate filament proteins and cellular hypertrophy.
Reactive astrocytes are found in close association with amyloid-beta (Aβ) deposits.
Synaptic communication and neuronal network function could be directly modulated by reactive astrocytes, potentially contributing to cognitive decline in AD.
In this review, we focus on reactive astrocytes as treatment targets in AD in the APPswePS1dE9 AD mouse model, a widely used model to study amyloidosis and gliosis.
We first give an overview of the model; that is, how it was generated, which cells express the transgenes, and the effect of its genetic background on Aβ pathology.
Subsequently, to determine whether modifying reactive astrocytes in AD could influence pathogenesis and cognition, we review studies using this mouse model in which interventions were directly targeted at reactive astrocytes or had an indirect effect on reactive astrocytes.
Overall, studies specifically targeting astrocytes to reduce astrogliosis showed beneficial effects on cognition, which indicates that targeting astrocytes should be included in developing novel therapies for AD.
extracellular deposits of amyloid-beta (Aβ) and intracellular neurofibrillary tangles, consisting of hyperphosphorylated tau
Moreover, Aβ plaques are invaded and surrounded by activated microglia
Over the past decade, there has been an increasing insight into the effect of reactive astrogliosis on neural functioning.
Therefore, it is opportune to review reactive astrocytes in relation to cognitive function in a widely used AD mouse model: the APPswePS1dE9 mouse (Box 1).
Astrocytes are essential for proper brain functioning (Box 2;
They are actively involved in synaptic communication
Perisynaptic astrocyte protrusions closely interact with synapses and together they form the tripartite synapse
In the reactive state, astrocytes show cellular hypertrophy, which is likely to affect these protrusions.
Besides, there is a change in the intermediate filament (IF) cytoskeleton, due to an increase in the expression of the IF proteins glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP; the classical marker for reactive astrocytes; Box 3), vimentin, and nestin
The changes associated with the reactive state can directly impact synaptic transmission and neuronal circuit activity, thereby potentially contributing to the cognitive problems observed in AD
To understand how the changes in reactive astrocytes contribute to cognitive decline in AD, it is crucial to study the alterations in neuron-glia interactions during AD pathogenesis, as these can directly affect neuronal functioning.
In this systematic review, we focus on the APPswePS1dE9 mouse.
This is a widely used AD mouse model, which excellently mimics amyloidosis and gliosis.
Of note, in the scientific literature, this model is often referred to as APP/PS1 mice.
Since the abbreviation APP/PS1 is also used to refer to other AD mouse models with different APP and PS1 mutations and driven by different promoters, we will use the full name APPswePS1dE9 throughout the BOX 1 The APPswePS1dE9 mouse model APPswePS1dE9 mice overexpress two transgenes; humanized amyloid precursor protein (hAPP) harboring the Swedish mutation (K595N/M596L;
The APPswePS1dE9 mice were made by coinjection of two plasmids into a single cell embryo derived from F2 hybrids of C57BL/6J and C3H/HeJ mice (Figure
Each plasmid contained one of the two transgenes, either humanized APP or human PS1dE9, under the control of a mouse prion protein (PrP) promoter element (the MoPrP.Xho vector).
The two transgenes co-integrated and co-segregated as a single locus
For coinjection of both transgenes, the MoPrP.Xho vector was used.
Within this modified prion protein (MoPrP) vector, an Xho I restriction site replaced the open reading frame (ORF) of the third exon, removing the coding sequence of PrP.
The transgene sequences, containing a start and stop codon, were cloned into the vector at this Xho I site.
The main advantage of the use of the MoPrP.Xho vector was that the ORF is located within an exon, and can, therefore, be easily replaced by a recombinant ORF.
Furthermore, as the MoPrP.Xho vector is small by itself, large cDNA fragments can be introduced
The expression of the transgenes is driven by the mouse PrP promoter, which was thought to lead to a predominant neuronal expression of the transgenes
However, it is known that in addition to the nervous system, the promoter also drives the expression of transgenes in other organs, such as heart and kidneys
Although transgene expression in heart and kidneys probably would not affect the pathological conditions in the brain, it might be associated with the premature death of APPswePS1dE9 mice (Section 3.5).
Multiple lines of mice were derived from embryos with the coinjected vectors
The mice of line 85 were deposited at the Jackson Laboratories
In this review, we focus on The first increase in soluble Aβ 42 levels has been observed in 3-month-old APPswePS1dE9 mice
Impaired synaptic plasticity has been detected as early as 3.5 months in the cortex
A decrease in presynaptic and postsynaptic terminals has been observed by 4 months of age in the hippocampus
Cognitive impairments have been observed as early as 3 months of age, in a contextual fear memory task and 6-month-old APPswePS1dE9 mice in the Morris water maze spatial memory task
Astrogliosis develops around the age of 6 months, based on the increased expression of GFAP
review.
We will first introduce the amyloid hypothesis, on which the model is based, and review the characteristics and the merit of the APPswePS1dE9 mouse model for AD research.
We then systematically review studies that describe interventions that directly or indirectly affected reactive astrocytes in the APPswePS1dE9 AD mouse model, to determine whether modifying reactive astrocytes in AD could influence pathogenesis and cognition.

| THE AMYLOID HYPOTHESIS AND THE APPSWEPS1DE9 MOUSE MODEL
Several AD mouse models, including the APPswePS1dE9 model, are based on the amyloid-cascade hypothesis.
Even though the debate on the exact etiology of AD is still strongly ongoing
The hypothesis places Aβ, a 39-43 amino acid long peptide proteolytically cleaved from the amyloid precursors protein (APP; Figure
The amyloid hypothesis states that the overproduction of Aβ and its aggregation in plaques are the first events in AD pathogenesis, eventually resulting in the development of neurofibrillary tangles, loss of synapses, and neuronal death
In the 1990s, AD-causative mutations were observed in APP and in genes that were later found to be components of γ-secretase that cleaves APP, that is, presenilin 1 (PS1), and presenilin 2 (PS2;
(a) Alternative processing of APP by α-, β-, and/or γ-secretases resulting in amyloidogenic and non-amyloidogenic cleavage.
(b) Humanized mouse APP sequence (the white blocks indicate the human-specific amino acids that were introduced in the mouse sequence), containing the Swedish mutation (yellow block).
(c) PS1 is a transmembrane protein and part of the γ-secretase complex.
The PS1dE9 mutation results in the deletion of exon 9. (d) The APPswe and PS1dE9 transgenes were integrated in MoPrP vectors between exon 2 and 3; the coding sequence of PrP was completely removed, as described in
The two vectors were co-injected into a single cell embryo derived from F2 hybrids of C57BL/6J and C3H/HeJ mice: C3/B6HeJ mice.
This resulted in the generation of double transgenic APPswePS1dE9 mice, in which the expression of both the APP and the PS1 gene is driven by the mouse prion protein promoter.
(e) Integration of the transgenes occurred at chromosome 9 between the Arpp21 and Pdcd6ip genes
(f) From the age of 6 months, reactive astrocytes (GFAP, green) and activated microglia (Iba1, red) surrounding Aβ plaques (6E10, blue) were detected, scale bar: 50 μm, adjusted from original picture in
Aβ, amyloid-beta; APP, amyloid precursor protein; ε-site, epsilon cleavage site; GFAP, glial fibrillary acidic protein; Iba1, ionized calcium-binding adapter molecule 1; MoPrP, modified prion protein; PrP, prion protein; PS1, presenilin 1; sAPPα, soluble amyloid precursor protein-α; sAPPβ, soluble amyloid precursor protein-β.
Based on
Scientific illustration toolkits from Motifolio were used to generate parts of this figure
These genetic findings point into the direction of an enhanced processing of APP and production of Aβ, and support the hypothesis of a primary involvement of Aβ in the disease process.
A major concern with the amyloid hypothesis is the poor correlation between the development of cognitive impairment and Aβ plaque burden
Still, mouse models based on mutations in APP, PS1, and PS2 are valuable tools to study specific parts of the AD pathogenesis.
Over the years, the amyloid hypothesis has been refined and now also includes the important role of Aβ oligomers, which is the most pathogenic and toxic form of Aβ
Of the various forms of Aβ (monomers, oligomers, fibrils), it is oligomeric Aβ that disrupt synaptic function
In several AD mouse models, based on genetic mutations in APP, PS1, and PS2, an impairment in synaptic transmission has been detected before fibrillar plaques become apparent
In this review, we focus on APPswePS1dE9 mice (Box 1), which overexpress two transgenes: humanized amyloid precursor protein (hAPP) harboring the Swedish mutation (K595N/M596L, Figure
Both mutations cause early-onset AD in humans

| Amyloid precursor protein, start of the amyloidogenic pathway
AD-causative mutations were found in the APP gene, leading to an enhanced processing of the APP protein into Aβ.
Even though its central place in the amyloid hypothesis, the normal function of APP and its cleaved fragments is largely unknown.
APP is a ubiquitously expressed Type I membrane glycoprotein with only a small intracellular domain
In the brain, APP regulates the cell cycle progression of fetal neural stem cells
In the adult brain, APP is involved in long-term potentiation (LTP;
APP can be processed by different proteolytic enzymes, that is, α-, β-, and γ-secretases, resulting in different products (Figure
Via the non-amyloidogenic pathway, APP is sequentially cleaved by αand y-secretase, resulting in a soluble amyloid precursor protein-α (sAPPα), an extracellular P3, and an intracellular APP C-terminal domain (AICD) fragment.
The amyloidogenic pathway yields sAPPβ, Aβ, and AICD due to cleavage by βand γ-secretases
Over the years, also other proteolytic products of APP have been implicated in AD.
In 2004,
Although others have shown that the effect on downstream targets is weak and might be indirect
Thus, the role of AICD as a transcriptional regulator remains controversial (for a review,
Also, the extracellular N-terminal fragment of APP (N-APP) produced after cleavage of APP by β-secretase, has been shown to mediate neurodegeneration.
This outcome is distinct from effects mediated by Aβ peptides
APP is differentially spliced, resulting in several isoforms.
The most common and most stable isoforms are APP 695 , APP 751 , and APP 770 , with the number referring to the number of amino acids
In the brain, APP 695 is mainly expressed in neurons
In neuronal cell lines, it has been shown that sAPPβ, Aβ, and AICD are preferentially formed from APP 695
The Kunitz-type protease inhibitor sequence in APP 770 and APP 751 promotes cleavage by α-secretase, not yielding Aβ.
APP 695 lacks this sequence, making it the most amyloidogenic APP isoform

| APPswePS1dE9 mouse: Swedish mutation in APP results in an increased Aβ production
For the generation of the APPswePS1dE9 model, humanized mouse APP 695 was used
Human and mouse APP sequences differ in 17 amino acids, three of which are positioned within the Aβ-encoding part.
In humanized mouse APP 695 , the mousespecific amino acids in the Aβ-encoding sequence were replaced by the human-specific amino acids (Figure
Thus, glycine at position 5 in the Aβ domain was replaced by arginine, phenylalanine at position 10 by tyrosine, and arginine at position 13 by histidine.
The last replacement causes Aβ to be more susceptible to zinc-mediated aggregation
Importantly, the produced Aβ peptide in the mouse will be entirely human
The humanized APP sequence of the APPswePS1dE9 mice contains the Swedish mutation.
Several mutations in APP have been linked to familial AD (FAD;
The humanized APP sequence of the APPswePS1dE9 mice contains the Swedish mutation.
The Swedish mutation (APPswe) was discovered in a Swedish family with early-onset AD.
Two pedigrees showed a double missense mutation in exon 16 of APP, which results in the replacement of the lysine residue at position 595 in APP 695 by asparagine (K595N) and the methionine residue at position 596 by leucine (M596L).
The mutated codons are positioned just before the Nterminal side of the Aβ domain (Figure
Due to the position of these mutations, β-secretase can cleave APP more efficiently.
The level of Aβ in cells expressing APPswe is 6-8 times higher than in cells expressing wild-type APP
Processing of wild-type APP by β-secretase occurs in early endosomes
In short, the APPswe mutation affects APP processing towards an increased Aβ production.

| Presenilin 1, function in the amyloidogenic pathway
Presenilin 1 (PS1) and 2 (PS2) are transmembrane proteins that undergo endoproteolytic processing.
This yields large N-terminal and smaller C-terminal fragments (NTFs and CTFs)
In contrast to the holoprotein, the NTFs and CTFs are stable protein fragments forming complexes that represent the active form of PSs
PS1 is crucial for normal development as PS1 -/-mice die late in embryogenesis or at birth
PSs also play an essential role in synaptic function and neuronal survival in adult mice, since age-dependent synapse and neuron loss has been observed in a conditional double knockout mouse.
These PS1 -/-/ PS2 -/-mice showed memory and behavioral impairments (reviewed by
In PS1-deficient neurons, accumulation of AICD fragments and loss of Aβ production have been observed
These studies revealed that PS1 is essential for the proteolytic function of γ-secretase
We now know that PS1 or PS2 form the catalytic active subunit of the γ-secretase intramembrane protease complexes, which also contain Nicastrin (Nct), anterior pharynx defective 1 (Aph-1), and presenilin-enhancer-2 (Pen-2; De
Diverse molecular effects are induced by the different mutations in PSs.
Mutations in PS1 and PS2 increase the ratio of Aβ 42 :Aβ 40
Consistent with this observation, Aβ deposition was observed earlier in transgenic mice in which APPswe was coexpressed with mutant PS1 compared to mice only expressing APPswe
The largest change in the Aβ 42 :Aβ 40 ratio was observed when APPswe was co-expressed with PS1 lacking exon 9, which shifted the ratio from 1:3 to 1:0.75
This change in the Aβ 42 :Aβ 40 ratio could be caused by the subcellular distribution of PSs.
PS1 and PS2 have distinct subcellular locations, contributing to substrate specificity.
Whereas PS1 is broadly distributed in the cell, PS2 is directed to late endosomes/lysosomes.
The strongest increase in the Aβ 42: Aβ 40 ratio was induced by mutations in PS1 when it changed the localization of PS1 to late endosomes/lysosomes.
FAD-associated mutations can affect the subcellular location of PS1 and overall increase the Aβ 42 :Aβ 40 ratio, predominantly affecting the intracellular fraction and Aβ 40 formation
Overall the mutations appear to decrease the C-to N-terminal cleavage of APP, resulting in longer, more hydrophobic, and self-aggregating Aβ peptides
When modulating PS1, it has to be noted that PSs/γ-secretase not only cleave APP, but that they target numerous type I integral membrane proteins, such as Notch1, ErbB4, E-cadherin, CD44, and LDL-receptor related protein
These changes could also contribute to AD pathogenesis.

| APPswePS1dE9 mouse: PS1 Exon 9 deletion results in an increased Aβ production
Mutations in PS1 and PS2, are the main cause of FAD
Together, they represent approximately 75% of all known FAD mutations (
mutations).
For the generation of the APPswePS1dE9 model, human PS1 with a deletion of exon 9 (PS1dE9) was used
The deletion of exon 9 causes early-onset FAD
The PS1dE9 mutation is a point mutation (G to T) in the splice site for exon 9, which breaks up the consensus sequence for the splice acceptor site, resulting in the (in-frame) deletion of exon 9
As this is the domain in which PS processing normally occurs, PS1dE9 ultimately results in the accumulation of the uncleavable PS holoprotein.
However, the pathological function of PS1dE9 is independent of its defect to undergo proteolytic processing, but rather due to a missense translation that is the result of the aberrant exon 8/10 splice junction leading to S290C and an increase in Aβ 42 .
Correcting the S290C change prevented the threefold increase in Aβ 42 production
Thus, the PS1dE9 variant affects APP processing towards an increased Aβ 42 production.
How the PS1dE9 mutation results in an increased production of Aβ 42 remains unclear.
A hypothesis is that this mutation results in disturbed transport of PS1 from the endoplasmic reticulum
The PS1dE9 mutation is associated with atypical Aβ pathology and motor symptoms.
In the cortex of several AD patients with this mutation large, loose, "cotton wool" Aβ deposits and few dense core plaques were detected
However, not all patients with the PS1dE9 mutation display this atypical pathology
In PS1dE9 transgenic mice, this atypical pathology is not observed and APPswePS1dE9 mice display characteristic neuritic plaques

| CHARACTERIZATION OF THE APPSWEPS1DE9 MOUSE MODEL
The discovery of AD-causative mutations in the APP, PS1, and PS2 genes contributed to the generation of various transgenic AD mouse models
Around 100 models are now available to study AD pathogenesis (
The APPswePS1dE9 mouse model, which is the focus of this review, was generated in 2001

| Cell-type-specific expression of the transgenes
In APPswePS1dE9 mice, the expression of the transgenes is driven by the mouse PrP promoter (Box 1, Figure
However, by comparing expression levels of PrP in different cell types in the brain, the highest expression is found in astrocytes and endothelial cells, followed by neurons, oligodendrocyte progenitor cells (OPCs), and oligodendrocytes.
The expression of the Prp gene in microglia is low
Although it is mentioned in the original manuscript that there is MoPrP.Xho-driven transgene expression in astrocytes, it is not further discussed
APP and PS1 are endogenously expressed by astrocytes and microglia of wild-type mice (Figure
We observed expression of the APP and PS1 transgenes in cortical astrocytes (Figure
This shows that the transgenes are actively transcribed in glia, and therefore might also directly change glia function in the APPswePS1dE9 mice.

| Influence of genetic background on AD pathogenesis
The genetic background of mice can affect behavior and the timing of the formation of plaques
The original APPswePS1dE9 mouse was generated in F2 hybrids of C57BL/6J and C3H/HeJ (B6C3) mice.
This mouse line has also been backcrossed to C57BL/6J, as this background is favorable for behavioral experiments to test memory and cognition.
The partial C3H/HeJ background is especially relevant concerning neuroinflammation and reactive gliosis research in this AD mouse model, as the C3H/HeJ mice have a mutation the in Toll-like receptor-4 gene (Tlr4).
Normally, peripheral administration of the bacterial endotoxin lipopolysaccharide (LPS) induces a microglia response and reactive astrocytes.
However, a spontaneous mutation in the Lps

BOX 2 Physiological functions of astrocytes
Astrocytes are involved in numerous physiological functions, including, but not limited to, maintaining molecular homeostasis of the CNS, recycling of neurotransmitters, supplying energy substrates to neurons, and maintaining the bloodbrain barrier (BBB) (for a comprehensive review see
Astrocyte processes are in close contact with neurons, forming the so-called tripartite synapse
Connexins (Cxs), specifically Cx30 and Cx43, are the proteins that form transmembrane hemichannels (HCs) or gap junctions between astrocytes.
The intercellular gap junctions enable the diffusion of small molecules through the astrocyte network and play an important role in the metabolic support of neurons
As a hemichannel, connexins also form a pore between the cytoplasm and the extracellular space
Astrocytes have an active role in CNS physiology, and astrocyte dysfunction has been implicated in various CNS disorders.
In AD, astrocytes undergo morphological, molecular, and functional changes, a process known as astrogliosis.
locus (defective LPS response: Lps d/d ) makes C3H/HeJ mice resistant to LPS
C57BL/6J mice do not have this mutation (Lps n/n allele) and therefore have a normal LPS response.
This Lps gene was later identified as the Tlr4 gene, and a single mutation in the third exon of the Tlr4 gene is responsible for the LPS resistance.
Aside from their inability to respond to LPS, C3H/HeJ mice are developmentally and immunologically normal
Maintaining APPswePS1dE9 mice on a B6C3 background will result in a mixed litter with different Tlr4
genotypes.
Mice can be homozygous (Lps d/d ), heterozygous (Lps d/n ),
Endogenous and transgenic APP and PS1 expression in astrocytes and microglia.
(a).
Expression levels of endogenous APP and PS1, modified from
Cells were isolated from the cortices of P7 mice
(b,c) Cortical astrocytes and microglia were isolated from 15-to 18-month-old WT (blue) and APPswePS1dE9 mice (red) by FACS procedures, described in detail by
RNA was isolated using TRIsure and cDNA was generated following the manufacturer's instructions (Quantitect -Qiagen).
Resulting cDNA served as a template in real-time qPCR assays (SYBR Green PCR Master Mix; Applied Biosystems), as described by
To determine expression levels of the humanized APP (hAPP) transgene the following primers were used: FW: TGAACCATTTCAACCGAGCTG and REV: GTGGGTACCTCCAGAGCC.
Transcript levels were normalized to HPRT and GAPDH levels.
(b) Normalized mRNA expression of hAPP is higher in astrocytes of APPswePS1dE9 mice (n = 17 mice) compared to WT (n = 20 mice, the level of hAPP was below the limit of detection in 17 samples).
(c) Normalized mRNA expression of hAPP is higher in microglia of APPswePS1dE9 mice (n = 19 mice) compared to WT (n = 33 mice, the level of hAPP was below the limit of detection in 29 samples).
(d,e) Cortical astrocytes and microglia were isolated from 4-month-old wild-type (blue) and APPswePS1dE9 mice (red) by MACS procedures, adapted from protocol by
To determine expression levels of the hPS1 transgene the following primers were used: FW: GAGGACAACCACCTGAGCAA and REV: ATCTTGCTCCACCACCTGC. Transcript levels were normalized to HPRT and GAPDH levels.
(d) Normalized mRNA expression of hPS1 is higher in astrocytes of APPswePS1dE9 mice (n = 4 mice) compared to WT (n = 4 mice, the level of hPS1 was below the limit of detection in three samples).
(e) Normalized mRNA expression of hPS1 is higher in microglia of APPswePS1dE9 mice (n = 4 mice) compared to WT (n = 4 mice, the level of hPS1 was below the limit of detection in three samples).
FACS, fluorescence-activated cell sorting; FPKM, fragments per kilobase million; GAPDH, glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase; hAPP, humanized amyloid precursor protein; HPRT, hypoxanthine phosphoribosyltransferase; hPS1, human presenilin 1; MACS, magnetic-activated cell sorting; MO, myelinating oligodendrocyte; NFO, newly formed oligodendrocyte; OPC, oligodendrocyte progenitor cell; PS1, presenilin 1; WT, wild-type.
*p < .05,
****p < .0001,
Mann-Whitney test or wild-type (Lps n/n ) for the Tlr4 mutation
This is of importance for AD research, as TLR4 (lps d/d ) mediates the Aβinduced activation of microglia.
Indeed microglia cultures of C3H/HeJ mice exposed to Aβ show a reduced production of nitrite and IL-6 in comparison to microglia from wild-type C3H/HeN mice (which do not have a mutation in the TLR4 gene)
TLR4 signaling is involved in the clearance and uptake of Aβ
Moreover, the Lps d/d -APPswePS1dE9 mice are more vulnerable to cognitive deficits compared to Lps n/n -APPswePS1dE9 of the same age, as assessed by the Morris water maze
Therefore, it is important to indicate the specific strain and for B6C3 mice the specific Lps genotype, when reporting results, as the background strain of APPswePS1dE9 mice affects amyloidosis, microglia activation, and cognition
Unfortunately, this information is not always specified in the scientific literature.
The Jackson Laboratory provides two strains of the APPswePS1dE9 mice, one on a mixed B6C3 background (B6C3-Tg (APPswe, PSEN1dE9)85Dbo/Mmjax; Stock No: 34829) and one on a C57BL/6J congenic background (B6.Cg-Tg(APPswe, PSEN1dE9) 85Dbo/Mmjax; Stock No: 34832).
For the studies selected in part 4 of this review, we indicate the background used when specified.

| Neuropathological, neurobiological, and behavioral characteristics
Transgenic mouse models of AD with a mutation only in APP are characterized by a relatively slow accumulation of Aβ, whereas mice with mutations in both APP and PS1 accumulate Aβ faster, develop plaques earlier in life, and show behavioral impairments at younger ages
APPswePS1dE9 mice develop the main pathological hallmarks observed in AD patients, including aggregation of Aβ in plaques, reactive astrocytes, neuroinflammation, and cognitive impairments
In the hippocampus of 12-month-old APPswePS1dE9 mice, even tau hyperphosphorylation is increased compared to wildtype controls
However, it is important to highlight that tau pathology in the form of neurofibrillary tangles is not observed in APPswePS1dE9 mice and other AD mouse models, except when the animals also express human mutant tau
In 3-month-old APPswePS1dE9 mice, an increase in soluble Aβ 42 is detected in the posterior cerebral cortex
Plaques are detected in 4-month-old mice in the (frontal) cortex and hippocampus
The age at which Aβ plaques are detected is depending on the method used, the sex of the animals, and the genetic background.
For instance, the studies by
Also, sex influences the Aβ pathology in APPSwePS1dE9 mice
The study by
In 12-month-old female APPswePS1dE9 mice higher levels of the astroglial protein GFAP, the microglial marker CD45, and proinflammatory cytokines are found together with an increased Aβ burden and a lower level of synaptic markers compared to male mice
These studies indicate that the genetic background and sex are important factors that should be considered when designing studies.
Plaque-associated reactive astrocytes and activated microglia are detected in APPswePS1dE9 mice from the age of 6 months
Electrophysiologically, the first changes are observed at the onset of Aβ pathology.
Impaired synaptic plasticity is detected as early as 3.5 months in the cortex of APPswePS1dE9 mice
In the hippocampus, no major defects in glutamatergic transmission or plasticity are found in 3-month-old APPswePS1dE9 mice.
Only the induction of transient LTP is affected, in an ageindependent manner
Loss of synapses or neurons could mediate impairment in synaptic plasticity.
While some studies indicate a decrease in the number of presynaptic and postsynaptic terminals in the hippocampus as early as 4 months

Cognitive impairments are first observed in 3-month-old
APPswePS1dE9 mice in a contextual fear memory task and in 6-month-old mice in the Morris water maze spatial memory task
In other studies, impairments have been found in a spatial working memory task in 4-month-old APPswePS1dE9 mice
Whereas another study found no differences in spatial learning between wild-type and APPswePS1dE9 mice at the age of 7 months, the performance of APPswePS1dE9 mice in the RAWM was impaired at the age of 12-13 months
The first changes in cognition are detected by hippocampaldependent cognitive tests, including the contextual fear memory task, of which the performance inversely correlates with regions in which Aβ pathology was found.

| Reactive astrocytes
Due to their active and crucial function in the brain, changes in astrocytes in pathological conditions are no longer considered as a nonspecific or passive secondary reaction
A variety of pathological stimuli can induce morphological, molecular, and functional changes in astrocytes
Different terms, including (astro)gliosis, astrocyte activation, reactive astrocytes, and astrocyte reactivity are used in literature to describe these astroglial changes (for a comprehensive review,
Detrimental effects on brain function can be mediated by the loss of homeostatic functions and/or gain of functions related to the reactive state of astrocytes
Nevertheless, beneficial functions of reactive astrocytes have also been found.
Reactive astrocytes form a glial scar to restrict damage, repair the blood-brain barrier, and provide energy substrates
Preventing the reactive astrocytes-associated increase in GFAP (sometimes together with vimentin) can exacerbate inflammation and pathology associated with autoimmune encephalomyelitis
Plaque-associated reactive astrocytes are detected in APPswePS1dE9 mice at the age of 6 months, based on the increased expression of GFAP
Despite the widespread presence of reactive astrocytes in APPswePS1dE9 mice at late stages of AD pathology, no evidence has been found for proliferation of astrocytes
At the age of 15-18 months, isolated cortical astrocytes revealed a proinflammatory phenotype and a reduced expression of genes involved in neuronal support and communication
The expression of immunoproteasome subunits is increased in astrocytes during ageing, starting in 9-to 12-month-old APPswePS1dE9 mice
Elevated resting intracellular calcium levels and more frequent calcium transients were found in cortical astrocytes after the development of senile plaques (6-8 months).
These astrocytic calcium transients originated near plaques, occurred synchronously over longer distances, and were uncoupled from neuronal activity
When astrocytes become reactive they enhance the release of various gliotransmitters, including GABA, glutamate, and ATP
The astroglial GABA immunoreactivity is inversely correlated with the distance from amyloid plaques
These findings indicate that there are clear morphological, molecular, and functional changes in reactive astrocytes in APPswePS1dE9 mice.

| Advantages and limitations
Although no animal model fully mimics the pathology and cognitive impairments seen in human AD patients, AD mouse models have been invaluable in AD research.
Each AD (mouse) model has its strengths and limitations
AD mouse models enable investigating astrocyte function in an intact system and studying behavioral changes.
However, it should be taken into account that there are species differences between mouse and human astrocytes at a molecular and functional level
The characterization of astrocytes acutely isolated from human brain tissue
Validation of these findings in a complete organism, to assess its effect on AD pathology and on memory and cognition, remains an essential step in therapy development for AD.
This makes AD mouse models extremely valuable.

BOX 3 GFAP
Glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) is the characteristic intermediate filament (IF) protein in astrocytes.
Astrocytes express 10 different isoforms of GFAP, which form together with vimentin and nestin the cytoskeleton of astrocytes
GFAP expression is highly upregulated in disease.
Reactive astrocytes are observed in various brain pathologies, for example, epilepsy, neurodegenerative diseases, ischemia, infection, and brain
trauma.
An increased GFAP expression and changed morphology are the most used markers for reactive astrocytes
Although some functional changes after the loss of GFAP have been described
Even though GFAP is a valid and valuable marker for reactive astrocytes, there are some remaining concerns and limitations.
GFAPimmunostainings only show the IF cytoskeleton, which is about 10% of the astrocyte surface, and therefore cannot be used to determine cellular hypertrophy.
Cortical astrocytes have lower expression levels of GFAP in comparison to hippocampal astrocytes, and it remains to be determined whether these astrocytes respond with a similar GFAP increase in response to AD pathology.
In conclusion, by only studying GFAP, early changes and subpopulation specific changes of reactive astrocytes are missed in AD.
Alternative and AD specific reactive astrocyte markers should be determined to fully understand the pathological changes in AD astrocytes.
A major advantage of the APPswePS1dE9 mouse model is that it enables efficient crossing with other mice, as the transgenes were incorporated at the same chromosomal location and co-segregate as a single locus
APPswePS1dE9 mice develop the main pathological hallmarks as observed in AD patients; agerelated aggregation of Aβ in plaques, neuroinflammation, reactive gliosis, and cognitive impairments
Moreover, due to the expression of both APPswe and PS1dE9, the mice develop Aβ pathology at an early age
In AD patients, the earliest pathological changes are observed in the medial temporal lobe (entorhinal cortex and hippocampus;
Braak
This spatial and temporal expression is not mimicked by the transgene expression that is driven by the PrP promoter.
However, also in the APPswePS1dE9 mice, Aβ pathology is detected from an early age in the cortex and hippocampus
In AD knock-in models, in which the endogenous mouse APP gene is humanized, the target gene is under the control of its native promoter.
While this leaves the temporal, spatial, and gene expression level of APP undisturbed
Another potential disadvantage of these knock-in models is the less severe pathology development and minor behavioral changes
Variable premature death rates, between 10% and 35%, have been reported for APPswePS1dE9 mice.
Although cardiomyocyte contractile dysfunction was found in APPswePS1dE9 mice, this was not linked to the mortality rate
Overall, gross pathological abnormalities were not observed in these mice
One study using female mice indicates that before the age of 6 months, about 35% of the APPswePS1dE9 mice kept as a hemizygote on a C57BL/6J congenic background died.
Seizures might be a factor accounting for the premature death of APPswePS1dE9 mice
Indeed, patch-clamp electrophysiology identified that a depolarized resting membrane potential contributed to the increased neuronal network excitability observed in this transgenic line
The mortality rate seems to be highly variable, as in our group it is around 10% for APPswePS1dE9 mice at 6 months of age (personal communication Willem Kamphuis).
Whether the variable mortality rate is due to the specific background used of the

| Interventions directly affecting reactive astrocytes
The following studies applied various astrocyte-specific interventions in APPswePS1dE9 mice to unravel the contribution of reactive astrocytes to AD pathogenesis (Table
Studies with a similar approach to target reactive astrocytes are discussed together in the following sections.
Astrocyte-specific Cx43 deficiency was obtained by crossing a GFAP-cre mouse line with a floxed-Cx43 mouse line
Astroglial Cx43 deficiency in 9-month-old APPswePS1dE9 mice resulted in a reduced release of the gliotransmitters glutamate and ATP.
The release of GABA was not affected in these mice
This latter finding is in line with the study by

| Intervening with connexins in reactive astrocytes
Besides the reduced gliotransmitter release, there was a significant decrease in GFAP levels in the cortical and hippocampal astrocytes of 12-month-old Cx43-deficient APPswePS1dE9 mice, as compared to APPswePS1dE9 astrocytes.
The decrease in GFAP was not caused by a decrease in Aβ plaque load, as this was similar in both mouse strains
The Cx43 deficiency also led to a reduction in neuronal damage, as shown by a decrease in oxidative stress and neuritic dystrophy in the hippocampus
The Cx43 deficient APPswePS1dE9 mice had a better spatial and nonspatial memory compared to APPswePS1dE9 mice.
Re-expression of Cx43 by a viral vector in 7-month-old mice resulted in reactive astrocytes and aggravated synaptic function assessed 2 months later
Thus, both studies support that astroglial connexins, that is, Cx43 in particular, are potential therapeutic molecular targets to prevent reactive astrocytes and synaptic degeneration in AD

| Inducible expression of human Apolipoprotein E isoforms in astrocytes
The
Surprisingly, crossing the original version of the APPswePS1dE9 mice, resulting from the crossing of the APPswe line C3-3 and the PSdE9 line S-9, with a mouse line expressing human ApoE4 driven by the mouse prion protein promoter did not enhance Aβ pathology at 6 months
These findings show that the astrocyte-specific expression of ApoE3 or ApoE4 impact Aβ pathology and astrogliosis differently and indicate that the expression of ApoE isoforms in astrocytes is a potential therapeutic target to modulate reactive astrogliosis and synaptic degeneration in AD.

| Increasing reactive astrocytes by oxidative stress
Oxidative stress plays an important role in the pathogenesis of AD as a hippocampal memory task.
The effect on Aβ burden was not assessed in this study
Taken together, the administration of DT induced severe reactive astrocytes, triggered neurodegeneration, and impaired spatial memory in DTR-expressing APPswePS1de9 mice.
This study indicates that reducing oxidative stress could reduce reactive astrocytes, presenting a therapeutic strategy for AD.

| Reducing reactive astrocytes by overexpression of clusterin
Clusterin (CLU), also known as apolipoprotein J (APOJ), is a multifunctional glycoprotein, involved in heterogeneous processes, including lipid homeostasis, complement inhibition, and apoptosis
Large-scale genome-wide association studies have identified an association of common polymorphisms within the CLU gene with the risk of developing AD
CLU could form complexes with Aβ, thereby influencing its solubility and preventing amyloid fibril formation.
Astrocytes are a major source of CLU expression in the brain
The JAK/STAT3 pathway is activated in astrocytes of adult APPswePS1dE9 mice (8 months)
Binding of several cytokines and growth factors to their receptors activates JAK2, results in the phosphorylation and nuclear translocation of STAT3.
Nuclear STAT3 induces the transcription of multiple target genes, including GFAP
Inhibition of the JAK2/STAT3 pathway via adeno-associated virus-based vectors (AAV)-induced overexpression of Suppressor of Cytokine Signaling 3 (SOCS3) in the hippocampus of 3-month-old APPswePS1dE9 mice prevented the upregulation of GFAP and Aβ plaque load assessed 6 months later
In this experiment, SOCS3 was driven by the gfaABC 1 D promoter, which makes the expression astrocyte-specific.
The SOCS3-mediated inhibition of JAK2/STAT3 normalized the expression of multiple reactive astrocyte markers, including the expression of cytokines and complement factors in 9-month-old APPswePS1dE9 mice.
Moreover, inhibition of STAT3 improved spatial learning in APPswePS1dE9 mice, as assessed by the Morris water maze test.
Vice versa, stimulation of the JAK2/STAT3 pathway induced reactive astrocytes in wild-type mice and enhanced reactive astrogliosis in APPswePS1dE9 mice.
More Aβ plaques were present in APPswePS1dE9 mice with an enhanced astrocyte reactivity
However, this study is in contrast with previous studies in which astrocyte reactivity was reduced by GFAP and vimentin deficiency (see next section).
Astrocyte-specific STAT3 deficiency can be obtained by crossing a tamoxifen-inducible Cx43-Cre mouse line with a floxed-STAT3 mouse line.
Deletion of STAT3 in astrocytes from an early age, that is, 6 weeks, resulted in a reduced Aβ burden at the age of 8 months and an increase in internalization of Aβ in microglia
While
Around plaques, even an increase in astrocyte volume was found, which is a characteristic of reactive astrocytes.
The morphology of microglia near plaques was affected, displaying a higher number of branches and longer processes.
It was suggested that STAT3 deletion triggers a switch in astrocytes from a neurotoxic to a protective astrocyte phenotype, based on the expression of specific markers (including Amigo2, C3, and Tm4sf1).
Moreover, STAT3 deletion in astrocytes reduced the astrocyte calcium hyperactivity, and induced an improvement in spatial learning and memory.
The application of a preclinical systemic STAT3 inhibitor for 6 weeks also protected 8-month-old APPswePS1dE9 mice from cognitive decline
These results show that reactive astrocytes contribute to AD pathogenesis and that blocking the JAK/STAT3 pathway in astrocytes, therefore, could offer a novel therapeutic strategy for AD

| Reducing reactive astrocytes by deleting intermediate filament proteins
Upregulation of the IF proteins GFAP and vimentin is a well-known characteristic of reactive astrogliosis, the functional alterations associated with it, however, remain up to now largely unknown.
The response of astrocytes to Aβ seems dependent on the presence of GFAP, as astrocytes of GFAP-deficient ( -/-) mice failed to form a barrier-like structure around an Aβ plaque in the hippocampus, as
shown in slice cultures
By comparing the transcriptome of cortical astrocytes of 15-to 18-month-old
APPswePS1dE9-GFAP -/-, APPswePS1dE9-GFAP -/-vimentin -/-, and control APPswePS1dE9 mice,
Astrocytes of GFAPand GFAP-vimentin-deficient APPswePS1dE9 mice displayed an aggravated inflammatory response and the decrease of neuronal support genes, as shown earlier
Whether this indicates a deteriorated or improved inflammatory status is still unclear, as the changed genes include pro-inflammatory and anti-inflammatory genes.
No differences in Aβ plaque load were found between both IF-deficient and APPswePS1dE9 mice with IFs in mice of 6, 9, and 15 months of age, indicating that the IFs themselves do not play a prominent role in amyloidosis
These results are in contrast with earlier findings of
They found that the number of astrocytes was unaffected, but the overlap between astrocyte processes and amyloid plaques was reduced after deletion of IF proteins (which is also seen in the study of
These results suggest that reactive astrocytes are needed to limit plaque growth
Discrepancies between the studies can be caused by the different age of animals used in the studies, the mixed backgrounds of the IF-deficient animals, or different staining techniques used to visualize Aβ plaques.
Discrepancies with the study by
In contrast to the inhibition of the JAK2/STAT3 pathway to prevent the upregulation of GFAP
Additional factors that might contribute to the differences are the genetic background of the mouse lines and the timing of the intervention, as disruption of the JAK/STAT3 pathway was only induced from the age of 3-4 months
In summary, although IF-deficiencies affect the transcriptional response of reactive astrocytes
How background strain and pathology stage exactly affect this outcome is still unknown.
Moreover, the effect of IF-deficiency on cognitive decline in the APPswePS1dE9 still needs to be established.

| Interventions indirectly affecting reactive astrocytes
Reactive astrocytes were also indirectly affected by various intervention studies, which we categorized on the main target of their intervention, Aβ, inflammation, transmitter release, neuroprotection, or environmental risk factors.
In the following sections, we give a short overview of the findings of these studies, which are listed in Table

| Amyloid-beta
To reduce the Aβ load or prevent the formation of Aβ in APPswePS1dE9 mice, many different strategies have been used over the years, such as Aβ immunization
Besides reducing the Aβ load, almost all of these interventions also reduced reactive astrogliosis based on GFAP expression and, when studied, showed improved memory of the APPswePS1dE9 mice (Table
In one study, however, the intervention to stimulate Aβ clearance resulted in an upregulation of GFAP around Aβ plaques.
Also, LC3, an autophagy-related protein, was increased in these astrocytes.
These findings suggest that the intervention recruited astrocytes to plaques and enhanced Aβ clearance via autophagy by astrocytes

| Inflammation
Expectedly, many interventions that also affected reactive astrocytes were aimed at the modulation of inflammation, for example through inhibiting NF-κB
In the majority of studies, reducing inflammation also decreased the expression of GFAP, and in some studies also led to a decrease in the Aβ load.
In the studies in which also the cognitive function was studied, an improvement of memory was found in the studies that report on reduced reactive astrogliosis.
In three studies, however, the inflammation-targeted interventions led to an upregulation of GFAP
For two of these studies, this was expected considering the genotypes of the mice that were generated by cross-breeding with APPswePS1dE9 mice, the LPS d/d -APPswePS1dE9 mice
The LPS d/d genotype is known to enhance AD pathology in APPswePS1dE9 mice (see 3.2,
In the third study, the transient receptor potential cation channel, subfamily A1 (TRPA1)-deficient APPswePS1dE9 mice were investigated.
In TRPA-1 deficient APPswePS1dE9 mice a reduction of Aβ load, inflammatory cytokine secretion, and improved cognition were found.
Even though GFAP was increased in TRPA1-deficient mice, a reduced expression of IL-1β, IL-6, and IL-4 in astrocytes was detected.
These findings indicate that despite an increased GFAP expression, astroglial inflammation was reduced.
However, as TRPA1 is expressed in endothelial cells, neurons, and astrocytes, it remains unclear whether it was the TRPA1 deficiency in astrocytes in APPswePS1dE9 mice that contributed to the reduced inflammatory response and improvement in learning and memory.
Astrocytes are known to closely interact with microglia; both cells are involved in reactive gliosis in AD.
The studies by
They used a C-C chemokine receptor type 3 (CCR3) antagonist and CCR3-deficient APPswePS1dE9 mice to target microgliosis, which led to a reduced GFAP expression and Aβ load and an improved memory

| Transmitter release
The study by
They used Boldine, which has been shown in in vitro experiments to block HCs and not gap junctions.
Boldine administration to 6-month-old APPswePS1dE9 mice for 3 months, via drinking water, reduced the release of ATP and glutamate, without affecting the release of D-serine or GABA.
Although not specifically mentioned, these transmitters can either be released from astrocytes
Aβ load was unaffected and the number of dystrophic neurites was reduced
The studies by
Both studies used MAO-B inhibitors and showed a reduction in GABA production and release by astrocytes.
Neuronal plasticity was increased and the inhibitors prevented memory impairment in APPswePS1dE9 mice
It is important to note, that the drugs used in these three studies are not astrocyte- (IHC, 6E10)
,
Cx and Hip:    specific and thus a contribution of neurons or microglia has to be considered

| Neuroprotection
Because AD is a progressive neurodegenerative disease, various interventions have been targeted at neuroprotection in APPswePS1dE9 mice.
These interventions included choline supplementation
All studies categorized in the neuroprotective group, except one, showed a reduction of GFAP expression and Aβ burden, and some also showed an improvement in memory function (when examined), in response to the neuroprotective intervention.
Crossbreeding of Endophilin-B1 (Endo-B1) deficient mice with APPswePS1dE9 mice resulted in the upregulation of GFAP, an increase in Aβ burden, aggravation of synaptic degeneration, and behavioral impairment compared to APPswePS1dE9 mice
Endo-B1 (also known as Bax-interacting factor 1) has multiple functions, including the regulation of apoptosis, autophagy, and mitochondrial function.
Endo-B1 is neuroprotective, as overexpression of Endo-B1 in neuronal cultures protected against Aβinduced apoptosis and mitochondrial dysfunction
In cortical tissue of AD patients and 10-month-old APPswePS1dE9 mice, Endo-B1 protein levels are decreased compared to controls
Other neuroprotective interventions were aimed at the cholinergic network, modulated oxidative stress, or targeted the AD risk factor Pyk2.
The basal forebrain cholinergic system is vulnerable to degeneration in AD patients
Even though the number of cholinergic neurons in the forebrain remained unchanged, dystrophic cholinergic neurites were found in the cortex, hippocampus, and striatum of APPswePS1dE9 mice
The use of perinatal choline supplementation prevented the reduction of the cholinergic marker choline acetyltransferase in 9-and 12-month-old APPswePS1dE9 mice.
It also reduced amyloidosis and the GFAP levels specifically in 9-month-old female APPswePS1dE9 mice
One of the mechanisms by which Aβ induces neurotoxicity is oxidative stress
Reducing oxidative stress by applying a semi-synthetic derivative of the St. John's Wort
These interventions also reduced the Aβ burden and GFAP levels
Vice versa, increasing reactive astrocytes by oxidative stress in astrocyte-specific DTR expressing APPswePS1dE9 mice resulted in neurodegeneration and impaired spatial memory compared to APPswePS1dE9 mice
The kinase Pyk2 (PTK2B) has been implicated as a late-onset AD risk factor, and is primarily expressed by neurons.
Pyk2-deficiency in APPswePS1dE9 prevented synapse loss and improved cognitive functioning compared to 12-month-old APPswePS1dE9 mice.
Also, the Aβ burden and GFAP levels were reduced in Pyk2-deficient mice
but also increased the expression of GFAP without affecting Aβ burden

| Environmental risk factors
To conclude, the majority of interventions reduced both Aβ burden and GFAP expression, although some studies showed that these could be independently affected.
When the studies also included cognitive testing, an improvement in cognitive function was detected in most studies.
As most interventions summarized in Table
It is important to note that these studies impact reactive astrocytes indirectly and they were not designed to determine causality between reactive astrogliosis and AD pathogenesis.
Therefore, conclusions should be made with caution.
Although GFAP expression is a valuable, but limited readout for reactive astrocytes, in almost all intervention studies (listed in Table
without changes in other astrocyte-related genes after early life stress exposure in APPswePS1dE9 mice
Even though studies using alternative markers for reactive astrocytes are limited, this indicates that (functional) changes can be induced in reactive astrocytes by interventions, in some cases without affecting the expression of GFAP
The causality and underlying mechanisms that mediate a positive effect on Aβ burden, reactive astrocytes, and cognitive performance require further investigation.
An astrocyte-specific approach to unravel the contribution of astrocytes in the interventions listed in Table

| DISCUSSION
In this review, we have listed direct and indirect interventions that attenuate the occurrence of reactive astrocytes in the APPswePS1dE9 AD mouse model.
Considering their crucial role in proper brain functioning, the functional changes associated with the reactive state of astrocytes can have a direct impact on synapse function and neuronal circuit activity, potentially contributing to cognitive problems in AD
Classically, most studies investigating the changes in reactive astrocytes focus on GFAP expression, rather than on functional changes.
An increased GFAP expression and changed morphology are the most often used markers for reactive astrocytes
However, it remains unclear whether an increase in GFAP expression is an appropriate marker for all reactive astrocytes.
Moreover, this focus on GFAP expression and morphological changes in astrocytes have so far not been sufficient to reveal what happens in the early stages of AD pathology.
While an increase in soluble Aβ 42 is detected in 3-month-old APPswePS1dE9 mice
Whether the early increase in Aβ oligomers is sufficient to induce reactive astrocytes, and whether GFAP upregulation is a sensitive marker for the early and subtle functional changes in astrocytes is unknown.
To determine the contribution of reactive astrocytes to AD pathogenesis, it is necessary to unravel the effect of their functional changes to synaptic dysfunction and/or loss and eventually dementia.
The consequences of disturbances in astroglial function, including but not limited to the release of gliotransmitters, uptake of neurotransmitters, ion buffering, and BBB maintenance
There is an emerging interest in astrocyte function and more tools are becoming available to study this using in vivo, ex vivo, and in vitro systems
Astrocyte-specific techniques are being developed to manipulate astrocyte function and to study neuron-glia interactions.
Optogenetics and chemogenetics enable the manipulation of astrocytes
Genetically encoded calcium indicators and sensors for transmitters allow for the functional measurement in astrocytes
The field is relatively young, and in recent years, an increase in studies focusing on astrocyte heterogeneity, function, and astrocyte-neuron interactions
This will undoubtedly lead to more insight in astrocyte function in health and disease, which is essential to understand the full spectrum of AD pathogenesis.
To develop astrocyte-specific and well-timed interventions, changes in astroglial function at different stages of the disease need to be determined.
This information will enable astrocyte-directed therapies to be effective in reversing the astrocyte-induced damage or allow for repair and/or recovery.
When the damage is too severe, it might be irreversible.
As more therapeutics will be targeted towards the earlier stages of AD, identifying pathological changes in astrocyte function in the early stages of pathology is important.
This should coincide with the development of accurate biomarkers for specific disease stages to make the treatment of AD patients possible.
Transcriptomics and proteomics are important tools to find changes in astrocytes at the gene or protein level
The A1 and A2 profiles identifying neuroinflammation and ischemia-induced subtypes of reactive astrocytes, respectively
However, limitations of this classification have also been revealed, as aged astrocytes take on a A1-like neuroinflammatory phenotype
genes are observed in APPswePS1dE9 mice, the MCAO model, and the aging mouse brain
These findings indicate that it may be difficult to define classes of reactive astrocytes with only a few genes.
Recent single-cell RNAseq approaches are likely to reveal more and more disease and cell-type-specific profiles.
A recent single-cell RNA sequencing study identified five transcriptomically distinct types of astrocytes in the hippocampus and cortex of adult mice
Still little is known about the effect of the molecular and functional heterogeneous subtypes of astrocytes and reactive astrocytes and their contribution to AD pathogenesis.
Using hippocampal astrocytes of 7-month-old 5xFAD AD mice, Habib et al., 2020 identified a diseaseassociated astrocyte (DAA) population
Not all genes in the DAA profile are unique for AD-associated astrocytes as the profile shared a significant number of upregulated genes compared with the Gfap-high population, a population also present in wild-type mice.
It remains to be determined whether these markers for reactive astrocytes are universal for different AD mouse models, pathology stages, and brain regions studied.
Overall, state-of-the-art sequencing approaches will discover novel disease-and subtype-specific profiles, which also need to be validated in AD patient material.
These profiles will help to identify specific pathways that can be targeted with the use of cell-specific tools and enable the development of astrocyte-specific therapies.
Connecting gene and protein changes to functional changes will be the first step in the development of astrocyte-and pathway-specific AD therapies.

| CONCLUSION
Reactive astrocytes are present in the APPswePS1dE9 mice when plaques become apparent, coinciding with cognitive decline
Still little is known about the effect of the functional changes associated with their reactive state and their contribution to AD pathogenesis.
Specific treatment windows and astrocyte-specific interventions need to be further developed.
The few astrocyte-specific interventions highlighted in this review produced encouraging results
indicating that targeting reactive astrocytes could be a promising therapeutic area for AD.


APPswePS1dE9 mice on a C57BL/6J × C3H/HeJ genetic background, MMRRC Stock No: 34829 (formerly Jackson Lab Stock No: 004462) and APPswePS1dE9 mice on a congenic C57BL/6J genetic background MMRRC Stock No: 34832 (formerly Jackson Lab Stock No: 005864).


. The cleavage of APP by β-secretase results in the formation of sAPPβ and an intramembrane β-carboxyl-terminal fragment (β-CTF).
The formation of Aβ 40 or Aβ 42 starts with ε-cleavage, followed by γ-cleavage of the β-CTF (Takami et al., 2009).
Products of the primary ε-cleavage, Aβ 49 , and AICD50-99 or Aβ 48 and AICD49-99, are sequential cleaved resulting in Aβ 40 and Aβ 42 , respectively.
The two major pathways are Aβ 49 à Aβ 46 à Aβ 43 à Aβ 40 and Aβ 48 à Aβ 45 à Aβ 42 (tripeptide hypothesis;


APPswePS1dE9 mice, the environment in which the mice are housed including the type of caging, noise levels, food, or social housing is not clear.Despite its limitations, theAPPswePS1de9 mouse model is overall a good model to study amyloidosis and the development of reactive astrocytes and its consequences, which forms the focus of this review.
4 | SYSTEMATIC REVIEW: REACTIVE ASTROCYTES AS A TREATMENT TARGET IN THE APPSWEPS1DE9 MOUSE MODEL Astrocytes display a reactive phenotype in the CNS of AD patients and APPswePS1dE9 mice (Section 3.4); meaning hypertrophic soma and a pronounced upregulation of the intermediate filament cytoskeleton.
How this affects astrocyte normal function (Box 2) and astrocyte-neuron interactions is just beginning to be unraveled.
To determine how intervening with reactive astrocytes could affect AD pathogenesis and cognition, we have systematically reviewed studies on the APPswePS1dE9 mouse model in which astrocytes were targeted by either direct or indirect interventions.
Besides the effect on astrocytes, we also included the effect on Aβ burden, microglia activation, synaptic density, and memory.
When indicated in the study, we included the specific APPswePS1dE9 strain purchased, including genetic background, and which sex was used.
The review is based on a PubMed search, updated last on April 2, 2021, with the following search terms: ((((Alzheimer*) AND mouse model*) NOT (5xFAD OR 2xKI OR 3xTg OR Tg2576 OR TgCRND8 OR TASTPM OR ARTE10 OR EAE OR NL-F OR v717I OR J20 OR JNPL3 OR P301L OR P301S OR PS19 OR APP23 OR PDAPP OR TAPP)) AND (reactive astrocyt* OR astrocytosis OR astrogliosis OR gliosis)) AND ("2001"[Date -Publication]: "3000"[Date -Publication]).
We only included articles written in English.
This search term yielded 314 research articles (Figure3).
We screened the title and abstract of these research articles and selected studies referring to an APP/PS1 model or an unspecified AD mouse model.
Selecting the studies that found an effect of astrocytes and/or gliosis or used an astrocytespecific intervention resulted in the inclusion of 101 articles.
After screening the full text, 55 articles were selected that used the APPswePS1dE9 mouse model.
In nine studies, astrocytes were directly targeted in APPswePS1dE9 mice either by blocking the negative functional changes of reactive astrocytes, by inducing gene expression in astrocytes, or by preventing astrocytes to become reactive (


Connexin30 (Cx30) and Cx43 are the proteins that form gap junctions between astrocytes or form transmembrane hemichannels (HCs), which are pores between the cytoplasm and the extracellular milieu of astrocytes.
Reactive astrocytes, that surround Aβ plaques, upregulate the expression of Cx30 and Cx43
Regardless of their distance to plaques, the gap junction communication between APPswePS1dE9 astrocytes, however, was similar to that in wild-type astrocytes.
In the hippocampus of APPswePS1dE9 mice, the HCs composed of Cx43 were chronically open, indicating that specifically the hemichannel function is affected in AD
Opening of the Cx43 HCs can be triggered by the presence of Aβ (Aβ-induced) inflammation, or an increased concentration of intracellular calcium ([Ca 2+ ] i ) in astrocytes, inducing the release of gliotransmitters such as ATP and glutamate from reactive astrocytes
ATP activates P2X7 or P2Y1 receptors on microglia and astrocytes, leading to increased calcium transients and calcium waves in astrocytes, as has been shown in another AD mouse model: the APPPS1 model driven by the Thy1 promoter
HC-dependent glutamate and ATP release amplify a vicious circle in astrocytes by inducing high [Ca 2+ ] i levels that trigger Cx43 HC opening contributing to a maintenance of elevated [Ca 2+ ] i .
The effect of the resulting chronic release of glutamate and ATP mediated by activated HCs can be detrimental and/or protective for neurons
This is shown by cell culture experiments that indicate that glutamate release can contribute to synaptic loss by activation of extrasynaptic NMDA receptors
And, excessive ATP release can mediate a neurotoxic effect by stimulation of IL-1β secretion by microglia



F
Abbreviations: General-Specified interventions or ages indicated with 1-3 .
When not indicated: same effect for all interventions or ages.
When a specific group is not indicated: read-out was not determined for that group; ", Increased or



(
In this study, the diphtheria toxin receptor (DTR) was expressed in astrocytes by injecting AAVs with DTR driven by the GFAP104 promotor in the CA1 region of the hippocampus of 10-to 12-month-old APPswePS1dE9 mice.
Administration of diphtheria toxin (DT) in these mice induced astroglial hydrogen peroxide (H 2 O 2 ) production and resulted in an increase of reactive astrocytes, based on GFAP expression.
Furthermore, it reduced the expression of NeuN, and increased expression of cleaved caspase-3, suggesting the induction of neurodegeneration.
Moreover, the severe reactive astrocytes in astrocyte-specific DTR-expressing APPswePS1dE9 mice impaired spike probability compared to APPswePS1dE9 mice
Whether this was due to synaptic degeneration and/or increased tonic inhibition by the severe reactive astrocytes, as indicated by a previous study
The DTR-expressing APPswePS1dE9 mice showed impaired spatial memory assessed by the novel place recognition test, known


investigated the impact of overexpression of astroglial CLU on AD pathology.
An AAV vector expressing CLU under the control of the GFAP promoter was used to induce a 30% overexpression of CLU in astrocytes in 8-month-old APPswePS1dE9 mice.
This CLU overexpression ameliorates amyloid pathology and reduced the number of dystrophic neurites in the cortex and hippocampus of APPswePS1dE9 mice.
Also, gliosis, assessed by GFAP and Iba1 immunostaining, was reduced in 8-month-old AAV-CLU-APPswePS1dE9 mice compared to APPswePS1dE9 mice injected with control AAV-GFP vectors.
These results indicate that the overexpression of CLU in astrocytes impacts amyloid burden and associated pathologies and offers a novel therapeutic molecular target to reduce reactive astrocytes and synaptic degeneration in AD



4. 1 . 5 |
Reducing reactive astrocytes by disrupting or inhibiting the JAK2/STAT3 pathway Reactive astrocytes can be directly induced by activating the Janus kinase/signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (JAK/STAT3)




receptor subtype 2B; PSD95, postsynaptic density protein 95; RTN-3, reticulon-3, marker of neuritic dystrophy; SNAP-25, synaptosomal nerve-associated protein 25; SV2A, synaptic vesicle glycoprotein 2A; Syn, synaptophysin; ThS, thioflavin-S; VAMP1, vesicle-associated membrane protein 1; VGlut, vesicular glutamate transporter; Vim, Vimentin; X-34 dye, fluorescent amyloid-specific dye.




Table 1).
We found 46 studies in which astrocytes were indirectly affected by various interventions.
We divided these studies into