The Use of Ginkgo Biloba L. as a Neuroprotective Agent in the Alzheimer’s Disease
Alzheimer's disease, a neurodegenerative disease, is one of the most common causes of dementia if elderly people worldwide.
Alzheimer's disease leads to the alienation of individuals and their exclusion from social and professional life.
It is characterized mainly by the degradation of memory and disorientation, which occurs as a result of the loss of neuronal structure and function in different brain areas.
In recent years, more and more attention has been paid to use in the treatment of natural bioactive compounds that will be effective in neurodegenerative diseases, including Alzheimer's disease.
G. biloba L. and its most frequently used standardized extract (EGb 761), have been used for many years in supportive therapy and in the prevention of cognitive disorders.
The paper presents an overview of reports on the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease, as well as a summary of the properties of G. biloba extract and its effects on the possible pathogenesis of the disease.
By exploring more about the pathogenesis of the disease and the benefits of G. biloba extract for patients with Alzheimer's disease, it will be possible to create an individualized therapeutic protocol to optimize the treatment.

INTRODUCTION
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a chronic neurodegenerative disease that is associated with aging and is one of the most common causes of dementia and social exclusion
AD is responsible for 60-80% of dementia cases and is also their most common cause of death
Treatment costs in the USA only were estimated at about $ 1 trillion in 2018
Despite the prevalence of the disease, the great suffering associated with it and the burden on the patient's family, the pathogenesis and mechanisms of AD are still not fully understood.
Hence, it seems necessary to search for answers concerning the pathogenesis and treatment of AD.
The main pathogenetic factors mentioned in literature include: abnormal metabolism of apolipoprotein E, abnormal metabolism-hyperphosphorylation of Tau protein, extracellular accumulation of amyloid beta (Aβ) in the form of senile plaques in the cerebral parenchyma.
Moreover, reports indicate the participation of oxidative stress, inflammation, abnormal glial cell function and damage to cholinergic neurons
In the course of the above phenomena, brain synapses and neurons are damaged, leading to a loss of integrity in neuronal systems, which don't operate sufficiently in isolation
Some reports also indicate the global effect of cerebral circulation disorders, an improvement of which would have a positive effect on AD treatments
Damage to such a neurovascular unit would lead to secondary damage to the blood-brain barrier (BBB)
Among the possible causes of dysregulation of homeostasis leading to the development of AD, the possible impact of disorders of the gastrointestinal microbiota is also suggested
There are also extensive studies on the dysfunction of exosomes.
They are small vesicles secreted by most cells, including neurons, used for intercellular communication and removal of cell metabolites.
They influence the development of neurons and their regeneration.
In AD, they are directly related to the transport of amyloid precursors and Tau proteins, which are related to the development of the disease
The main cause of this progressive neurodegenerative disorder is the presence of amyloid plaques (AβPs), so-called senile plaques, neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs) and the loss of neurons, especially in the hippocampus and neocortex.
These factors accompany the disease from its start at different rate of development.
AD is pathomorphologically characterized by granulovacuolar degeneration in the brain, synaptic pathology, rare white matter (white matter refaction) and inflammation (neuroinflammation)
The clinical symptoms of AD include: latent episodes of memory impairment and cognitive impairment, psychiatric symptoms, and behavioral disturbances
Among the spectrum of symptoms also diagnosed as a result of the course and duration of the disease, are communication and behavioral disorders, depression, agitation and dementia
The onset of the disease can be tricky, and early symptoms are often confused with fatigue or stress
Most often, at the beginning, short-term memory disorders dominate.
With disease progression, impairment of the long-term memory develops, and at a deep stage, personal information and identity are lost.
Psychiatric manifestations concern speech, orientation, concentration and attention disfunction, also delusions and hallucinations, mood and behavior disorders, depression and psychomotor restlessness.
In an advanced stage of AD, neurological changes appear: myoclonus and epileptic seizures affect about 10% of patients, as well as other disorders: extrapyramidal symptoms-slow movements, tilting of the figure, poor facial expressions, difficulties in walking, with a tendency to fall.
In the final stage of the disease, difficulties in maintaining a standing and sitting position appear, requiring a lying position, associated with complications such as frequent respiratory infections, thromboembolic complications, decubitus etc. AD is accompanied by eating disorders ranging from malnutrition to polyphagia (in the phase in which the patient is able to eat on his own, associated with memory impairment and not remembering recently taken meals)
The natural history of the disease varies individually, and patients live an average of 10 years from diagnosis.
AD progression characteristics are presented in Figure
Dementia developed during the course of AD can be mild, moderate or severe.
The initial stages of AD include observed changes in recent memory and personality.
A depressed mood, weakened interests and guilt are dominant, but also incontinence and inadequate emotional development.
In the second stage of the disease, observations, points of view, hallucinations, visual or auditory hallucinations increase.
Patients also suffer from disorders of eating, sleep rhythm and wakefulness.
At this stage, the patient requires permanent support.
In the last stages, muscle tension increases, motor functions become slow, and the patient must sit then lie into the terminal stage, also not auto-or allo-oriented, requiring obligatory permanent 24 h/day assistance.
Currently, there is no single drug for treatment of the wide range of AD symptoms, and the development of an effective treatment is a major challenge, so more and more often attention is paid to drugs of natural origin that can be administered alone or in combination with synthetic treatment.
Herbal medicines have been in use for over 1,000 years and are one of the most promising sources of new medicines
Plants have an abundance of biologically active substances that can eliminate many symptoms of the disease, with a lower risk and occurrence of side effects.
One such plant is G. biloba, which is characterized by a rich composition of bioactive compounds.
The most significant of those are: flavonoids and terpenes
G. biloba leaf preparations are commonly used in the treatment of central nervous system disorders such as Alzheimer's disease and cognitive deficits
Their general action can be described as anti-aggregating (anti-PAF) and nootropic (procognitive).
The EGb 761 is often taken by older adults as a supplement to improve memory impairment and the associated cognitive decline.
Despite this common usage, the effects and efficacy of G. biloba preparations have not been fully investigated, especially in people concomitantly using other anti-AD treatments
This review summarizes recent advances in the use of G. biloba in AD, as well as the biological effects, molecular mechanisms, toxicity and drug interactions.

THE FACTORS INFLUENCING AD
It has been proven that hypertension, obesity and diabetes have an impact on the development of AD
The major risk factors for developing AD are genetic and environmental factors, wherein the former concern about 70% of cases and are associated with three variants of apolipoproteins E (APOE), namely ε2, ε3, and ε4
APOE ε4 is most associated with the increased risk of AD
The effect of the APOE genotype on the risk of AD is likely to depend on the differential effect of APOE on β amyloid accumulation in the brain and its blood vessels.
Therefore, the response to AD treatment may differ significantly between genotypes
Also disorders of lipid homeostasis have a significant impact on the risk of developing AD.
According to the authors, this leads to neuronal signaling pathway disorders, but also to BBB disruption and other changes (such as mitochondrial dysfunction, oxidative stress, and inflammation) at the cellular level that may intensify the course of AD
Additionally, mutation genes are responsible for creating an environment favorable to the development of AD, such as HLA-DRB5-DRB1 and INPP5D, responsible for the immune response.
Also, MEF2C mutations are associated with the immune response and synaptic function, and PTK2B is responsible for cell migration processes and also synaptic function.
CELF1, NME8, and CASS4 are involved in shaping the functions of the cytoskeleton and axonal transport.
CASS 4 is also involved in the metabolism of Tau and β amyloid precursor protein (APP), and FERMT2 in the metabolism of Tau.
Mutations of the above genes are detected in AD and may lead to disorders of the physiological processes and development of AD
Age is a key risk factor for developing AD.
After the age of 65, the incidence of AD doubles with every 5 years, and the incidence of AD is higher in women than men
In 2018, the number of people with dementia worldwide was estimated at 50 million.
By 2030 this number will have increased to 82 million, and by 2050 it will reach 152 million.
It is estimated that in high-income countries, the prevalence of dementia is around 5-10% among those aged 65 or over.
AD dementia is the most common type of dementia, accounting for 60% of all cases
Literature reports that the incidence of AD increases significantly in postmenopausal women, reaching 2-3 times that of men.
This may suggest a significant protective effect of estrogen in the pathogenesis of AD
A relationship was also found between disturbances in the sleepwake rhythm, preceding the preclinical phase of AD development
The risk factors mentioned above are listed also in Figure

TREATMENT OF AD
The objectives of AD treatment are to stabilize, slow disease progression, reduce mental and behavioral symptoms, and thereby improve quality of life.
To date, no effective drug has been developed to cure or permanently reverse AD pathology.
In FIGURE 1 | Alzheimer disease progression of symptoms.
AD in the initial stage is characterized by short-term memory deficit, personality changes and difficulties in attention or concentration.
Progression results in increasing symptoms of memory deficit, mood disorders as well as delusions and hallucinations.
Movement difficulties, disorders of sleeping and eating may start occurring.
In the advanced stage the disease manifests with self-consciousness loss, auto-and allopsychic disorientation, substantial neurological changes resulting in epileptic seizures, myoclonia or postural stability difficulties.
Dementia developing in the course of the disease progresses from mild through moderate to an advanced stage where the patient is getting not capable of independent life.
pharmacotherapy, the aim is now to minimize symptoms and slow down disease progression

Application of Synthetic Treatments in AD
In clinical practice, the main drugs in AD treatment are synthetic acetylcholinesterase inhibitors (AchEI) such as donezepil, galantamine and rivastigmine, which are first line drugs.
They show good effectiveness for patients with mild or moderate symptoms of AD.
Tacrine, a drug initially popular for the treatment of AD, is being used less and less because of its side effects.
Donepezil-a selective non-competitive acetylcholinesterase inhibitor has a proven efficacy in the treatment of AD.
The increase in acetylcholine levels and improvement of cognitive functions in patients with AD has been proven in literature
The second group of drugs are N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor (NMDAR) antagonists, such as memantine, used for moderate to severe AD symptoms
The psychiatric symptoms of AD range from depressive symptoms, most often treated with serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRI), which require the addition of new atypical antipsychotic drugs such as olanzapine, quetiapine and risperidone.
Conventional antipsychotics are associated with extrapyramidal symptoms more often.
The use of both is associated with an increased risk of death in the course of AD

Application of Natural Treatment in AD
In the treatment of AD, natural drugs are being increasingly proposed that could support synthetic pharmacotherapy or, in some cases, replace it.
Currently, many plants are being investigated for potential sources of new drugs, especially since multipotential drugs are desirable in the treatment of AD, and those are often drugs of natural origin.
Plants provide a wealth of bioactive compounds that may play an important role in the treatment of neurological disorders

A Combination of Synthetic and Natural Methods of Therapy
Some reports indicate a positive effect of combining natural and synthetic therapy.
The simultaneous use of EGb 761 with donepezil (an acetylcholinesterase inhibitor) may give better results in the treatment of AD in terms of cognitive functions than the use of synthetic pharmacotherapy alone

THE USE OF G. BILOBA IN THE TREATMENT AND PREVENTION OF AD
The History and Description of the Plant G. biloba is a relic and an endemic plant.
The genus Ginkgo was widespread during the Mesozoic era.
Only one species has survived to our times (the so-called "living fossil").
It wasn't found in a natural state until the middle of the 20th century in the southeast of China.
However, it has long been grown at temples in many parts of East Asia as a "sacred tree," and was planted as an ornamental tree in temperate climate countries.
The Ginkgo is a gymnosperm dioecious tree.
The leaves have a characteristic fan shape and are seasonal (they fall in winter).
The leaf blade is leathery, often dissected, with primitive dichotomous veins.
The seeds are yellow, on a long stalk surrounded by a fruit-like, fleshy arillus (sarcotesta).
The aril contains butyric acid and smells like rancid butter
Roasted seeds are edible.
In traditional Chinese medicine, G. biloba has been used for over 600 years for such diseases as: bronchitis, asthma, renal dysfunction, bladder diseases and as anti-inflammatory substance
The seeds were first used as a medicinal substance by the Yuan dynasty
Moreover, the first notes of the use of the leaves internally as a medicinal raw material were recorded in the text of Liu Wen-Tai, Ben Cao Pin Hue Jing Yaor in 1,505
G. biloba leaf has long been used primarily in the treatment of brain dysfunction related to brain aging and neurodegenerative dementia

Chemical Composition of G. biloba Leaves
The main components of the leaves of G. biloba are flavonoids, constituting the largest group of active compounds represented by various classes of benzo-c-pyrone derivatives
This group includes mainly biflavones: ginkgetin, isoginkgetin, bilobetin, scjadopitizuna, amentoflavone, and the following flavonols: kaempferol, quercetin, isorhamnetin, rutin, myricetin
An important group are terpenoids, which include the main diterpenes: ginkgolides A, B, C, J, M, K, L and the main sesquiterpene-bilobalide
A potent group are also the derivatives of flavan-3-ol: catechin, epicatechin, epigallocatechin, and gallocatechin.
In the leaves there are also proanthocyanidins such as procyanidin, prodelphynidin; biflavon glucosides (ginkgetin, isoginkgetin); phenolic acids: derivatives of benzoic and cinnamic acids; phytosterols such as β-sitosterol, stigmasterol, campesterol, dihydrobrassicasterol; and carotenoids such as γ-carotene, α-carotene, lutein as well as organic acids, as shown in Figure

EGb 761 Extract
The standardized extract of dried G. biloba leaves for pharmaceutical purposes was first obtained and introduced in 1965 in Germany by Dr. Willmar Schwabe III, German physician and pharmacist.
The first reports on the therapeutic effect mainly concerned the effect on cerebral and peripheral blood flow disorders and cerebral atherosclerosis and were published in
Then, in 1974 in France, the extract of dried leaves was registered for internal use, receiving the current name-EGb 761.
Currently, the standardized EGb 761 extract is one of the most popular herbal supplements.
It is in the form of a dry extract made with acetone 60% (w/w) as the extraction solvent.
In relation to the original composition of G. biloba leaves, EGb 761 is enriched with pharmacologically active ingredients such as flavonoids, terpene lactones, and depleted of any toxic components, mainly ginkgolide acids.
The final standardized extract (the components are listed in Figure
flavonoids and 5.0-7.0%
terpene lactones, consisting of 2.8-3.4% A, B and C ginkgolides and 2.6-3.2%
bilobalide, with a ginkgolic acid content less than 5 ppm.
EGb 761 has been used in most published clinical and preclinical studies
This preparation is used primarily in the treatment of hearing and balance disorders, tinnitus and dizziness resulting from impaired local blood flow, as well as for cognitive dysfunction, in particular age-related memory deficits

Oxidative Stress in AD
As a result of oxidative stress, the body releases reactive oxygen species (ROS), involved in many disorders, including disorders of the cardiovascular system, tissue damage, DNA damage.
All these actions contribute to the development of many neurodegenerative diseases and accelerate aging of the body
Oxidative stress is a key mechanism in the pathogenesis of AD
The progressive loss of neuronal cell populations in specific regions of the brain in AD patients is strongly correlated with oxidative stress
ROS in excess are harmful to all types of cells, including neurons.
Such damage in AD can affect all neurons, playing a key role in irreversible cellular dysfunction, ultimately leading to their death.
The damage mainly consists of advanced glycation end products (AGEs), lipid peroxidation products and nitration products.
Hemoxygenase-1 (HO-1) is one of the most sensitive selective markers of cellular stress response, and in AD both HO-1 and mRNA have been shown to be elevated in the  brains of AD patients
Oxidative stress also accompanies the accumulation of senile plaques in AD, increasing the activity of beta and gamma secretases.
The accumulation of Ab plaques supports and intensifies oxidative stress, and together they lead to irreversible changes
Antioxidant Activity of G. biloba vs. AD One of the methods of protection against oxidative stress is to provide potent exogenous antioxidants.
One such is the leaf extract of G. biloba
The antioxidant effects of EGb 761 are mainly related to its influence on cerebral blood flow, the neurotransmitter system, cellular redox state and the level of nitric oxide
EGb 761 works directly by scavenging ROS or increasing the expression of genes encoding antioxidant enzymes.
In addition, it demonstrated a protective effect in in vitro studies on human brain tissues that had been oxidatively damaged by exposure to hydroxyl (OH•) or superoxide (O 2 -•) free radicals produced by Co 60 irradiation
Treatment with EGb 761 extract in rat cerebellar granule cells successfully attenuated the oxidative damage induced by H 2 O 2 /FeSO 4 , which resulted in protection against apoptotic cell death (
The antioxidant activity in the extract of G. biloba is related to its flavonoid components, such as kaempferol and quercetin, which suppressed ROS in the body in both in vitro and in vivo models
The flavonoid fraction is responsible for the antioxidant effect through direct ROS scavenging, chelation of pro-oxidative heavy metal ions, and increased expression of antioxidant proteins, such as superoxide dismutase (SOD) and glutathione reductase (GSH)
G. biloba also reduces lipid peroxidation in the hippocampus, which has been shown in rats
The antioxidant effect of flavonoids may result directly from increased activity of the cytochrome P-450 enzyme system, which reduces the formation of ROS and inhibits the release of peroxide anions
Other components that determine the antioxidant effect of G. biloba is the group of ginkgolids, characterized by an inhibitory effect on the peroxidation of lipids, being antagonists platelet aggregation factor (PAF)-a factor initiating the formation of ROS.
Ginkgolide B, which plays the main role as scavenger and ROS inhibitor, turned out to be particularly active
It reduces the activity of constitutive and inducible nitric oxide synthesis (cNOS and iNOS) and the permeability of the blood-brain barrier, which may be of particular importance in the prevention of cerebral edema
Ginkgolide B, decreased the level of reactive oxygen and nitrogen species (ROS/RNS) in human IMR-32 and SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma cells
The specific structure of the polyphenols contained in EGb 761 allows them to capture superoxide anions, hydroxyl radicals and peroxide radicals
EGb 761 extract blocks Aβ-induced cell apoptosis as a consequence of oxidative stress
Treatment of mice with EGb 761 for a period of 2 weeks at a dose of 100 mg/kg resulted in a decrease in apoptosis of lymphocytes in the spleen of young (3 months old) and older (24 months old) animals
In the anti-apoptotic effect, apart from ROS scavenging and inhibition of lipid peroxidation, the inhibition of caspase 3 plays a major role (Sienkiewicz-Jarosz and Ślusarska, 2003).
This component also improves angiogenesis through the endothelial nitric oxide synthesis pathway

Mitochondrial Changes in AD
In the pathogenesis of AD, more and more attention has been focused on mitochondrial dysfunction.
Abnormalities in the functioning of mitochondria are related to the pathological changes observed in AD
The impaired function of these organelles reduces the production of ATP, leading to cell apoptosis
Mitochondria, and in particular mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA), are the primary targets of ROS interactions.
MtDNA accumulating in mammalian tissues undergoes at least 10 times more damage from ROS than nuclear DNA.
One reason for this is the lack of protective histones and effective repair systems in mtDNA, which results in greater susceptibility to various types of mutations or oxidative damage.
The change in mitochondrial function is caused mainly by: 1) aging of the body, 2) overproduction of ROS, 3) overload of Ca 2+ ions due to their increased uptake from the cytoplasm.
These factors lead mainly to a change in the potential of the mitochondrial membrane and its greater permeability, as well as a change in cellular respiratory activity, resulting in an inhibition of mitochondrial respiration
Cell aging also causes an increase in edema and changes in the structure of the mitochondria.
Such damage is manifested in the vacuolization of the matrix, damage to the mitochondrial membrane, shortening of the mitochondrial crest.
Mitochondrial dysfunction is also associated with decreased activity of mitochondrial enzymes
Such changes of mitochondria in the brain have been observed in the earlier and later stages of AD, which has been classified as one of the main causes of this disease
The mitochondrial cascade hypothesis for AD states that dysfunction is an important common pathomechanism for the entire spectrum of age-related memory disorders.
The most important assumption of this hypothesis probably concerns the very early stages of mitochondrial dysfunction caused by oxidative stress causing aging and a slight increase in Aβ levels
The aging process of cells is associated with an excessive production of nitric oxide (NO), which reacts with mitochondrial complex IV, causing the inhibition of the respiratory chain.
Complex IV may temporarily increase leakage of the superoxide anion from the electron transport chain.
The resulting peroxide can then react with NO to form peroxynitrite, which is especially dangerous to mitochondrial enzymes.
Consequently, this leads to a reduction in ATP formation and a reduction in the potential of the mitochondrial membrane
The most visible defect in the mitochondrial electron transport system in AD is the deficiency of cytochrome C oxidase activity (complex IV), which has been demonstrated in postmortem tissues of human and animal brains.
The decrease in ATP synthesis by complex V may initiate apoptosis

G. biloba Vs Mitochondrial Function
EGb 761 has a broad pharmacological activity mainly due to its ROS scavenging properties and its direct protective effect on mitochondria
EGb 761 protects neurons from the β-toxicity that causes mitochondrial dysfunction as well as respiratory chain complex deficiencies and apoptosis
EGb 761 has an effect on the plasticity of neurons, demonstrating long-term synaptic enhancement (LPT), which was observed in the hippocampus of older mice compared to younger animals
When used, it reduces oxidative stress, improving mitochondrial respiration
The effectiveness of G. biloba against complexes I, IV and V of the mitochondrial respiratory chain was observed against senescent cells obtained from two age groups of mice with induced nitrosation stress.
The animals were treated with EGb 761 for a period of 14 days at a dose of 100 mg/kg.
The effect was only visible in relation to cells obtained from older animals, which proved that the extract is effective against senescent cells
Under the influence of EGb 761, the levels of ROS in the brains of the older mice were also reduced by increasing the production of ATP in neurons.
The long-term influence of EGb 761 on mitochondria is manifested in the regulation of energy metabolism deficits caused by Aβ
EGb 761 protects against the oxidation of mitochondrial glutathione and the increase of production of peroxide by these organelles.
The antioxidant effect is related to removal of the superoxide anion and the hydroxyl radical, which consequently prevents lipid peroxidation in the mitochondrial membranes.
EGb 761 reduces the production of ROS in the mitochondria and protects the mitochondrial complexes of the respiratory chain and increases the availability of ATP
The components of EGb 761 that play a key role in reducing ROS are flavonoids, characterized by a high antioxidant potential
These substances are mainly attributed a protective effect on mtDNA
Bilobalid, rutin, quercetin and quercitrin inhibit the hypoxia-induced decrease in ATP content, stimulating the rate of mitochondrial respiration
Terpenes such as: ginkgolide B and J also prevent Aβ-induced mitochondrial dysfunction while reducing intracellular ROS production
Considering the fact that the flavonoid fraction constitutes 24% of the extract and the terpene fraction 6%, each of the ingredients used showed a protective effect.
The most effective fractions were ginkgolide J and the entire flavonoid fraction, which stabilized the potential of the mitochondrial membrane of the brain cells by 109 and 106%, respectively.
The lowest protective effect was shown by ginkgolide A
Bilobalid increased cellular glucose uptake, regulated the process of its oxidation, prevented decoupling of the individual stages of oxygen phosphorylation, which in turn prevented a decrease in ATP levels and its further consequences, such as ionic disturbances or mitochondrial dysfunction
A consequence of the protective effect of EGb 761 on the mitochondrial respiratory chain complex is the improvement in neuronal functions previously impaired as a result of aging, hypoxia, hypoglycemia or an increase in Aβ

Neuroprotective Effect of G. biloba
Loss of neurons is a factor of cognitive deficit in AD
EGb 761 extract has a neuroprotective effect, including: inhibiting the inflammatory process
The exact mechanism of G. biloba neuroprotective effect at the cellular level, is not fully understood, but include: 1) scavenging of free radicals, 2) improving mitochondrial function, 3) reducing blood viscosity, 4) serotonin levels modulation in various regions of the brain, 5) increasing the level of dopamine in the prefrontal cortex
EGb 761 extract administered intraperitoneally to mice (20, 50 and 100 mg/kg/day for a period of 7 days) before or after treatment with 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP), protected the nigrostriatal dopaminergic pathway (nigrostriatal dopaminergic) with a decrease in monoamine oxidase (MAO) activity in the brain
Administration of EGb 761 for 7 days in the middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO)-induced focal cerebral damage I/R model in rats resulted in an improvement in neurological deficits by reduction of the content of malondialdehyde (MDA) and pro-inflammatory cytokinins tumor necrosis factor (TNFα) and interleukin 1β (IL-1β) while increasing the level of anti-inflammatory cytokinin interleukin 10 (IL-10).
This study also noted the activity of SOD and myeloperoxidase (MPO)
Consequently, combination therapy with BMSCs and EGb 761 showed an synergistic effect in animals with experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis through inhibition of pro-inflammatory cytokines, demyelination and protection of axons and neurons.

Microglia Function in AD
Microglial cells play an important role in the development and prevention of many diseases of the central nervous system, such as AD
Microglia are non-neuronal cells of the central nervous system that control homeostasis and are involved in the immune response.
Microglia activation, which causes tissue damage, is associated with an increase in the level of immune function factors.
Microglial cells are extremely sensitive to brain damage
They can participate in disease processes by secreting Aβ.
Reactive microglia can influence the development of AD disease through increased secretion of interleukin (IL-1), which in turn causes increased expression of APP and α-antichymotrypsin, which are components of senile plaques
Inflammation is of key importance in the development of AD, as confirmed by epidemiological studies on the inhibition of progression of AD in people taking antiinflammatory drugs
Nerve tissue inflammation is a key factor in AD, increasing microglia activation.
On one hand, microglia causes the loss of neurons through the release of pro-inflammatory cytokines, and on the other, they have beneficial effects in the form of neuronal repair
It seems reasonable to say that the maintenance of nerve cell homeostasis depends on a certain balance between pro and anti-inflammatory activation, in which microglial cells participate
Proper microglia function is also related to the brain's ability to maintain proteostasis.
The reason for this not happening may be a weakened primary immunity and a lack of broad scope for the development of secondary immunity in the brain tissue compared to other tissues.
As a consequence, they can damage the delicate mechanism of central nervous system homeostasis.
Supporting the nervous system in its natural ability to utilize the beta amyloid and plaques without exacerbating inflammatory features is currently one of the lines of work in the treatment of AD
Perhaps natural pharmacotherapy has such properties, but that requires more extensive research.

G. biloba vs. Microglia
Inflammatory responses resulting from Aβ deposition in the cerebral parenchyma are mediated by numerous mechanisms, including microglia activation and inflammasome activation
An inflammatory process mediated by microglia in the central nervous system plays an important role in the loss of neurons in various neurodegenerative diseases, including AD
The use of EGb 761 significantly increases the microglia around amyloid plaques.
Microglia releases cytotoxic mediators such as IL-1β, IL-6 and TNFα, causing pro-inflammatory reactions, however, antiinflammatory cytokines such as IL-4, IL-13 and Arg-1 are also secreted in microglia activation.
The use of EGb 761 significantly reduces the above-mentioned cytotoxic mediators, which were found in the brains of animals supplemented with EGb 761.
On the other hand, the level of anti-inflammatory cytokines such as IL-4, IL-13 and TGFβ was significantly increased.
Upregulation of anti-inflammatory factors with simultaneous downregulation of pro-inflammatory cytokines suggests that EGb 761 may be sensitive to the microglia phenotype.
This hypothesis is adopted by
M1 marker iNOS was decreased and the M2 marker Arg-1 was increased in chronic EGb 761 treated mice
More evidence for the reduction of the proinflammatory response by EGb 761 is the inhibition of microglial inflammatory responses using BV2 microglial cell lines, which, assessed by qPCR, showed a significant increase in pro-inflammatory cytokines TNFα, IL-1β and IL-6 compared to control cells.
Moreover, supplementation with EGb 761 increased the levels of mRNA, macrophage inflammatory protein-1 alpha (MIP-1α) and monocyte chemo attractant protein-1 (MCP-1)
EGb 761 extract strongly inhibits LPS-induced prostaglandin E2 (PGE 2) production mediated by cyclooxygenase 2 (COX-2) and other pro-inflammatory mediators such as TNF-α, IL-6 and IL-1β in studies in rats
Long-term binding of EGb 761 can reduce the pathology of Aβ by acting to inhibit β-secretase activity and Aβ aggregation.
A positive effect of EGb 761 extract was also shown in reducing chronic inflammation of the colon in mice, inhibiting macrophage activation and reducing inflammation by lowering inflammatory markers such as: iNOS, COX-2, TNF-α.
Moreover, it was shown that the EGb 761 extract reduced the number of T cells such as CD4 +/CD25-/Foxp3 in the colon
EGb 761 reduced the activity of cyclooxygenase 1 (COX-1) and cyclooxygenase 2 (COX-2), which influenced the selective inhibition of thromboxane A2 mediated by COX-1 in platelets, and the production of prostaglandin I2 (PGI 2) mediated by COX-2 in endothelial cells
Free cholesterol may be involved in the production of Aβ protein and APP
This thesis was confirmed by
In the pathogenesis of AD, one of the main causes is oxidative stress, as a result of which the products of glycation and lipid peroxidation are formed.
It also leads to an increase in the activity of beta and gamma secretases, which stimulate platelet activation, which in turn increases the oxidative stress itself.
There is also an increase in NO production.
GB derivatives counteract these phenomena by direct trapping of ROS, chelation of active metal ions, delivery of antioxidant proteins, reduction of lipid peroxidation and NO synthesis-mainly with the help of the flavonoid and ginkgolide fractions.
The derivatives also reduce oxidative stress by increasing the expression of antioxidant enzyme genes and inhibiting caspase 3. Another element in the pathogenesis of AD is mitochondrial dysfunction.
In the disease, ATP production decreases, which accelerates cell apoptosis.
The damaging effect of ROS on mitochondrial DNA is also reported.
The pathogenesis involves swelling, expansion of the mitochondrial matrix and damage to the mitochondrial membranes, as well as the shortening of mitochondrial crests, which is accompanied by a decrease in the activity of mitochondrial enzymes.
NO produced through oxidative stress, reacts with the fourth mitochondrial complex and leads to a reduction in ATP production.
GB derivatives counteract the mitochondrial dysfunction indirectly by limiting oxidative stress in general.
Directly GB derivates react by decreasing ROS production, protection of mitochondrial DNA, supporting ATP availability, protection against platelet production and accumulation as well as protection of mitochondrial complexes themselves: 1,4,5.
They also reduce lipid peroxidation.
At the level of microglial function in AD, these cells of the immune system are activated due to inflammation, which leads to an increase in pro-inflammatory cytokines: IL1 and expression of APP as well as alpha antichymotrypsin.
On the other hand, microglia activation also triggers neuronal repair mechanisms.
GB derivatives support the accumulation of microglia around amyloid plaques, and also lead to a reduction in the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines (IL1β, IL6, TNFα) and to increase the production of anti-inflammatory cytokines (IL4, IL13, TGFβ).

Frontiers in

Memory and Cognition in AD
Cognitive decline is recognized as one of the main symptoms of AD.
In the elderly, the prefrontal cortex plays a key role in cognitive function, where prefrontal dopaminergic innervation decreases with age.
This results in a decrease in the control of cognitive functions, i.e., cognitive flexibility, goal retention, inhibition of habitual or impulsive reactions and prospective memory

The Role of G. biloba in Improving Cognitive Functions
The primary clinical application of EGb 761 includes improvement of cerebral and peripheral circulation as well as a positive effect on neurosensory dysfunction
Numerous studies have confirmed the beneficial effects of EGb 761 and other standardized G. biloba leaf extracts on cognition and age-related problems with memory and concentration.
EGb 761 showed a beneficial effects in both healthy and AD subjects (Table
The main reasons for the improvement in memory and cognitive functions after the use of G. biloba include: increased blood flow in the brain, protective effect against peroxidation of brain lipids, easier utilization of oxygen and glucose by brain cells, reduction of amyloid plaque deposition
G. biloba affects several neurotransmitter pathways, as demonstrated by studies in rats administered EGb 761 for 14 days.
The extract also reduced stress-induced excessive corticosterone secretion by reducing the number of peripheral benzodiazepine adrenal receptors
EGb 761 can effectively reduce the activity of MAO, as well as increasing the level of dopamine, especially in the prefrontal cortex
The dopamine-boosting effect is probably based on a mild inhibition of the norepinephrine transporter, a protein mediating the synaptic uptake of the dopamine hormone
An increase in serotonin levels was also observed in the prefrontal cortex and hippocampus of mice that consumed 50-300 mg EGb 761/kg/day for 2-3 weeks
EGb 761 also has a slight inhibitory effect on acetylocholinesterase and therefore will increase cholinergic transmission in the brain
It is believed that the main active substances responsible for improving cognitive functions are 1) ginkgolide, an inhibitor of platelet activating factor, inhibiting thrombocyte aggregation and improving blood circulation
Administration of bilobalide to mice for 4-8 weeks at 100 mg/kg/ day
Bilobalide reduced cytotoxic brain edema in triethylininduced as well as ischemic brain damage in the animals.
Bilobalide prevented the hypoxia of organs and tissues, as well as the activation of phospholipase A2 and the degradation of phospholipids in the hippocampus of rats

SAFETY IN THE USE OF G. BILOBA EXTRACT Application
Due to its broad spectrum of activity, preparations with G. biloba are used frequently, with the most popular being EGb 761 comprising a precisely defined chemical composition
The recommended dosage is 240 mg once daily

Interactions and Toxicity
Supplements with G. biloba may extend the bleeding and clotting time, which is exacerbated by the simultaneous administration of anticoagulants and antiplatelet drugs
biloba.
The use of both preparations together did not extend the bleeding time compared to the administration of ticlopidine alone
A sudden increase in blood pressure may occur with diuretics.
The extract may also enhance the effect of antidepressants such as phenelzine, tranylcypromine and trazodone, causing an increased risk of side effects and even a coma.
When G. biloba is taken simultaneously and for a long time with non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, such as ibuprofen, diclofenac or ketoprofen, an irritating effect on the gastric mucosa may intensify, leading to ulcers and gastrointestinal bleeding
On the other hand, drugs used for gastric ulcers, such as omeprazole, show a reduced effect in the presence of the extract of G. biloba
G. biloba also has a blood sugar elevating effect, so in diabetic patients taking the extract, blood glucose monitoring is recommended
G. biloba extract affects the biotransformation of drugs by affecting the activity of cytochrome P450.
The terpenoid fraction contained in the plant inhibits cytochrome CYP2C9, while the flavonoid fraction reduces the activity of cytochromes CYP2C9, CYP1A2, CYP2E1 and CYP3A4.
In addition, studies have shown the effect of G. biloba and single substances isolated from it on the activity of P-glycoprotein
Such an effect may reduce the rate of drug metabolism due to inhibition of CYP3A, reducing its antihypertensive effect
Markowitz reports that the G. biloba extract in the recommended doses probably does not change the effect of co-administered drugs dependent on the CYP2D6 or CYP3A4 elimination pathways, such as dextromethorphan and alprazolam, which were used at a dose of 120 mg twice a day together with G. biloba extract
In general, the EGb 761 extract is well tolerated and safe up to a dose of 240 mg/day
No side effects were observed when G. biloba extract was administered for 1-3 months at a dose of 120-160 mg/day
In contrast, in a similar study at a dose of 120 mg/day for 52 weeks, gastrointestinal complications were common (Le
The main adverse reaction reported by patients with AD during EGb 761 treatment was a headache
It is generally believed that the use of G. biloba does not show strong side effects, but if they do occur they are mainly: nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, headache and dizziness, weakness, skin rashes, palpitations
So far, no mutagenic, carcinogenic, teratogenic or embryogenic side effects have been demonstrated.
The oral LD50 in mice is 2,100 times the recommended daily dose
EGb 761 contains allergenic and toxic compounds such as 4-O-methylpyridoxin (ginkgotoxin)
Ginkgotoxin is found mainly in the seeds and leaves of G. biloba and is structurally related to vitamin B6, possibly interfering with its synthesis, metabolism and functioning.
Excessive consumption of ginkgotoxin may cause seizures
Ingestion of the seeds can be poisonous, leading to severe allergic skin reactions as well as seizures
Possible nephrotoxicity and hepatotoxicity of other bioflavonoids in G. biloba leaves, such as amentoflavone, sciadopitysin, ginkgetin, isoginkgetin and bilobetin, have also been demonstrated.
In an in vitro cytotoxicity test, these compounds reduced cell viability in human tubular renal epithelial cells (HK-2) and human normal hepatocytes (L-02), indicating potential hepatic and renal toxicity.
In contrast, in the in vivo experiment, phosphatase activity was significantly elevated after mice ingested these substances.
Widespread hydropic degeneration of hepatocytes was observed after administration of ginkgetin and bilobetin
The undoubted advantage of using G. biloba derivatives is indicated by reports on the safety of this drug.
Comparative studies of EGb 761 and donepezil do not show significant differences in the effectiveness of either substance
In a study involving older patients (80 and older), it was found that EGb 761 showed similar procognitive effects to donepezil, while presenting fewer side effects

PERSPECTIVES ON NEW RESEARCH
Multipotent substances acting at many different levels with increased efficacy, a safe profile and an easy administration route in the treatment of AD, are currently being sought.
Recent studies often mention the docking method, which is widely used in the design of multipotent drugs
The pathogenesis of AD is complex and multifactorial, hence the goal of pharmacotherapy should be to influence a number of proteins and enzymes, including NMDA, nitric oxide synthase (NOS), beta secretase 1 (BACE-1), TNFα, mono amine oxidase A (MAO-A), mono amine oxidase B (MAO-B) and butylcholine esterase
Computer models prove the effectiveness of drug selection based on the docking method, especially in the field of the phenolic derivatives contained in EGb 761 and pharmacological targets in AD
Even in 2009, meta-analyses showed inconclusive results in research on the effectiveness of G. biloba
In the latest reports from a metanalysis of research from 1980 to 2020, information is found that EGb 761 may be able to improve cognitive functions in patients suffering from mild dementia while using the drug for a long period of time-more than 24 weeks at an appropriate dose of 240 mg/day
Most authors agree that more extensive randomized trials with varying doses and long follow-up periods are needed.

CONCLUSION
G. biloba derivatives have a proven beneficial effect on cognitive disorders in the course of dementia, including mild and moderate AD.
Unfortunately, there are not many randomized trials proving the clinical effectiveness in AD.
Despite its recognized position in the treatment of neurodegenerative diseases, there is still controversy over the exact mechanism of its action, as well as its clinical effectiveness and application.
It seems reasonable to assume that the effect of G. biloba derivatives will be individual and will depend on the duration of the treatment as well as the applied dose.
So far, no limitations on the use of ginkgo derivatives have been identified.
Perhaps one of the factors determining the effectiveness of a treatment is the patient's sensitivity to a given drug (homogeneity, heterogeneity of the population).
There is also a need for extensive research depending on the severity of the course, genetic condition and dose used in treatment, with long-term follow-ups.



FIGURE 2 |
FIGURE 2 | Factors influencing the development of AD-the most common type of dementia.
Genetic and environmental factors are mentioned as the main risk factors for developing AD.
Apolipoproteins E lead to irregular amyloid β aggregation.
Mutations of genes such as HLA-DRB5-DRB1, INPP5D, MEFLC, PTK2B, CELF1, NME8, CASS4 and FERMT2 may induce the dysfunctions of brain physiological processes.
Other factors such as hypertension, obesity, diabetes, blood circulation disorders, oxidative stress and inflammation, also influence AD progression.
People over the age of 65 years, especially postmenopausal women, are more predisposed to AD development.



FIGURE 3 |
FIGURE 3 | Groups of active compounds contained in GB (G.
biloba) leaves with examples of chemical structures.
The groups are terpenoids, phenolic acids, phytosterols, carotenoids, organic acids.
GB is also a valuable source of a large group of flavonoids including biflavones, flavonols, flavones, flavanonols as well as flavan-3-ols as catechins or proanthocyanidins.



FIGURE 4 |
FIGURE 4 | Chemical structures of the major active compounds in G. biloba leaves.
(A)-bilobalide, (B)-ginkgolide, (C)-isorhamnetin, (D)-kaempferol, (E)-quercetin.Ginkgolides contained in GB belong to the group of diterpenes, whereas bilobalide to sesquiterpenes.
The main flavonols of GB leaves are kaempferol, quercetin and isorhamnetin



FIGURE 5 |
FIGURE 5 |The main components of EGb 761 and their possible uses.
EGb 761 is enriched with active substances and contains flavonoids (22-27%), terpene lactones group (5-7%) including bilobalide (2.6-3.2%) and ginkgolides A, B, C (2.8-3.4%),
organic acids, proanthocyanidins, with a reduced content of ginkgolic acid (≤5 ppm).
The extract could be applied in the treatment of balance disorders, tinnitus, vertigo, intellectual dysfunction, memory impairment and others.



FIGURE 6 |
FIGURE 6 | Alzheimer's disease pathogenesis and possible activity of Ginkgo biloba derivatives.
In the pathogenesis of AD, one of the main causes is oxidative stress, as a result of which the products of glycation and lipid peroxidation are formed.
It also leads to an increase in the activity of beta and gamma secretases, which stimulate platelet activation, which in turn increases the oxidative stress itself.
There is also an increase in NO production.
GB derivatives counteract these phenomena by direct trapping of ROS, chelation of active metal ions, delivery of antioxidant proteins, reduction of lipid peroxidation and NO synthesis-mainly with the help of the flavonoid and ginkgolide fractions.
The derivatives also reduce oxidative stress by increasing the expression of antioxidant enzyme genes and inhibiting caspase 3. Another element in the pathogenesis of AD is mitochondrial dysfunction.
In the disease, ATP production decreases, which accelerates cell apoptosis.
The damaging effect of ROS on mitochondrial DNA is also reported.
The pathogenesis involves swelling, expansion of the mitochondrial matrix and damage to the mitochondrial membranes, as well as the shortening of mitochondrial crests, which is accompanied by a decrease in the activity of mitochondrial enzymes.
NO produced through oxidative stress, reacts with the fourth mitochondrial complex and leads to a reduction in ATP production.
GB derivatives counteract the mitochondrial dysfunction indirectly by limiting oxidative stress in general.
Directly GB derivates react by decreasing ROS production, protection of mitochondrial DNA, supporting ATP availability, protection against platelet production and accumulation as well as protection of mitochondrial complexes themselves: 1,4,5.
They also reduce lipid peroxidation.
At the level of microglial function in AD, these cells of the immune system are activated due to inflammation, which leads to an increase in pro-inflammatory cytokines: IL1 and expression of APP as well as alpha antichymotrypsin.
On the other hand, microglia activation also triggers neuronal repair mechanisms.
GB derivatives support the accumulation of microglia around amyloid plaques, and also lead to a reduction in the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines (IL1β, IL6, TNFα) and to increase the production of anti-inflammatory cytokines (IL4, IL13, TGFβ).


Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org
November 2021 | Volume 12 | Article 775034



TABLE 1 |
Effect of G. biloba extracts EGb 761 on cognitive functions.