Deciphering the Roles of Metformin in Alzheimer’s Disease: A Snapshot
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a prevalent neurodegenerative disease predominantly affecting millions of elderly people.
To date, no effective therapy has been identified to reverse the progression of AD.
Metformin, as a first-line medication for Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus (T2DM), exerts multiple beneficial effects on various neurodegenerative disorders, including AD.
Evidence from clinical studies has demonstrated that metformin use contributes to a lower risk of developing AD and better cognitive performance, which might be modified by interactors such as diabetic status and APOE-ε4 status.
Previous mechanistic studies have gradually unveiled the effects of metformin on AD pathology and pathophysiology, including neuronal loss, neural dysfunction, amyloid-β (Aβ) depositions, tau phosphorylation, chronic neuroinflammation, insulin resistance, impaired glucose metabolism and mitochondrial dysfunction.
Current evidence remains ambiguous and even conflicting.
Herein, we review the current state of knowledge concerning the mechanisms of metformin in AD pathology while summarizing current evidence from clinical studies.

INTRODUCTION
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a neurodegenerative disease characterized by a progressive decline of cognitive functions, such as memory and learning, sometimes accompanied by behavioral and psychological symptoms
With a high morbidity, disability and fatality rate, AD significantly increase global healthcare burden.
Unfortunately, its neuropathological hallmarks, amyloid-β (Aβ) plaques and neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs) appear decades before the occurrence of cognitive impairment
To date, no effective therapy has been identified to reverse or slow down the progression of AD and improve its clinical outcomes
Therefore, early identification of people at higher risk of developing AD and early intervention are now the most practical strategies to reduce AD burden.
A broader perspective on the treatment is also urgently needed.
Increasing evidence suggests a positive association between Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus (T2DM) and the risk of developing AD
Impaired insulin signaling and glucose metabolism, two key mechanisms involved in T2DM, have been found to contribute to AD pathogenesis and progression
Researchers have even proposed the term "Type-3-Diabetes" for AD due to the significant association
Intranasal insulin has been considered as a promising candidate for AD prevention and treatment due to its safety and current encouraging clinical evidence on its effectiveness
As for other anti-diabetic drugs, including dipeptidyl peptidase (DPP)-IV inhibitors and Glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) analogues, they were found to decrease neuroinflammation, Aβ load and tau phosphorylation in experimental studies, while clinical evidence is still lacking
Metformin, one of the first-line medications for T2DM, is a biguanide that lowers plasma glucose concentration mainly by improving insulin resistance and suppressing gluconeogenesis in the liver.
Recent studies have further discovered its antiinflammatory, anti-apoptotic and anti-oxidative effects
It is also confirmed that metformin can rapidly cross the blood-brain barrier (BBB) and accumulate in different brain regions
Metformin is now regarded as a magic drug that might benefit various diseases, including AD
Current studies on the effects of metformin on AD and the underlying mechanisms remain limited and controversial.
It is also necessary to take its adverse effects into consideration before regarding metformin as a candidate for AD prevention and earlystage treatment.
Moreover, it is important to confirm the cognitive safety of long-term metformin use in T2DM patients.
The present review is to summarize the current knowledge on this topic and proposes promising directions for further research.

SEARCH STRATEGY AND SELECTION CRITERIA
We initially searched PubMed from inception to June 2021 for English-only publications using predefined search terms for metformin and Alzheimer's disease.
We also reviewed the reference list of relevant articles.
We included published observational studies and clinical trials exploring the cognitive effect of metformin on people with T2DM or cognitive impairment.
As for preclinical studies, we included in vitro studies and in vivo studies using AD or diabetic or wild-type mouse models.
When summarizing the evidence, further search was conducted to collect background information on the mentioned underlying mechanisms such as the association of AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK)

MECHANISMS LINKING METFORMIN WITH AD The Effects of Metformin on Neuronal Loss and Neural Dysfunction
Metformin treatment was shown to inhibit neuronal loss, the direct cause of cognitive deficits in AD, by promoting neurogenesis and inhibiting pathological neuronal apoptosis in the hippocampus of amyloid precursor protein/presenilin-1 (APP/PS1) mice
Similarly, Chen and others reported that metformin could ameliorate Aβinduced apoptosis in hippocampal neurons by suppressing c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) activation
Another in vitro study demonstrated that in db/db mice, metformin treatment could suppress the activation of caspase-3, one of the essential mediators of apoptosis
In human neural stem cells (hNSCs), co-treatment with metformin restored the Aβ-induced increase in caspase 3/9 activity and cytosolic cytochrome c released from mitochondria in an AMPK-dependent manner, probably leading to a suppression of apoptosis
Metformin was also found to decrease apoptotic cell death induced by Aβ 25-35 in SH-SY5Y cells
However, Picone et al. observed promoted neuronal apoptosis by metformin in the cortex of C57B6/J mice
Further preclinical studies are warranted to probe the underlying mechanisms and the safety of metformin among nondiabetic and non-AD subjects.
Protein kinase C (PKC) has been known to affect insulin function and memory formation by promoting synaptogenesis
Furthermore, Syal et al. reported that the activated aPKC-CBP pathway by metformin treatment could reverse impairment of neurogenesis and spatial memory in the 3xTg-AD mouse model by decreasing the expression of monoacylglycerol lipase (Mgll), a hydrolaseproducing arachidonic acid (ARA) precursor pool, through degrading endocannabinoid 2-arachidonoyl glycerol (2-AG).
Mgll was further considered as a potential biomarker to help identify metformin-responsive AD patients
Metformin was also found to markedly increase the expression of neurotrophic and synapse-related factors (Bdnf, Ngf and Syp) in the brain of APP/PS1 mice
Pilipenko reported that metformin could restore hippocampal synaptic plasticity in streptozocin (STZ)-induced sporadic AD rats
In APP/PS1 mice, metformin was shown to improve synaptic defects, including spine loss, inhibit basal synaptic transmission and decrease the expression of surface GluA1 by suppressing the overactivation of cyclin-dependent kinase 5 (Cdk5), which play a critical role in synaptic plasticity
Chen et al. found that metformin potentiated glutamatergic synaptic transmission onto the hippocampal CA1 pyramidal neurons in C57BJ/6 mice
This promotion by metformin may improve the dysfunction of glutamatergic synapses, which appear in the early stage of AD

The Effects of Metformin on Aβ Pathology
The insulin-degrading enzyme (IDE), the protease that cleaves βforming peptides such as insulin and Aβ, plays a major role in the crosstalk between T2DM and AD
They also observed a slightly decreased expression of β-secretase BACE1 (one of the key enzymes responsible for the cleavage of APP to produce Aβ) and no significant change in the expression of other Aβ-related secretases (A Disintegrin and metalloproteinase domain-containing protein 10 (ADAM10) and PS1) and transporters (lipoprotein receptor-related protein (LRP1) and receptor for advanced glycation end products (RAGE))
Ou et al. reported a reduction in BACE1 expression and amyloid plaque accumulation in the hippocampus and cortex of APP/PS1 mice treated with metformin.
The reduction was mediated through regulating the AMPK/mTOR/S6K/BACE1 signaling pathway
It is noteworthy that AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) is critical in regulating the effect of metformin on AD pathology (Figure
Previous studies have demonstrated the ability of metformin to activate AMPK thus exerting various effects, including a possible neuroprotective effect on AD pathology
As for Aβ transport, Chen et al. reported that metformin could decrease RAGE expression and Aβ influx across the BBB, restoring the abnormal Aβ transport in db/db mice
However, a previous in vitro study showed that metformin alone exerted no significant effect on IDE but up-regulated AMPKdependent BACE1 expression to increase Aβ generation in N2a695 cells overexpressing APP.
A combination with insulin reversed the deleterious effect of metformin, suggesting an important regulatory role of insulin in metformin function
Similarly, overexpression of APP and PS1 in LAN5 neuroblastoma cells treated with metformin was suppressed by insulin.
In C57B6/J mice, metformin activated AMPK and increase the levels of APP and BACE1, thus promoting the production of Aβ in the cortex
Metformin was also found to directly interact with Aβ, leading to the alteration of its aggregation profiles, including a reduction of harmless mature fibrils and stabilization of toxic prefibrillar oligomers, suggesting an increase in Aβ toxicity

The Effects of Metformin on Tau Pathology
The underlying mechanisms behind the complex effects of metformin on tau pathology remain elusive.
Metformin played paradoxical roles in tauopathy in the brain of mutant human tau (P301S) transgenic mice, including phosphorylation-suppressing and pro-aggregation effects; the former benefit seemed to be weakened by the latter harm
Kickstein et al. also verified the ability of metformin to decrease tau phosphorylation at Ser202 both in vitro and in vivo, which was dependent on the activation of the mTOR/ protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A) signaling pathway and unrelated to AMPK activation
Metformin injection for 18 weeks attenuated the increase of phospho-tau phosphorylated at Ser396 and Thr231 in the hippocampus of obese, leptin-resistant mice with ADassociated brain changes through suppressing the activation of JNK instead of attenuating the decrease of PP2A
Metformin was also found to restrict the spreading of tau pathology and reduce Aβ plaques in APP/PS1 mice injected with tau seeds, probably through promoting microglial autophagy of the two pathologies
However, Zhang et al. reported that chronic metformin administration increased tau phosphorylation in old ApoEtarget replacement (TR) mice, probably through increasing the phosphorylation of GSK-3β at Tyr216
Similarly, Kuhla et al. also reported a metformin-induced increase in tau phosphorylation in ApoE deficient (ApoE -/-) mice, a mouse model of tauopathy
Further research is needed to confirm whether ApoE genotypes can modify the effects of metformin.

The Effects of Metformin on Neuroinflammation
Accumulating data have revealed the ability of metformin to modulate chronic neuroinflammation (one of the core pathologies in AD).
This includes sustained activation of immune cells such as microglia and increased proinflammatory cytokines
Previous studies have proposed that metformin could effectively reduce the levels of proinflammatory cytokines such as tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-α), interleukin 1 beta (IL-1β) and IL-6, in the brain of APP/PS1 mice, which could be attributed to the activation of AMPK/P65 NF-κB signaling pathways observed in the hippocampus
Nuclear factor-kappa B (NF-κB) is a well-known pro-inflammatory transcription factor involved in abnormal neuroinflammation in AD
Ou et al. also observed decreased accumulation of activated microglia and astrocytes around Aβ plaques in metformin-treated APP/PS1 mice
In a mouse model with STZ-induced sporadic AD, microgliosis and astrogliosis were also improved by metformin
Interestingly, Chen et al. reported enhanced microgliosis around Aβ plaques, promoted microglial phagocytosis and ameliorated autophagy of tau aggregates in metformin-treated APP/PS1 mice initially injected with tau aggregates
It has been suggested that moderate activation of autophagy is critical in the clearance of protein aggregates, thus delaying progression in the early stage of AD
The difference in microglia activation might be associated with injected tau aggregates stimulation.

The Effects of Metformin on Insulin Resistance and Glucose Metabolism
Mounting evidence has supported a robust correlation between insulin resistance and neurodegenerative changes in AD, such as Aβ accumulation and tau phosphorylation
It is well established that metformin can alleviate hyperinsulinemia and insulin resistance, secondarily, improving metabolic dysfunction
Considering the ability of metformin to cross the BBB, it is reasonable to speculate that metformin may directly improve AD-related impairment of insulin signaling and glucose metabolism in the CNS.
Gupta et al. reported that metformin treatment could alleviate the insulin resistance and AD-related pathological changes induced by hyper-insulinemic exposure in neuronal cell lines
Glucose hypometabolism has been acknowledged as a key pathophysiological characteristic of AD
Metformin effectively increased brain glucose uptake in APP/ PS1 mice
Glucose transporters (GLUTs) deficiency is one of the main causes of the decreased glucose metabolism.
GLUT-1 is mainly expressed in BBB endothelial cells and thus plays a crucial role in the glucose transport across the BBB.
GLUT-3 is expressed in neurons, and thus it is in charge of glucose uptake into neurons
Glycogen synthase kinase-3 (GSK-3) is associated with the impairment of glucose tolerance
In rats with STZinduced sporadic AD, metformin elevated the density of GLUT-1 and GLUT-3 but decreased the density of GSK-3 in the hippocampus and cortex, suggesting a normalization of brain glucose transport and uptake
Niccoli et al. reported that metformin could mimic the impact of overexpressed GLUT-1 to increase neuronal glucose uptake in the adult-onset Drosophila model
Thus, metformin treatment could considerably restore the impaired glucose metabolism in the brain.

Other Effects of Metformin on AD
The anti-oxidative property of metformin also plays a vital role in ameliorating AD pathology.
In APP/PS1 mice, the increase in superoxide dismutase (SOD) activity and malondialdehyde (MDA) level was attenuated by metformin administration
In rats with scopolamine-induced cognitive impairment, metformin decreased the level of nitric oxide (NO) and MDA in the frontal cortical and hippocampal tissues
Metformin was also found to inhibit the elevated levels of inflammation and endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress by high glucose treatment through suppressing the interaction between AMPKα and caveolin1 in primary rat astrocytes
Mitochondrial dysfunction has been identified as an early event of AD
Exposure to Aβ could result in an impairment of mitochondrial function and morphology in hNSCs.
Co-treatment with metformin, however, was found to protect against the impairment, which was dependent on AMPK activation
An in vivo study using SAMP8 mice of sporadic AD reported that metformin decreased the level of APPc99 and pTau404 expression, which was associated with improved mitochondrial function in previous studies
However, metformin treatment for 3 months was found to increase the levels of the translocase of the outer membrane 40 (TOM40), hexokinase I (HKI) and voltage-dependent anion-selective channels 1 (VDAC) and influence their conformation in the cortex region of C57B6/J mice, suggesting impairment of mitochondrial permeability transition pores and membrane channels, thereby leading to mitochondrial dysfunction
Growing evidence has indicated an anti-degenerative benefit from the inhibition of acetylcholinesterase (AChE), the enzyme secreted into the synaptic cleft to inactivate acetylcholine (ACh) by cholinergic neurons
Gupta found that metformin could inhibit the increase of AChE activity by 34.9% in insulin-resistant neuroblastoma cells
Bhutada et al. reported a decrease in the activity of choline esterase (ChE) after chronic metformin treatment in the hippocampus of rats with STZ-induced diabetes
In the rat model of STZ-induced sporadic AD, metformin inhibited AChE activity in the hippocampal CA1 and CA3.
Interestingly, metformin alone increased AChE activity in similar regions of non-AD rats

CLINICAL EVIDENCE
Current epidemiological studies regarding the effects of metformin on the risk of AD remain still scanty and contradictory (Table
Most studies set the outcome as the onset of all-cause cognitive dysfunctions such as dementia and the participants as T2DM patients.
A meta-analysis conducted in 2018 have shown that treatment with metformin could effectively lower the risk of subsequent dementia by 34% in elderly people with T2DM
Consistently, a recent longitudinal study among community-dwelling diabetic patients in Finland suggested that long-term high-dose metformin use could decrease the risk of AD in elderly diabetic patients
Similarly,
Interestingly, this association was not observed among the APOE ε4 carriers, which implied an interaction between APOE ε4 carrier status and metformin
Compared with sulfonylurea, metformin could significantly lower the risk of dementia only among T2DM patients aged 75 or younger who were white, or had good renal function or HbA1C values ≥ 7%
These findings have implied that it is necessary to identify the subgroups of people that can benefit from metformin use for the prevention of cognitive impairment.
Metformin was also found to have a greater preventive effect than thiazolidinediones
A combination of metformin and sulfonylurea could reduce the risk of dementia by 35% compared with no medication use, exhibiting better safety and efficacy
A previous case-control study by
The cases and controls were not matched on diabetes diagnosis, which was in fact an important confounder in this study, likely leading to this inconsistent finding.
Several studies have also investigated whether metformin could exert a cognitive benefit in patients with cognitive impairment (Table
There have been two small-scale randomized clinical trials showing positive results.
Luchsinger et al. found that metformin 1,000 mg twice a day for 12 months could result in greater improvement than placebo use in selective reminding test (SRT) as well as a statistically nonsignificant increase of plasma Aβ 42 in overweight patients with amnestic mild cognitive impairment (aMCI)
Another randomized crossover study patients with MCI or mild dementia due to AD suggested that metformin use could contribute to an improvement of executive function
However, in the longitudinal study by
Further analysis showed an association between metformin use and faster decline in delayed memory among the APOE ε4 carriers, implying that the adverse interaction between metformin and APOE-ε4 genotype or AD pathology might neutralize the neuroprotective effect of metformin itself
A small-scale crosssectional study reported an association between metformin use and worse cognitive performance among diabetic patients, which might be mediated by vitamin B 12 deficiency
The contradictions in the findings above might stem from the insufficient sample sizes of clinical trials and different diabetic status of participants.
In conclusion, current evidence has mainly suggested a cognitive benefit of metformin among cognitive normal T2DM patients while its cognitive effect on T2DM patients with AD seems negative.
The underlying mechanisms of the adverse interaction between metformin and APOE-ε4 genotype or AD pathology need to be uncovered.
Further works are warranted to identify the characteristics of people who benefit from metformin for the prevention or treatment of cognitive impairment.
Largescale, placebo-controlled randomized clinical trials are also needed to determine whether these effects can be generalized among population without T2DM.
It will provide valuable insights into the underlying mechanisms if measuring AD biomarkers such as Aβ, phosphorylated tau (p-tau) and total tau (t-tau) in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and brain atrophy in future clinical research.

CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE PERSPECTIVES
This review mainly focuses on the clinical and mechanistic evidence on the effects of metformin on AD.
The specific mechanisms linking T2DM to AD and the general pharmacological mechanisms are reviewed briefly.
Most clinical evidence has suggested that metformin, as a firstline glucose-lowering medication, helps lower the risk of AD among people with T2DM.
Potential explanations include an improvement in the various macrovascular disorders associated with T2DM and the specific neuroprotective function of metformin reviewed above
It is important to note that the effect of metformin on AD pathology is independent of glycemic control.
However, current evidence failed to support the therapeutic role of metformin.
Although most animal studies have suggested a neuroprotective role of metformin among APP/PS1 mice, clinical studies found no significant cognitive benefit of metformin among subjects with cognitive impairment due to AD
Both preclinical and clinical studies have implied an interaction between metformin and ApoE carrier status
Moreover, there are no studies probing the impact of metformin on non-diabetes subjects with normal cognitive function.
It is necessary to identify the characteristics of people who get protection from metformin against AD.
The modifiers such as APOE-ε4 genotype should also be taken into consideration when prescribing antidiabetic medication.
It would be interesting to compare the effects generated by metformin and insulin treatment since there has been encouraging evidence suggesting the effectiveness of intranasal insulin treatment in AD
It is still unclear about the interactions between metformin and other common anti-AD drugs.
Further investigation is needed to demonstrate whether their combination can be more effective in the fight against AD.
The poor oral absorption and gastrointestinal adverse effects significantly limited the clinical application of metformin.
Researchers have attempted to design and synthesize prodrugs of metformin with higher lipophilicity to improve permeability and passive transcellular absorption.
There have been several lipophilic sulfenamide prodrugs designed and shown to achieve better absorption
Furthermore, Rautio et al. synthesized novel sulfonamide prodrugs that would only be bioactivated by glutathione-Stransferase after oral absorption, which further improved the bioavailability of metformin
Further studies are warranted to design new prodrug structures or other techniques making metformin reach the CNS more precisely.
After oral administration, metformin is delivered to the CNS via cerebral blood flow (CBF) and transported across the BBB.
It is important to note that CBF reduction and the impairment of BBB integrity are early events occurred in AD pathogenesis, which may influence the uptake of metformin across the BBB
Interestingly, a clinical trial by
In Wistar rats, metformin was reported to efficiently cross the BBB and differently accumulate in brain regions, including hippocampus and frontal cortex after chronic oral administration for 3 weeks
The patterns of metformin accumulation in different brain structures under AD pathology is still unclear.
Further research is needed to confirm the appropriate dose and duration of metformin use required to produce sufficient protective effects against AD while causing less adverse effects.



FIGURE 1 |
FIGURE 1 | Main potential AMPK-dependent molecule mechanisms involved in the neuroprotective effects of metformin against AD pathology.
Most presented mechanistic studies have implied an AMPK-dependent neuroprotective action of metformin against AD.
The regulation of AMPK/mTOR/S6K/BACE1 signaling pathway by metformin can result in a reduction in Aβ production, thus decreasing Aβ toxicity.
AMPK activation can also suppress the activation of the NF-κB pathway, which is regarded as the central signaling pathway involved in AD neuroinflammation.
Moreover, the increased activation of caspase cascade, which is involved in the apoptosis-mediated neurodegeneration, and the impairment of mitochondrial function and morphology induced by Aβ can be inhibited by metformin in an AMPKdependent manner.
AMPK, AMP-activated protein kinase; APP, amyloid precursor protein; Aβ, amyloid-β; BACE1, β-site APP cleaving enzyme-1; mTOR, mechanistic target of rapamycin; NF-κB, Nuclear factor-kappa B; S6K, ribosomal S6 kinase.



TABLE 1 |
Representative clinical studies on the effects of metformin on AD.
AD, Alzheimer's disease; MCI, mild cognitive impairment; T2DM, type 2 diabetes mellitus.