A Comparison of the Greek ACE-III, M-ACE, ACE-R, MMSE, and ECAS in the Assessment and Identification of Alzheimer’s Disease
Objective: This study aimed to adapt the Addenbrooke's Cognitive Examination-III (ACE-III) and Mini-ACE (M-ACE) into Greek and then to examine the convergent validity against their predecessors Addenbrooke's Cognitive Examination-Revised (ACE-R) and Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) in a Greek population.
Moreover, a primary aim was to appraise the utility of each screen by conducting a comparison of the psychometric properties of ACE-III, M-ACE, ACE-R, MMSE, and the Edinburgh Cognitive and Behavioural ALS Screen (ECAS) in detecting Alzheimer's disease (AD).
Methods: Forty patients with AD were recruited and matched with 38 controls.
Bayesian Pearson's correlation analysis was conducted to examine the convergent validity.
Receiver operating characteristic curve analysis was implemented to appraise the sensitivity and specificity of the tests in detecting AD.
Results: The ACE-III, M-ACE, and the ECAS scores robustly correlated with ACE-R and MMSE.
The ACE-III and the ECAS-ALS Non-Specific score were the most sensitive and specific tools in detecting AD, closely followed by ECAS Total score and M-ACE.
Only ECAS Total score correlated with the duration of disease.
The ECAS scores were more resilient to ceiling effects than the other screens.
M-ACE produced fewer ceiling effects than MMSE.
The Greek ACE-III and M-ACE were successfully adapted and showed good convergent validity against their predecessors.
They showed very good psychometric properties in detecting AD and may be considered in hectic clinical settings.
ECAS Total score and ECAS-ALS Non-Specific showed comparable psychometric properties in the detection of AD and may be considered in poly-pathological clinics where motor impairments are common.

Introduction
Cognitive assessment is crucial for the detection of Alzheimer's disease (AD) and for the differential diagnosis of other types of dementia, such as frontotemporal dementia (FTD)
Comprehensive assessment of cognition and behaviour has clinical implications for patient care, regarding the available treatment options, survival expectancy, competency to drive or provide informed consent, ability to live independently at home, the carer's burden and quality of life
However, in hectic clinical settings, briefer cognitive screening methods are often the test of choice, with patients with more complex needs or diagnostic uncertainties being referred for full neuro-psychological assessment
Addenbrooke's Cognitive Examination Revised (ACE-R) and the embedded Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) are the predominant brief screening tests for dementia in the Greek population, with administration times of approximately 15 and 5 min, respectively
Both of them were designed to briefly examine a wide range of cognitive domains: attention, memory, language, visuo-spatial components and verbal fluency
ACE-R aids in the detection, differentiation and monitoring of cognitive decline in dementia syndromes, such as FTD and AD
However, ACE-R has several limitations
Acknowledging these weaknesses led to the development of Addenbrooke's Cognitive Examination III (ACE-III).
While the ACE-III does not incorporate MMSE, it continues to assess the same five cognitive domains, with new items in verbal repetition and language comprehension tasks, while backward spelling was replaced by serial 7s subtraction
ACE-III has been validated against extensive neuro-psychological tests
However, even ACE-III, which demands 15-20 min to administer, has been suggested to be excessive for some busy clinical settings
Mini-Addenbrooke's Cognitive Examination (M-ACE) was subsequently developed, which appears to be more sensitive and specific than its widely used precursor, MMSE
The Edinburgh Cognitive and Behavioural ALS Screen (ECAS) was recently developed
ECAS is also a brief assessment similar to ACE-III, but it was designed for patients with various motor impairments and was found to be sensitive in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), Parkinson's disease and progressive supranuclear palsy
ECAS has been specifically designed to detect the type of cognitive and behavioural impairment in ALS of an executive nature similar to that found in FTD.
ECAS comprises an ALS-specific component (executive function and social cognition, verbal fluency and language) and a carer's interview to detect the behavioural and psychotic changes typical in FTD.
This focus on executive functions distinguishes ECAS from ACE-III.
However, the ECAS was also designed to assess the functions typically affected in other diseases common in older adults, such as AD, and therefore it includes an ALS Non-Specific segment (memory and visuo-spatial function)
We have previously demonstrated that the ALS Non-Specific score is highly sensitive and specific in identifying the cognitive changes typical of AD and helps differentiate AD from ALS
In this study, aimed to adapt the ACE-III and M-ACE and to examine their convergent validity against their predecessors, ACE-R and MMSE, in a Greek population.
Moreover, our primary aim was to compare these screening tools (ACE-III, M-ACE, ACE-R, MMSE and ECAS) in detecting AD in a Greek population.

Methods

Participants
All the participants and their carers signed an informed consent form in compliance with the revised Declaration of
This study was approved by the Psychology Research Ethics Committee of the University of Edinburgh, as well as the Aeginition Hospital Ethics Committee.
All the participants were native Greek speakers and free from the following: (1) psychiatric disorders; (2) psychoactive drugs, antidepressants and anticonvulsants, (3) other neurological conditions affecting cognition; (4) learning disabilities; (5) alcoholism and drug abuse and (6) uncontrolled systemic diseases.

Patients with AD
The attendants of the Maroussi Alzheimer Clinic of the Athens Association of Alzheimer Disease and Related Disorders, Athens, Greece, were employed for this study.
A total of 40 patients with AD participated; a sub-sample has previously been described by
Recruitment was conducted in accordance with the general inclusion criteria and the following criteria specific to AD: (1) a diagnosis of AD according to the National Institute of Neurological and Communicative Disorders and Stroke/Alzheimer's Disease and Related Disorders Association (NINCDS-ADRDA)
AD and vascular dementia).
In addition, a neuropsychologist or psychiatrist interviewed the patients and administered the Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale (HADS)
The duration of the disease was calculated in years, from the onset of the first symptoms to the testing date.

Healthy Subjects
In this study, 38 controls were recruited and matched in age, sex and education to the patient group.
They belonged to one of the following categories: (1) members of Athens Association of Alzheimer Disease and Related Disorders, Athens, Greece; (2) relatives of patients with AD or (3) volunteers who responded to the calls of the above association.
For recruitment, we implemented the aforementioned general inclusion criteria.

Procedures

Translation-Adaptation
Adaptation of ACE-III and embedded M-ACE required minor adjustments as the administration (e.g.
instructions) of the majority of the tasks was similar to that of ACE-R.
The most significant adjustment, in terms of translation, was in the section of language in the task of proverb repetition, in which the pronunciation of proverbs is required.
In terms of pronunciation, the first item should be a low-difficulty proverb (i.e.
'All that glitters is not gold'), and the second item should be a medium-to-hard-difficulty proverb (i.e.
'A stitch in time saves nine').
The proverbs of the Greek version were culturally adjusted, and the counterparts of this difficulty measure were 'All that glitters is not gold' and 'Better donkeytying than donkey-seeking'.
The original version of ACE-III (in which the M-ACE is embedded) was adapted to the Greek language using the back-translation method.
The original English version was translated into Greek by a native Greek speaker fluent in English, and then it was translated back into English by a native speaker of both Greek and English who was also blind to the original version of ACE-III.
The procedure of translation/back translation was successful in only two iterations as there were mainly minor amendments compared to ACE-R.
Finally, the adaptation of ECAS in Greek was described by

Administration of the Tests and Inter-Rater Reliability
Administration of the tests was randomised to control for a possible practice effect
Inter-rater reliability was calculated between the scores for ACE-III and M-ACE provided by the assessors and the independent reviewer.
The four assessors and the independent reviewer were trained equally in the administration and scoring of ACE-III and M-ACE based on relevant guidelines.
The independent reviewer was blinded to the identity of the examiner as well as the examinee.

Statistical Analyses
Bayesian statistics were preferred over null hypothesis significance testing (NHST).
The Bayesian factor (BF10) has been found to be more parsimonious than the p-value in evaluating evidence against H0
Importantly, the difference between BF10 and pvalues is even greater (in favour of BF10) in small sample sizes, which is pertinent to the present study
A larger BF10 postulates more evidence in support of H1
In this study, a threshold of BF10 ≥ 10 was set for statistical inference, which postulates strong evidence in favour of H1
BF10 = 10) or to a p-value of <0.001 (e.g.
BF10 > 11)
However, we report both BF10 and p-values in this study.
Finally, BF10 allows evidence in either direction (i.e.
towards H1 and H0), and its measurement of evidence is insensitive to the stopping rule, which substantially mitigates the multiple comparisons problem and generates reliable and more generalisable results
The inter-rater reliability between the assessors who administered the screening procedures and the independent interviewer was appraised using the Intra-Class Correlation Coefficient (ICC), which displays outcomes from 'no match' = 0 to 'seamless match' = 1
The internal consistency of the Greek ACE-III and M-ACE was determined by calculating Cronbach's alpha coefficient.
A Cronbach's alpha coefficient of 0.70 or greater is considered substantial
Demographic and cognitive data were analysed and compared.
Shapiro-Wilk's test revealed non-significant results (i.e.
normal distribution) for every variable.
Between-group comparisons were made using Bayesian independent samples t-tests.
The convergent validity of the screening tools was examined in the whole sample ( = 78, i.e.
HC = 38 + AD = 40).
The convergent validity and associations between the screening tools were probed and quantified using Bayesian Pearson's correlation analysis to ensure that our results are more reliable and generalisable.
Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve analyses and area under the curve (AUC) were implemented to appraise the psychometric properties of the screening methods.
All statistical analyses were performed using SPSS Statistics v.24.0 (scale, ROC and AUC analyses) (Release 2016; IBM Corp., Armonk, NY, USA) and JASP v.0.8.1.2
(Bayesian Pearson's correlation analyses, Bayesian independent samples t-tests)
Finally, a post hoc analysis (i.e. the achieved statistical power) of the Bayesian Pearson's correlations (i.e. the convergent validity of the screening methods) was performed using G*Power

Results

Inter-Rater Reliability & Internal Consistency
The inter-rater reliability demonstrated an almost seamless agreement between the assessors, indicating substantial suitability for clinical measures
An ICC value of 0.92 was found for ACE-III and M-ACE
The scale analyses demonstrated excellent internal consistency of ACE-III and M-ACE with Cronbach's alpha = 0.79
We also inspected the internal consistency of ACE-III by replacing the repetition task of the culturally adjusted proverbs with the repetition task of phrases in ACE-R.
The internal consistency of ACE-III with the repetition task of phrases (ACE-R) dropped to 0.77, indicating that the new repetition task of culturally adjusted proverbs contributed to the improvement of the internal consistency of ACE-III.

Convergent Validity
The Bayesian Pearson's correlation analyses robustly supported the convergent validity of ACE-III and M-ACE, as well as ECAS and its sub-scores, by indicating a large effect size (i.e.
Pearson's  varied from 0.845 to 0.976), highly significant -values (i.e.
< 0.001), highly extreme evidence of the Bayesian factor analysis (e.g.
BF10 = 1.299e+33) and an almost perfect statistical power (i.e.
≈100%).
The statistics for the Bayesian Pearson's correlations are displayed in Table
ACE-III displayed a robust correlation with ACE-R.
Equally, M-ACE substantially correlated with MMSE.
Moreover, ECAS and its sub-scores significantly correlated with ACE-R.

Sensitivity and Specificity in the Detection of AD
ROC and AUC analyses were executed to explore the psychometric properties of the screens in detecting AD. Figure
All the tests confirmed an adequately high level of sensitivity and specificity.
Additionally, the analysis computed the sensitivity and specificity respective to different cut-offs, and the optimum cutoff to determine abnormality is shown (see Table
The ACE-III, ECAS, ACE-R, M-ACE, and ECAS-ALS Non-Specific covered the greatest AUC.

Correlational Pairs
Pearson

Cognitive Performance and Behavioural Changes in AD
In the whole sample, there were no associations between cognitive performance and age/education.
In group comparisons, patients with AD performed significantly worse than healthy controls in every test (see Table
In the AD sample, the HADS scores (i.e.
depression and anxiety) did not correlate with cognitive performance.
In addition, we examined the correlation between the screening methods and the duration of disease in the sample of patients with AD.
Robust correlations with the duration of disease were detected solely with the total score of ECAS (BF10 = 14.22), whereas with the rest of the screening methods and sub-scores the correlations were non-significant (see Table
14 patients (35%) had a disease duration of less than three years and 26 patients (65%) had a disease duration of three to six years, indicating that the sample of patients were in the early and early-middle stages of AD.
Furthermore, the carers of 16 out of 40 patients with AD (40%) reported behavioural changes in the ECAS Behavioural Interview.
The most prominent behavioural changes were apathy and loss of sympathy with some describing disinhibition (see Figure
compulsion, hyperorality and psychosis).

Ceiling Effects in the Screens
The ECAS scores appear to be substantially more resilient to ceiling effects compared to ACE-III, ACE-R (Figure
Ceiling effects in the last two short screens were pronounced (see Figures
Lastly, only four patients with AD (out of 40, i.e. 10%) failed to collect two points (i.e.
maximum points) in the phrase repetition task of ACE-R, whereas 10 patients with AD (i.e.
25%) failed to collect the maximum points in the proverb repetition task of ACE-III.
The tests also showed almost excellent inter-rater reliability, permitting extensive utilisation by various clinical practitioners
Therefore, the Greek ACE-III and M-ACE can be considered as suitable tools for clinical and research purposes.
Accordingly, M-ACE surfaces as the most appropriate brief screening tool for detecting AD.
M-ACE may be considered in hectic clinical environments, in which brief screening procedures are preferred.
Furthermore, the ECAS-ALS Non-Specific score was equally able to detect AD compared to the ACE-III with 97.4% sensitivity and specificity at a cut-off of 24.
In addition, the ECAS-ALS Non-Specific score was substantially more specific than M-ACE but was equally sensitive.
However, the sensitivity of the total score of ECAS was slightly below that of ACE-III and M-ACE although specificity was comparable.
Of note the ECAS Total score was the only score that correlated with the disease duration, indicating that it may be more sensitive to cognitive decline than the rest of the screens, although this has yet to be demonstrated.
Lastly, the ECAS-ALS Specific score appears to be less sensitive and specific compared to the above screening methods, although it displayed good psychometric properties in the identification of AD.

Utility of the Screens
The Greek version of ACE-III contains a repetition task of culturally adjusted proverbs, which replaced the repetition task of phrases in ACE-R.
These items appeared to contribute to the internal consistency of ACE-III, and were less prone to ceiling effects in the AD group compared to the equivalent task of ACE-R.
However, both tests suffered from ceiling effects in contrast to the ECAS.
These were most pronounced in the shorter screening tools (M-ACE and MMSE, although, the former was marginally less prone than the latter, which is in line with the findings of
However, the ECAS-ALS Non-Specific score and in particular the ECAS Total score and ECAS-ALS Specific did not suffer from ceiling effects.
These findings are in line with the findings of a previous study in which ECAS was found to be substantially less dependent on IQ and produced significantly fewer ceiling effects compared to ACE-III, which may be an advantage for use with clinical groups
Furthermore, ACE-III does not include a behavioural assessment, which is a shortcoming
In contrast, the ECAS has a Behavioural Interview, which may add to the cognitive profile of the patient and predict caregiver's burden.
In the current study, 40% of the carers of patients with AD reported behavioural changes.
The most prominent were apathy and loss of sympathy.
However, the ECAS Behavioural does not assess comprehensively apathy.
Apathy is considered a multi-dimensional construct incorporating emotional, executive and initiation dimensions
Recently, the Dimensional Apathy Scale (DAS) was developed to assess these constructs
Notably, the DAS was implemented in AD, where a heterogenous profile emerged, enabling classification into three distinct groups
Hence, the DAS may be used in conjunction with ACE-III or ECAS in order to further identify and differentiate the types of apathy, which may be of clinical relevance.
Moreover, ACE-III and M-ACE are not adjusted to motor impairments, whereas ECAS is adjusted to upper motor and speech impairments.
In a previous study, the ECAS-ALS Non-Specific score displayed very good psychometric properties in differentiating patients with AD from non-demented patients with ALS, whereas ACE-III and M-ACE were not successful
Therefore, the ECAS might be considered as an appropriate tool in patients with motor dysfunction, which are common in many neurodegenerative diseases, and could be ideally included in future clinical trials.

Limitations & Future Studies
This study contains certain caveats that should be noted.
One of the limitations of this study is the small sample size albeit the facilitation of robust statistical analyses with high statistical power.
A larger and more diverse sample would allow more solid and conclusive observations.
In future studies, the acquisition of normative data should be of a size that permits the computation of distinct cut-off scores that are analogous to the educational level.
Only patients with AD were recruited in this study.
It would be of relevance to investigate the capacity of the tests to differentiate between patients with FTD and AD and probe FTD phenotypes.
In addition, future studies should consider adapting a scale such as the DAS in Greek, which may assist with research and/or clinical endeavours.
The extensive and profound study of cognitive and behavioural changes in patients with dementia can help ameliorate and adjust patient care and alleviate the caregivers' burden.



Figure 2 -
Figure 2-ECAS Behavioural Interview: behavioural changes in AD



Figure 3 -Figure 4 -
Figure 3-Distribution of healthy controls' performance in the fourth quartile of the possible scores ECAS Total Score -Maximum Score = 136 ACE-R -Maximum Score = 100



Table 1 -
Convergent validity: Bayesian Pearson's correlations



Table 2 -
Sensitivity and specificity in the detection of AD SDs from the mean) are displayed first; The cut-ffs with highest sensitivity or specificity are presented.
The proposed cut-offs (based on optimal sensitivity and specificity values) are showed in bold.
Where the current and proposed cut-offs are the same only one value is given; AUC = Area Under Curve; PPV = Positive Predictive Value; NPV = Negative Predictive Value; PLR = Positive Likelihood Ratio; NLR = Negative Likelihood Ratio



Table 3 -
Comparison between controls and patients with AD Controls -Mean (SD) AD -Mean (SD) p-value BF₁₀



Table 4 -
Bayesian Pearson's correlations with the duration of disease