Investigation of Causal Effect of Atrial Fibrillation on Alzheimer Disease: A Mendelian Randomization Study
Background--Atrial fibrillation (AF) has been shown to be associated with an increased risk of dementia as well as Alzheimer disease in observational studies.
Whether this association reflects causal association is still unclear.
The purpose of this study was to examine the causal association of AF with Alzheimer disease.
Methods and Results--We used a 2-sample Mendelian randomization approach to evaluate the causal effect of AF on Alzheimer disease.
Summary data on the association of single nucleotide polymorphisms with AF were obtained from a recently published genome-wide association study with up to 1 030 836 individuals and data on single nucleotide polymorphism-Alzheimer disease association from another genome-wide association study with up to 455 258 individuals.
AF was mainly diagnosed according to International Classification of Diseases, Ninth Revision (ICD-9 or ICD-10) and Alzheimer disease was mainly diagnosed according to clinical criteria (eg, National Institute of Neurological and Communicative Disorders and Stroke and the Alzheimer's Disease and Related Disorders Association [NINCDS-ADRDA] criteria).
Effect estimates were calculated using the inverse-variance weighted method.
The Mendelian randomization analysis showed nonsignificant association of genetically predicted AF with risk of Alzheimer disease (odds ratio=1.002,
95% CI: 0.996-1.009,
P=0.47) using 93 single nucleotide polymorphisms as the instruments.
Mendelian randomization-Egger indicated no evidence of genetic pleiotropy (intercept=0.0002,
95% CI: À0.001 to 0.001, P=0.70).
D ementia is a major cause of disability in elderly people without available curative treatment.
Worldwide, there were %50 million people living with dementia in 2018, and this number is expected to increase because of population growth and aging.
trial fibrillation (AF) is the most common sustained cardiac arrhythmia in the elderly population.
AF was associated with an increased risk of ischemic stroke, which may further cause cognitive decline and dementia.
t was well established that AF may increase vascular dementia
There were growing evidences indicating that the presence of AF might increase the risk of cognitive decline and dementia even in patients without prior stroke.
Recently, several longitudinal studies have suggested that AF not only contributed to vascular dementia, but also to Alzheimer disease.
However, observational studies might be confounded by potential biases and reverse causation.
Whether the association between AF and Alzheimer disease observed in observational studies reflects causal association required further investigation.
Mendelian randomization (MR) analysis can avoid potential unmeasured confounders and reverse causation by using genetic variants as instrumental variables and make stronger causal inferences between an exposure and risk of disease.
n this study, we aimed to use MR analysis to evaluate the causal association of AF with Alzheimer disease using MR analysis.

Methods Study Design and Data Sources
We designed a 2-sample MR approach to evaluate the causal effect of AF on Alzheimer disease (Figure
The MR design is under the assumption that the genetic variants are associated with AF, but independent of confounders and risk of Alzheimer disease conditional on AF and confounders.
Based on this design, MR analysis can control potential confounders and reverse causation and make stronger causal inferences.
Data on the association of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) with AF and the association of SNPs with Alzheimer disease were obtained from recently published genome-wide association studies (GWAS).
The protocol and data collection of the original studies were approved by the ethics committee of participating sites and informed consent was obtained from all participants.
All data generated or analyzed during this study are included in this published article.

Selection of Genetic Variants
We used previous published genetic variants associated with AF from a recent published GWAS.
That study tested association between 34 740 186 genetic variants and AF with a total of 60 620 cases and 970 216 controls from 6 contributing studies.
Table
The majority (98.6%) of individuals were of European ancestry.
AF was mainly diagnosed according to International Classification of Diseases, Ninth Revision (ICD-9 or ICD-10).
In that study, 111 genetic loci with at least 1 genetic variant associated with AF were identified (P<5.0910
À8 ).
These locus index variants explained 4.6% of the variation in AF (F statistic=534, indicating sufficient strength of the instruments).
All these 111 SNPs were in different genomic regions and not in linkage disequilibrium (r 2 <0.10).
We performed a look-up of the 111 SNPs in Phenoscanner (a curated database holding publicly available results from large-scale GWAS with >65 billion associations and >150 million unique genetic variants; accessed on October 27, 2019) to evaluate whether these SNPs were associated with other traits at genome-wide significance level (P<5.0910
À8 ) that may affect our results.
e found that 9 SNPs (rs284277, rs1458038, rs60212594, rs422068, rs2540949, rs9899183, rs35005436, rs10006327, and rs12245149) were also associated with systolic blood pressure or self-reported hypertension and 7 SNPs (rs7789146, rs2885697, rs9953366, rs4951258, rs12604076, rs56201652, and rs34080181) were also associated with whole body water mass, fat-free mass, or fat percentage.
After exclusion of these 16 SNPs and 2 SNPs (rs12648245 and rs11156751) not found in outcome data sets, we used the remaining 93 SNPs as the instrument in the MR analysis.
Table

Outcomes
Summary statistics for the associations between the 93 SNPs related to AF and Alzheimer disease were obtained from the recently published genome-wide meta-analysis.
In that study, genome-wide meta-analysis was performed through 3 phases including 71 880 Alzheimer disease cases and 383 378 controls (Table
Phase 1 involved a genome-wide metaanalysis for clinically diagnosed Alzheimer disease

Clinical Perspective
What Is New?
• The relationship between atrial fibrillation and degenerative dementia such as Alzheimer disease is still unclear.
• The causal association of atrial fibrillation with Alzheimer disease was examined using a 2-sample Mendelian randomization analysis using summary data from recently published genome-wide association studies.
What Are the Clinical Implications?
• This study did not provide convincing evidence to support a causal association between atrial fibrillation and Alzheimer disease.
parental Alzheimer disease status weighted by age to construct an Alzheimer disease-by-proxy status assessed as part of the self-report questionnaire administered during the in-person assessment and additional information obtained from medical records.
All individuals of phase 1 and phase 2 were meta-analyzed together in phase 3. The associations between each SNP related to AF and Alzheimer disease are presented in Table

Statistical Analysis
We used 2-sample MR approaches to compute estimates of the effect of AF on Alzheimer disease using summarized data of the SNP-AF and SNP-Alzheimer disease associations.
We performed both fixed-effect and random-effect inversevariance weighted (IVW) MR analysis in which the effect estimate was the IVW mean of ratio estimates from 2 or more instruments using first-order weights, assuming all SNPs were valid instruments.
In sensitivity analyses, we also conducted penalized IVW, penalized robust IVW, MR-Egger, simple median, weighted median, weighted mode-based estimate (MBE), and Mendelian Randomization Pleiotropy Residual Sum and Outlier (MR-PRESSO) methods of MR analyses.
The penalized methods improved the robustness by penalizing the weights of instruments with pleiotropic effect with heterogeneous ratio estimates in the weighted regression model and the robust method can provide robust estimates both to outliers and to data points with high leverage by performing robust regression.
The MR-Egger method was performed by weighted linear regression of the associations of SNP with Alzheimer disease on the associations of SNP with AF using the inverse-variance of SNP-Alzheimer disease estimate as weights.
The MR-Egger method may provide robust estimates to potential violations of the standard instrumental variable assumptions because of directional pleiotropy (a genetic variant affects the Alzheimer disease via a different biological pathway from AF).
The weighted MBE method used the mode of the IVW empirical density function as the weighted MBEs and obtained a causal effect estimate robust to horizontal pleiotropy.
The MR-PRESSO approach was used to detect and correct for horizontal pleiotropic outliers through outlier removal in multiinstrument summary-level MR testing.
These methods had  been demonstrated to be more robust to the inclusion of pleiotropic and/or invalid instruments and provide a consistent estimate of the causal effect.
The second-order weights were used in the weighted MBE method and first-order weights were used for all other methods.
Heterogeneity between SNPs in the IVW analysis was estimated by Q statistic and I 2 index.
Potential pleiotropic effects were estimated by intercepts of the MR-Egger regression.
An I 2 GX statistic was calculated to test the presence of bias with MR-Egger because of measurement error; I 2 GX statistic >0.90 was considered no obvious violation of "NO Measurement Error" assumption and sufficient for instruments in the MR-Egger analyses.
We also performed a leave-1-out analysis in which 1 SNP was excluded in turn to estimate the influence of outlying and/or pleiotropic SNPs.
he associations between genetically predicted AF and Alzheimer disease were presented as odds ratios (ORs) with their 95% CIs per 1-unit-higher log-odds of AF.
The association of each genetic variant with AF was further plotted against its effect for the risk of Alzheimer disease.
A power analysis using a web-based application (
was conducted to estimate the minimum detectable magnitude of association in terms of OR per log odds of AF.
Based on the sample size of 1 030 836, our MR analysis has 80% power at an alpha rate of 5% to detect an OR of 1.055 per log odds of AF.
An observed 2-sided P<0.05 was considered as significant evidence for a causal association.
All analyses were conducted with R 3.5.3
(R Development Core Team).

Results
The MR analysis showed nonsignificant association of genetically predicted AF with risk of Alzheimer disease using 93 SNPs as the instruments (Figure
The fixed-effect and random-effect IVW methods showed that genetically predicted AF was not associated with the risk of Alzheimer disease (OR=1.002,
95% CI: 0.996-1.009,
P=0.47; OR=1.002, 95% CI: 0.995-1.010,
P=0.52).
Similar results were observed using the penalized IVW, penalized robust IVW, MR-Egger, simple median, weighted median, weighted MBE, and MR-PRESSO methods.
Association between each variant with AF and risk of Alzheimer disease are displayed in Figure
There was no evidence of heterogeneity in the IVW analysis (Q=113.60,
P=0.055;
I 2 =19%).
MR-Egger regression showed no evidence of directional pleiotropy for the association of the included SNPs with risk of Alzheimer disease (inter-cept=0.0002,
95% CI: À0.001 to 0.001, P=0.70).
There was a low risk of bias with MR-Egger because of measurement error (I 2 GX statistic=96.6%).
Funnel plot also showed no evidence of obvious heterogeneity across the estimates, indicating absence of the potential pleiotropic effects (Figure
The results of leave-1-out sensitivity analysis showed that the negative association between AF and Alzheimer disease was not substantially driven by any individual SNP (Figure

Discussion
Using 2-sample MR analysis based on data from large-scale GWAS studies, our study demonstrated that genetically predicted AF had no causal effect on the risk of Alzheimer disease.
The findings were robust in sensitivity analyses with different instruments and statistical models.
AF and dementia are frequent diseases that predominantly affect elderly people.
There were several assumed mechanisms that contribute to AF-related cognitive decline and dementia, including occurrence of AF-related (clinically overt or silent) strokes, systemic inflammation, and chronic hypoperfusion of the brain.
Strong evidences from many prospective studies have been established that AF was associated with cognitive impairment, cognitive decline, and dementia.
0]
0]
In the prospective Intermountain Heart Collaborative Study with 37 025 patients and 5-year follow-up, AF was independently associated with all forms of dementia, including Alzheimer disease.
In the Korea National Health Insurance Service-Senior cohort with 262 611 participants, incident AF was associated with an increased risk of both Alzheimer and vascular dementia.
ongitudinal association was observed between prevalent AF and all-cause dementia, but the association was nonsignificant between either incident or prevalent AF and Alzheimer disease in the Rotterdam Study.
However, these studies still cannot control the influence of unmeasured confounders because of the nature of observational study.
The present study provides evidence supporting a negative causal effect of genetically predicted AF on risk of Alzheimer disease using an MR approach, and this method may control unmeasured confounders and reverse causation.
ur findings demonstrated that the causal role of AF on Alzheimer disease could be different from that on vascular dementia.
The lack of causal association of AF with the risk of Alzheimer disease in our study suggests that the association of AF with Alzheimer disease risk observed in observational cohort studies may be confounded by other risk factors rather than indicate a causal relationship.
It was perhaps unsurprising because dementia and AF share numerous common vascular risk factors, such as hypertension, heart failure, diabetes mellitus, lipid disorders, age, obesity, and physical inactivity.
The co-occurrence of AF and Alzheimer disease might be explained by the existence of these common factors.
Another potential explanation was that AF probably increased the risk of Alzheimer disease only when AF started in middle age and with a longer duration of AF as neuropathology of underlying dementia gradually developed over many years.
There was only indirect evidence in observational studies that anticoagulation in AF was associated with a preventive effect on cognitive impairment and dementia development.
However, these studies did not separately analyze the dementia subtypes and may be confounded by other treatments (ie, patients with anticoagulation may also have a high compliance with treatment targeting other risk factors, such as hypertension, heart failure, diabetes mellitus, and lipid disorders).
The strength of the study is the design of MR analysis based on AF-related SNPs and effects of SNP-Alzheimer disease from large-scale GWAS studies.
Using the 2-sample MR approach, we were able to investigate the effect of AF based on data with large sample sizes (60 620 AF cases and 970 216 controls; 71 880 Alzheimer disease cases and 383 378 controls).
Compared with traditional observational study, MR analysis is less prone to potential unmeasured confounding and also to avoid reverse causation since genetic variation is allocated at conception, and thus can strengthen the evidence for causal inference.
ur study has several limitations.
First, it is difficult to completely avoid the influence of potential horizontal pleiotropy (a genetic variant affects the outcome via a different biological pathway from the exposure), which may lead to biased causal effect estimates.
However, pleiotropic effect was not observed in MR-Egger regression or heterogeneity test, and similar results were observed in sensitivity analyses using several other robust models.
Second, the findings were limited since data of associations of SNP-exposure and SNPoutcome were derived from 2 different populations.
Third, estimates of SNP-AF association were derived from transancestry studies, which may cause bias because of population admixture.
The same genetic variant could exhibit different pleiotropic effects in different populations.
However, we note that this might have subtle influences on the effect estimates because the majority of individuals were of European ancestry and merging studies showed the genetic architecture for common diseases was likely similar across ethnic groups.
ourth, measurement error may exist as Alzheimer disease-byproxy was used in UK Biobank in phase 2 of GWAS of Alzheimer disease.
This measurement error would likely bias results towards the null.
However, a strong genetic correlation (0.81) between Alzheimer disease status and Alzheimer disease-byproxy, and substantial concordance in the individual SNP effects were observed in the original study.
Finally, there were some overlapping samples between the AF and Alzheimer disease GWAS data set (38.4% in the AF GWAS data set and 82.6% in the Alzheimer disease GWAS data set), which could inflate MR estimates.
However, this would only affect the study by producing a false positive result and our study observed only negative results.

Conclusions
Our 2-sample MR analysis did not provide convincing evidence to support a causal effect of AF on risk of Alzheimer disease.


(eg, according to National Institute of Neurological and Communicative Disorders and Stroke and the Alzheimer's Disease and Related Disorders Association [NINCDS-ADRDA] criteria) case-control status using data from 3 independent consortia with 79 145 individuals of European ancestry and 9 862 738 genetic variants.
Phase 2 involved a GWAS using 376 113 individuals of European ancestry from UK Biobank with



Figure 1 .
Figure 1.
Conceptual framework for the Mendelian randomization analysis of atrial fibrillation and risk of Alzheimer disease.
The design is under the assumption that the genetic variants are associated with atrial fibrillation, but not with confounders, and the genetic variants are not associated with risk of Alzheimer disease conditional on atrial fibrillation and confounders.
SNP indicates single nucleotide polymorphism.


ADDTC indicates Alzheimer's Disease Diagnostic and Treatment Centers; DSM-III-R, DSM-Third Edition, Revised; DSM-IV, Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders -Fourth Edition; GWAS, genome-wide association studies; ICD, International Classification of Diseases; NIA/AA, National Institute on Aging-Alzheimer's Association; NINCDS-ADRDA, National Institute of Neurological and Communicative Disorders and Stroke and the Alzheimer's Disease and Related Disorders Association.


AD indicatesAlzheimer disease; EA, effect allele; EAF, effect allele frequency; OA, other allele; SE, standard error; SNP, single nucleotide polymorphism.
DOI: 10.1161/JAHA.119.014889
Journal of the American Heart Association



Figure 2 .
Figure 2. Risk of Alzheimer disease for genetically predicted atrial fibrillation.
IVW indicates inversevariance weighted; MBE, mode-based estimate; MR, Mendelian randomization; MR-PRESSO, Mendelian Randomization Pleiotropy RESidual Sum and Outlier.



Figure 3 .
Figure 3. Associations of atrial fibrillation-related variants with risk of Alzheimer disease.
The red line indicates the estimate of effect using inverse-variance weighted method.
Circles indicate marginal genetic associations with atrial fibrillation and risk of Alzheimer disease for each variant.
Error bars indicate 95% CIs.



Figure 4 .
Figure 4. Funnel plot of the Mendelian randomization analysis for Alzheimer disease.
Funnel plot evaluated the presence of possible heterogeneity across the estimates, which indicates the potential pleiotropic effects.
The figure presents the observed causal effect of each of the 93 instrumental variables (IVs) by dots, and the averaged causal effect of all IVs combined (b IV ) using inverse variance weighted (solid line) and MR-Egger (dashed line) method on x-axis.
Y axis presents the inverse standard error of the estimated causal effect for each of the single nucleotide polymorphisms (IVs).



Figure 5 .
Figure 5. MR leave-1-out sensitivity analysis for atrial fibrillation on AD.
Circles indicate MR estimates for atrial fibrillation on Alzheimer disease using inverse-variance weighted fixed-effect method if the SNP was omitted.
The bars indicate the CI of MR estimates.
AD indicates Alzheimer disease; AF, atrial fibrillation; MR, Mendelian randomization.





Table 1 .
Description of Contributing Studies



Table 2 .
Characteristics of the 93 SNPs Associated With Atrial Fibrillation