Top-Down Proteomics of Human Saliva Highlights Anti-inflammatory, Antioxidant, and Antimicrobial Defense Responses in Alzheimer Disease
Alzheimer disease (AD) is the most prevalent neurodegenerative disease in the elderly, characterized by accumulation in the brain of misfolded proteins, inflammation, and oxidative damage leading to neuronal cell death.
By considering the viewpoint that AD onset and worsening may be influenced by environmental factors causing infection, oxidative stress, and inflammatory reaction, we investigated the changes of the salivary proteome in a population of patients with respect to that in healthy controls (HCs).
Indeed, the possible use of saliva as a diagnostic tool has been explored in several oral and systemic diseases.
Moreover, the oral cavity continuously established adaptative and protective processes toward exogenous stimuli.
In the present study, qualitative/quantitative variations of 56 salivary proteoforms, including post-translationally modified derivatives, have been analyzed by RP-HPLC-ESI-IT-MS and MS/MS analyses, and immunological methods were applied to validate MS results.
The salivary protein profile of AD patients was characterized by significantly higher levels of some multifaceted proteins and peptides that were either specific to the oral cavity or also expressed in other body districts: (i) peptides involved in the homeostasis of the oral cavity; (ii) proteins acting as ROS/RNS scavengers and with a neuroprotective role, such as S100A8, S100A9, and their glutathionylated and nitrosylated proteoforms; cystatin B and glutathionylated and dimeric derivatives; (iii) proteins with antimicrobial activity, such as α-defensins, cystatins A and B, histatin 1, statherin, and thymosin β4, this last with a neuroprotective role at the level of microglia.
These results suggested that, in response to injured conditions, Alzheimer patients established defensive mechanisms detectable at the oral level.
Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD021538.

INTRODUCTION
Alzheimer disease (AD) is a neurodegenerative disease, and it is the leading cause of progressive dementia in the elderly population
Neuropathologically, AD is characterized by the accumulation of amyloid beta (Aβ) plaques and by the development in the brain of neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs) composed of tau protein
Only a small portion of AD cases has genetic causes while the majority (95%) are sporadic and occur in people over 65 years
The sporadic form of AD is more complex since it likely results from a combination of genetic and environmental factors.
Although the etiology of the disease has not been fully elucidated yet, the role of environmental factors, as a possible element of risk, has extended its relevance in AD pathology.
Indeed, it has been recently hypothesized that prolonged exposure to several heavy metals
The most common consequence of exposure to environmental risk factors is the overproduction of reactive oxygen species (ROS), and several studies are converging on the fact that oxidative stress might be crucial in AD pathogenesis.
Oxidative stress, observed in AD, is mainly due to Aβ misfolding
Nevertheless, the oral and gut microbiota-induced neuronal inflammation is a gradually emerging idea promoted by the discovery that brain infections, involving bacteria or viruses as external risk factors, can trigger Aβ deposition and AD development
Alzheimer disease diagnosis is heavily based on detection of Aβ and tau proteins in the central nervous system (CNS), either imaged using positron emission tomography or measured in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF); moreover, magnetic resonance imaging can be used to measure function and reveal brain atrophy
Some selective biomarkers in the CSF were shown to have excellent diagnostic accuracy
The invasive nature of CSF collection, which limits its widespread use in routine primary care practice
Blood biomarkers are more easily detectable than those from the CSF for population screening; however, the use of salivary biomarkers can show more advantages.
Indeed, saliva has been proposed as an easily collectable source of potential biomarkers for diagnosis and risk assessment for a range of pathological conditions that occur not only orally but also systemically
In fact, most blood biomarkers can also be found in saliva since proteins from the blood can pass into the saliva via passive diffusion, active transport, or microfiltration
It was reported that proteins from CNS are also excreted into the saliva
Recently,
In consideration of these evidences, the present study aimed to investigate, for the first time, the salivary proteome of AD patients in comparison with HCs by a top-down proteomic approach, to evidence possible qualitative/quantitative variations associated with the disease, also in light of the eventual involvement of environmental risk factors in AD pathogenesis.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Reagents and Instruments
All the chemicals and reagents used for high-performance liquid chromatography separation coupled to electrosprayion trap mass spectrometry (HPLC-ESI-IT-MS) analysis were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO, United States).
HPLC/low-resolution ESI-MS analyses were performed with a Surveyor HPLC system connected to an LCQ Advantage mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, United States).
The chromatographic column was a Vydac C8 reverse-phase column (Grace, Hesperia, CA, United States) (2.1 × 150 mm, particle diameter 5 µm).
HPLC/high-resolution ESI-MS and MS/MS experiments were carried out using an UltiMate 3000 micro HPLC apparatus (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA, United States) equipped with an FLM-3000 flow manager module and coupled to an LTQ-Orbitrap Elite or LTQ Orbitrap XL apparatus (Thermo Fisher).
The column was a Zorbax 300SB-C8 (1.0 × 150 mm; 3.5 µm particle diameter).
All the chemicals and reagents for immunodetection were purchased from Bio-Rad (Hercules, California, United States); the primary mouse monoclonal antibodies (Abs) for α-defensins, cystatin A, cystatin B, S100A8, S100A9, cystatin SN, and thymosin β4 (Tβ4) were purchased from Santa Cruz Biotechnology (Dallas, TX, United States).
The secondary rabbit anti-mouse Ab was from Invitrogen (Waltham, MA, United States).
Standard Tβ4 was provided by

Study Subjects and Clinical Data
Thirty-five subjects affected by AD (23 females and 12 males; mean age and standard deviation (SD): 80 ± 6) were recruited by the Neurology Department of the "Fondazione Policlinico Universitario A. Gemelli, " Catholic University of Rome.
The clinical diagnosis of AD has been carried out according to standardized criteria
The control group included 35 healthy volunteers (17 females and 18 males; mean age and SD: 78 ± 5).
The informed consent process agreed with the latest stipulations established by the Declaration of Helsinki.
The study was approved by the formal ethical committee of the Catholic University of Rome.
Included AD patients and controls were carefully selected as non-smokers.
They were not affected by any major oral disease (periodontitis, caries, or dry mouth).
The clinical diagnosis of AD has been carried out according to standardized criteria
Thirteen patients were classified in the moderate stage, and the remaining patients were in the mild stage.
Demographic and clinical features of the included patients are reported in Supplementary Table
Nineteen patients underwent acetylcholinesterase (AChE) inhibitor therapy (donepezil 5 mg or rivastigmine 9.5 mg daily) (group G1).
Eight patients were treated with AChE inhibitors in association with memantine, an antagonist of the N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor (NMDAR) (group G2).
Eight patients were treated with memantine 20 mg daily (group G3).

Sample Collection and Treatment
All the samples of non-stimulated whole saliva were collected between 9:00 and 12:00 a.m.
Donors, in fasting conditions, were invited to sit, assuming a relaxed position, and to swallow.
Whole saliva was collected as it flowed into the anterior floor of the mouth with a soft plastic aspirator for less than 1 min and transferred to a plastic tube cooled on ice.
Salivary samples were immediately diluted in a 1:1 v/v ratio with a 0.2% solution of 2,2,2-trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) containing 50 µM of leu-enkephalin as internal standard.
Then, each sample was centrifuged at 20,000 g for 15 min at 4 • C. Finally, the supernatant was separated from the precipitate and immediately analyzed by RP-HPLC-ESI-MS or stored at -80 • C until the analysis for up to 2 weeks.
Aliquots of 50 µl of each sample were used for the determination of the total protein concentration (TPC) by a bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay kit (Sigma-Aldrich/Merck, Darmstadt, Germany) in duplicate, following the provided instructions.

RP-HPLC/Low-Resolution ESI-MS Analysis
Thirty microliters of acidic extracts were injected in HPLC/lowresolution ESI-MS, applying procedures and conditions optimized in our previous studies
The total ion current (TIC) chromatographic profiles were analyzed to selectively search and quantify the peptides/proteins reported in Supplementary Table 2 (Supplementary Material), which shows UniProtKB codes, elution times, and experimental and theoretical average mass values (Mav) of the proteins/peptides included in the study.
Supplementary Table 2 also reports the multiply charged ions used for the eXtracted Ion Current (XIC) search, which were selected by excluding values common to other closely eluting proteins.
A window of ± 0.5 Da was used to extract ion current peaks.
Experimental Mav were obtained by deconvolution of averaged ESI-MS spectra automatically performed by using MagTran 1.0 software
Mav and elution times of proteins/peptides were compared with those determined on salivary samples, under the same experimental conditions, in our previous studies
Experimental Mav were also compared with the theoretical ones available at the UniProtKB human data bank

Quantification and Statistical Analysis
Quantification of peptides/proteins was performed by using the XIC peak areas measured by HPLC/low-resolution ESI-MS analysis, with the following peak parameters: baseline window 15, area noise factor 50, peak noise factor 50, peak height 15%, and tailing factor 1.5.
The estimated percentage error of the XIC analysis was <8%.
Eventual dilution errors occurring during sample collection were corrected by normalizing XIC peak areas of peptides/proteins with the XIC peak area of leu-enkephalin used as internal standard, as described in a previous study
Then, the corrected XIC peak area values of each peptide/protein were normalized on the TPC of each sample.
GraphPad Prism software (version 5.0) was used to calculate means and SDs of the normalized protein XIC peak areas and to perform statistical analysis.
Data distributions were tested for normality by the D'Agostino-Pearson test.
A comparison between the groups of patients and controls has been performed with Mann-Whitney and Welch-corrected t-tests, depending on the distribution (skewed or normal) and the variance (unequal or homogeneous).
Statistical analysis has been considered significant when the p-value was <0.05.
A nonparametric ANOVA with the Kruskal-Wallis test and Dunn's post-test was applied to compare the groups of patients treated with different pharmacological therapies.

Preparative RP-HPLC for Salivary Cystatin B
To obtain a cystatin B-enriched sample by a preparative RP-HPLC separation, a total of 6 ml of acid-soluble fraction of human saliva from a healthy donor was injected in a HPLC system UHPL UltiMate 3,000 (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA, United States).
The chromatographic separation was carried out on an RP Vydac C8 column (Grace, Hesperia, CA, United States), 250 × 10 mm, 5 µm diameter particles, with the following eluents: A, 0.056% aqueous TFA; and B, 0.05% TFA in acetonitrile (ACN)/water 80:20 (v/v).
The applied gradient was from 0 to 60% B in 40 min, from 60 to 100% in 5 min with a flow rate of 2.8 ml/min.
RP-HPLC fractions collected during the separation were analyzed by HPLC-ESI-MS, and that containing the cystatin B proteoforms were lyophilized, the powder was suspended in 250 µl of 0.1% TFA, and an aliquot was subjected to a BCA assay (Sigma-Aldrich/Merck, Darmstadt, Germany) to determine the TPC to be used as standard for the immunodetection of cystatin B in the salivary pool from AD and HC groups, as explained in the following paragraph.

Immunoblotting Analysis
For immunoblotting analysis, 25 µg of proteins from 28 AD patients (16 females and 12 males, mean age and SD: 79.7 ± 6.3) and from 28 HC (15 females and 13 males, mean age and SD: 78.4 ± 4.4) was separately mixed in pools to reach a final TPC of 10 µg/µl for both pools.
Dot-blotting was applied for the immunodetection of α-defensins, cystatins A and B, S100A8, S100A9, and Tβ4.
Two microliters of each pool diluted 1:10 was blotted in triplicate in a nitrocellulose membrane to detect α-defensins, S100A8, and S100A9.
For detection of cystatins A and B and Tβ4, 2 µl of the 10 µg/µl concentrated pools was used.
After 1 h, the membranes were incubated under stirring for 45 min in the blocking solution composed by 5% blotting-grade blocker (Bio-Rad) in TBS-T (Tris 0.02 M, NaCl 0.15 M 0.05% Tween-20, pH 7.6) and 1 h with the primary Ab (1:1,000 in TBS-T for α-defensins, S100A8, S100A9, and cystatins A and B and 1:200 for Tβ4).
After washing with TBS-T, the membranes were incubated for 1 h with the secondary rabbit anti-mouse Ab horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-conjugated [IgG (H + L), 1:5,000 in TBS-T for α-defensins, S100A8, S100A9, and cystatins A and B, and IgG2b, 1:50,000 for Tβ4].
Hence, the membranes were treated with the detection solution Clarity Western ECL Substrate (Bio-Rad) according to the manufacturer's instructions.
The signals were acquired in high-sensitivity mode with the ChemiDoc MP Imaging System (Bio-Rad) and the images analyzed with the Image Lab software (4.0.1 version).
The intensities of the signals, appropriately corrected by the software background subtraction, were normalized with respect to that of cystatin SN, leading to quantitatively unvaried results between patients and controls (Supplementary Table
To obtain a dot-blotting in the presence of monoclonal Abs against cystatin SN, the same experimental conditions reported above were applied, except for the secondary HRP-conjugated Ab, which was a rabbit anti-mouse IgG2b, diluted 1:50,000 in TBS-T.
Tβ4 signal normalization was performed with respect to the signal of 0.26 nmol of the standard peptide.
Cystatin B signal normalization was performed with respect to the signal of 0.2 µg of the cystatin B-enriched sample.
The full scan of the entire membranes and the results of the normalization are reported as Supplementary Material (Supplementary Figures

RP-HPLC/High-Resolution ESI-MS/MS Analysis
Twenty-two salivary samples (4 and 18 from the AD and HC groups, respectively) were subjected to HPLC/high-resolution ESI-MS/MS (LTQ-Orbitrap Elite or LTQ-Orbitrap XL) to perform a top-down characterization confirming the identity of the peptides and proteins investigated in this study and reported in Supplementary Table
The instrument operated in "Intact Protein Mode, " with the delta HCD (higher-energy collisional dissociation) vacuum pressure reduced to 0.1.
The chromatographic separation was carried out using eluent A [0.1% (v/v) aqueous formic acid (FA)] and eluent B [0.1% (v/v) FA in ACN/water 80/20].
The gradient was 0-2 min 5% B, 2-10 min from 5 to 25% B (linear), 10-25 min from 25 to 34% B, 25-45 min from 34 to 70% B, and 45-55 min from 70 to 90% B at a flow rate of 50 µl/min.
The injection volume was 19 µl.
Full MS experiments were performed in positive ion mode with mass ranging from 400 to 2,000 m/z at a resolution of 120,000 (at 400 m/z).
Capillary temperature was 275 • C, source voltage 4.0 kV, and S-lens radiofrequency level 69%.
In the data-independent acquisition mode, the five most abundant ions were acquired and fragmented by using collision-induced dissociation (CID) and HCD with 35% normalized collision energy for 10 ms, isolation width of 5 m/z, and activation q of 0.25.
HPLC-ESI-MS and MS/MS data were generated by Xcalibur 2.2 SP 1.48 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, CA, United States) using default parameters of the Xtract program for the deconvolution.
MS/MS data were analyzed by both manual inspection of the MS/MS spectra recorded along the chromatogram and the Proteome Discoverer 2.2 software elaboration based on the SEQUEST HT cluster as a search engine (University of Washington, licensed to Thermo Electron Corporation, San Jose, CA, United States) against the UniProtKB human data bank (188,453 entries, release 2019_03).
For peptide matching, high-confidence filter settings were applied: the peptide score threshold was 2.3, and the limits were Xcorr scores >1.2 for singly charged ions and 1.9 and 2.3 for doubly and triply charged ions, respectively.
The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.01 (strict) and 0.05 (relaxed), and the precursor and fragment mass tolerance were 10 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively.
N-terminal pyroglutamination of Glu or Gln residues, phosphorylation on Ser and Thr residues, N-terminal acetylation, oxidation of Met and Trp residues, glutathionylation, nitrosylation, and sulfonic acid of Cys residues were selected as dynamic modifications.
Because of the difficulties of the automated software in detecting with high confidence every protein and their fragments, the structural information derives in part from manual inspections of the MS/MS spectra, obtained by both CID and HCD fragmentations, against the theoretical ones generated by MS-Product software available at the Protein Prospector website
All the MS/MS spectra were manually verified by using all the fragmentation spectra with an acceptable number of fragment ions.
The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited into the ProteomeXchange Consortium

RESULTS
The results obtained in the present study concern the fraction of salivary peptides and proteins soluble in acidic solution and directly analyzable by RP-HPLC-ESI-MS by a topdown approach.
The investigated components belong to the following protein families: acidic proline-rich proteins (aPRPs); statherin; histatins (Hst); salivary cystatins (S-type); cystatins A, B, C, and D; α-defensins; Tβ4; antileukoproteinase (SLPI); S100A proteins; and all the variants and the posttranslational modifications (PTMs) that we have characterized in human saliva by our approach (Supplementary Table
Overall, 56 proteoforms were investigated in each salivary sample, including modified proteoforms generated by phosphorylation, proteolysis, N-terminal acetylation, methionine or tryptophan oxidation, and cysteine oxidation (formation of disulfide bridges, glutathionylation, cysteinylation, and nitrosylation) (Supplementary Table
Protein/peptide levels, measured by MS analysis with a standardized XIC procedure and normalized with respect the TPC, were compared between AD patients and controls.
TPC was lower in AD patients (807 µg/ml ± 544) than in controls (1,054 µg/ml ± 445) with a p-value of 0.01.
Proteins/peptides showing significantly different levels between the AD and HC groups are reported in Table
Higher levels in AD group than in HC were observed for statherin and three of its naturally occurring fragments (desF43, des1-9, and des1-13), for the P-C peptide, and for Hst-1 proteoforms, both phosphorylated and nonphosphorylated (Table
No changes in the abundance of other secretory proteins/peptides reported in Supplementary Table
Alzheimer disease patients showed also significantly higher levels of α-defensins 1-4, Tβ4, cystatin A, and the dimeric and glutathionylated proteoforms of cystatin B (Table
Moreover, the total S100A8 was more abundant in AD than in HC.
The unmodified proteoform of S100A8 was observed in only 9 AD patients and in 2 HC subjects.
In five AD patients, S100A8 was observed just as a hyperoxidized form (carrying Met 1/78 and Trp 54 oxidation and Cys 42 oxidized to sulfonic acid).
The nitrosylated proteoform at Cys 42 (S100A8-SNO) was observed only in 12 AD patients, and only in 7 of these patients was the unique proteoform detected.
All the proteoforms of S100A9(S) were more abundant in AD patients, and thus Table
Finally, the long glutathionylated S100A9 was significantly more abundant in the AD group than in the HC group.
Immunodetection approaches confirmed some of the MS results.
Dot-blotting analysis, shown in Figure
Similar results were obtained for S100A8 and S100A9, and also in this case, dot-blotting was used to immunodetect total S100A8 (Figure
The signal intensity of total S100A8 was significantly higher in the AD salivary pool (p = 0.03) than in the HC one (Supplementary Figure
Analogously, total S100A9 (short and long proteoforms) exhibited a signal intensity higher in the AD salivary pool than in the HC one (p = 0.007) (Figure
The result of the dot-blotting was in accordance with the MS results obtained on the total S100A9 (p < 0.0001) (Figure
Similarly, the immunodetection of Tβ4 confirmed the highest levels of the peptide in AD patients (p = 0.02) obtained by the MS approach (Figures
Finally, dot-blotting experiments showed more abundance of total cystatin B (dimeric and monomeric proteoforms) in AD patients than in HC (p-value = 0.03, Figure
Immunodetection of cystatin A did not provide reliable results (data not reported), probably because the cystatin A levels were under the sensitivity limits of our method.
The comparison among the three AD patient groups treated with different pharmacological therapies, named G1, G2, and G3, was limited by the very low number of subjects of the G2 and G3 groups and thus provided results that we consider preliminary and report in the Supplementary Materials (Supplementary   Figure
These data highlighted similar TPC values in the three patient groups.
The ANOVA showed that patients in the G1 and G2 groups, rather than G3, could contribute mainly to the highest levels of the peptides and proteins reported in Table

DISCUSSION
Saliva, as a mirror of oral and systemic health, provides valuable information because it contains not only proteins specifically secreted by the salivary glands
The present work evidenced increased levels of some proteins and peptides both secreted and not secreted by the salivary glands from AD patients compared to HCs.
Among the proteins not secreted by the salivary glands, this study highlighted a higher level of proteins with a multifaceted nature, namely, S100A8 and S100A9, α-defensins 1-4, Tβ4, and cystatins A and B. They are involved in many biological functions also at the level of the nervous system, and thus, it is not surprising that they may be implicated in molecular processes associated with AD pathogenesis.
S100A8 and S100A9 mainly derive from neutrophils and macrophages, which participate in inflammatory process.
During inflammation, S100A8 and S100A9 are actively released and exert a critical role in modulating the inflammatory response by stimulating leukocyte recruitment and inducing cytokine secretion.
S100A8 and S100A9 may play a dual role in inflammation, and their pro-inflammatory activity can switch to anti-inflammatory probably depending on the local   microenvironment
Our results did not allow us to establish if the increased levels of S100A9 and S100A8 observed in saliva of AD patients were linked to a proor anti-inflammatory role; however, they agree with studies performed by other research groups.
Indeed, as a consequence to neuroinflammations, overexpression of S100A proteins had already been observed in AD where they seem to be involved in several processes related to APP processing, Aβ levels, tau protein PTMs, formation of protein inclusions, and multiple signaling pathways
S100A8 was found to be upregulated in the sera of AD patients
Similarly, S100A9 was found to be strongly increased in brain lysates of both AD patients and AD mice
Several studies evidenced a strong positive correlation between S100A9 levels and AD pathology: knockdown of S100A9 improved cognition on model mice of AD and reduced global levels of Aβ and APP C-terminal fragments due to decreased activity of the beta-site amyloid precursor protein cleaving enzyme 1 (BACE-1)
Moreover, a correlation between S100A9 and calcium dysregulation in AD has been also evidenced since knockdown of S100A9 significantly diminished the increase of Ca 2+ levels determined by APP C-terminal fragments or by Aβ
Our study on saliva from AD patients highlighted, with respect to HC, higher levels not only of S100A8 and S100A9 but also of their oxidized proteoforms, namely, the hyperoxidized proteoform of S100A8, S100A8-SNO, and glutathionylated long S100A9.
Oxidative modifications of proteins are common in neurological disorders since the extracellular milieu is strongly oxidizing as a result of generation of ROS and reactive nitric oxide species (RNS)
Various environmental stimuli are responsible for ROS/RNS production by either inducing neuroinflammation or stimulating/preventing several signaling pathways, which leads to increased or reduced enzyme activity that boosts the addition of oxidative products in neuronal cells
Indeed, high concentrations of Fe 3+ in NFTs and Aβ aggregates increased the levels of H 2 O 2 and advanced glycation end products
Furthermore, it is known that Aβ chemotaxis of microglia and amyloid fibril phagocytosis represent inflammatory stimuli and play a critical role in ROS production
Also, the NADPH oxidase system has been identified as an important source of intracellular ROS, thus playing a key role in the generation of oxidative stress in neurodegenerative diseases
Therefore, it is worth underlining that S100A8 and S100A9 themselves, increasing intracellular NADPH oxidase activity, give a contribution to ROS generation
Oxidation may represent a switch, whereby the modified proteins display anti-inflammatory functions, such as that demonstrated for S100A8-SNO
Changes in the inflammatory microenvironment, PTMs of S100A8 and S100A9, binding with transition metals (Zn 2+ and Ca 2+ ), and S100A8/S100A9 heterodimer formation most likely play an important role in the functional switching of these pleiotropic proteins
In addition to exposure to oxidative stress, the microbiotainduced neuronal inflammation is a gradually emerging concept promoted by the discovery that brain infections, involving external risk factors such as bacteria or viruses, can trigger Aβ deposition and AD development
In fact, chronic brain infections, caused by various pathogens, have been reported for AD patients
In particular, it has been hypothesized that oral and gut microbiota, or their released endotoxins, may alter the permeability of the blood-brain barrier (BBB), facilitate the cerebral colonization by opportunistic pathogens, and induce microglia activation, resulting in increased levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines, which lead to neuronal loss and neurodegeneration
The inflammatory response thereafter may indirectly lead to the upregulation of Aβ production
It has been supposed that neuropathological alterations might be associated with abnormal expression and/or regulation of antimicrobial peptides, including defensins
Such antimicrobial peptides open an intriguing prospect for the detection and follow-up of such cerebral infection since they, as part of the innate immune system, can efficiently penetrate the BBB and target microbes.
Besides their main role as antibacterial and antiviral peptides, defensins also exert numerous immunological effects
Our study evidenced higher levels of α-defensins 1-4 in the saliva of AD patients than in HCs.
In accordance with our results,
It is fascinating in the contexts of AD also, the antimicrobial and anti-inflammatory activities of thymosin β4
Tβ4 is the most abundant Tβ in human tissues, including CNS, where it exerts multiple biological functions, such as downregulation of inflammatory chemokines and cytokines, promotion of cell migration, blood vessel formation, cell survival, stem cell maturation, inhibition of microbial growth, and antiapoptotic factor on gingival fibroblasts
The increased level of Tβ4 in saliva from AD patients is interesting and probably reflects an increase in the brain, in view of the elevated levels of Tβ4 found in reactive microglia of AD patients, where it suppresses the pro-inflammatory signaling
Interestingly, the saliva of AD patients was also characterized by increased levels of cystatin B, which is widely expressed in numerous tissues, including the brain, and of cystatin A, expressed mainly in epidermal cells, lymphoid tissues, and oral squamous epithelia
It has been suggested that cystatins could play a role in AD; indeed, cystatins A and B have been reported to localize to amyloid plaques of various origins
It is interesting to underline that cystatins B and A, like cystatin C, are considered potential Aβ-binding proteins in vitro
Indeed, it was demonstrated that cystatin B can bind Aβ and inhibit its fibrillization.
Binding is dependent on the oligomeric state
Unfortunately, we were unable to determine the oligomeric state of cystatin B in saliva.
This opens a new perspective for further studies on the salivary proteome of AD patients.
Cystatins A and B may also play an important role as regulation factors of inflammation through the inhibition of cathepsins
In particular, cystatin B, the main natural inhibitor of cathepsin B, may exert a neuronal protective key role in AD.
In fact, it should be highlighted that the chronic systemic exposure to lipopolysaccharide produced by periodontal bacteria may result in an overexpression of cathepsin B, which has been recently demonstrated to play a critical role in initiating neuroinflammation and neural dysfunction
Cathepsin B is a beta secretase enzyme, and similar to the BACE-1, it cleaves APP at the beta-cleavage site, creating amyloid fragments
Besides the principal role of cystatin B as an inhibitor of cathepsin B, recent data show additional interesting roles in maintenance of cell homeostasis, reduction of oxidative stress
Saliva of AD patients compared to the HC group also showed higher levels of some peptides secreted by the salivary glands that are involved in the metal homeostasis and defense of the oral cavity, namely, histatin-1, both phosphorylated and not phosphorylated, and statherin.
Histatin-1 is a peptide with multifaceted actions, including bacterial and host protease inhibitory properties, wound healing processes, and stimulation of cell migration
Moreover, histatin-1, similar to cystatin B, is able to inhibit bacterial lipopolysaccharide activity and consequently inflammatory cytokines and production of other pro-inflammatory factors
Indeed, histatin-1 together with other salivary Hst, defensins and cathelicidins, represent the main family of antimicrobial peptides in mammals
Histatins carry two metal-binding motifs in the N-terminal domain, by which they exert their antimicrobial action: the Cu(II)/Ni(II) binding (ATCUN) motif and the Zn(II)-binding motif HEXXH
Interestingly,
Antibacterial activities against oral pathogens have been demonstrated also for statherin and its C-terminal fragments
The increased level of these antimicrobial peptides in saliva of AD patients can be linked to an oral dysbiosis, which is often observed in such patients.
It is worth noting that recent epidemiological studies have identified a strong association between the periodontal pathogen P. gingivalis and neurodegeneration.
P. gingivalis has been detected in the brain autopsy and CSF of individuals diagnosed with AD
Another recent study demonstrated the presence of P. gingivalisderived lipopolysaccharides in brain samples from AD patients
Oral dysbiosis in elderly people with AD was frequently observed as well as the propensity to periodontal problems; AD individuals may also suffer from xerostomia and oral lesions, such as stomatitis and candidiasis
These conditions have been associated with a decrease of submandibular salivary flow in patients with AD without medications
Nevertheless, the results obtained in the present study did not appear linked to pathological conditions occurring in the oral cavity, since the enrolled patients were selected on the basis of absence of manifest oral diseases.
Moreover, our results could not be considered a consequence of glandular flow variations due to the therapy; indeed, no statistically significant differences in the TPC were measured among the three (G1, G2, and G3) groups of patients with diverse drug treatments.
Additionally, among all the peptides/proteins of glandular origins, only some peptides, such as statherin, histatin 1, and P-C peptides, changed their abundance in the saliva of AD patients with respect to the controls.
This evidence suggested a connection between the attendance of the AD and the overexpression and/or oversecretion of these specific peptides.
Finally, preliminary results from the comparison among G1, G2, and G3 groups appeared to display that almost all proteoforms found at high levels in the AD saliva were more concentrated in G1 and G2, treated with AChE inhibitors, than in G3 group; this last group, treated with an NMDAR antagonist, showed levels similar to those of the HC group.
Only statherin proteoforms and P-C peptides were found at the highest levels in the G3 group.
A further investigation focused on implications of the pharmacological therapy is desirable with a greater number of patients.
The data collected in the present study did not allow us to demonstrate that infections and/or inflammation occurred in our AD patients at the moment of the sample collection or to affirm that our results were a consequence of previous injury events.
Certainly, we observed that peptides and proteins involved in the innate immunoprotection, both specific of the oral cavity and also expressed in other body districts, were abundant in salivary samples of AD patients, particularly proteins acting as ROS/RNS scavengers and with a neuroprotective role, such as S100A8, S100A9, and cystatin B; proteins with antimicrobial activity, such as α-defensins, cystatins A and B, histatin-1, statherin, and Tβ4; and peptides involved in the homeostasis of the oral cavity.
Almost all these peptides/proteins are able to act as anti-inflammatory factors, and among these, Tβ4 has an important regulatory role at the microglia level.
Moreover, several experimental and clinical data confirm a key role of oral and gut dysbiosis in neurodegeneration.
The merging of oral-/gutderived inflammatory response together with aging and poor diet in the elderly may contribute to the pathogenesis of AD.
The results obtained in this study support the view that, in the AD patients under study, several protective mechanisms against pathogen-targeting agents generating ROS and RNS, infections, and inflammatory conditions have been established.
and CD: immunodetection experiments.
TC, BM, CM, MC, and IM: study design.
TC, BM, IM, AO, GF, MC, and CM: manuscript writing.
CM, AM, AB, and AL: clinical data collection and patient diagnosis.
All authors contributed to the article and approved the submitted version.



FIGURE 1 |
FIGURE 1 | Dot-blotting immunodetection of total α-defensins in salivary pools of AD and HC samples (A) and distribution plot of the XIC peak area values measured by HPLC-ESI-MS of total α-defensins (B) in each salivary sample from the AD and HC groups (XIC peak areas of the four identified defensins were considered in the sum, see Supplementary Table2) ( * , p < 0.05; * * * , p < 0.001).


FIGURE 1 | Dot-blotting immunodetection of total α-defensins in salivary pools of AD and HC samples (A) and distribution plot of the XIC peak area values measured by HPLC-ESI-MS of total α-defensins (B) in each salivary sample from the AD and HC groups (XIC peak areas of the four identified defensins were considered in the sum, see Supplementary Table2) ( * , p < 0.05; * * * , p < 0.001).


FIGURE 1 | Dot-blotting immunodetection of total α-defensins in salivary pools of AD and HC samples (A) and distribution plot of the XIC peak area values measured by HPLC-ESI-MS of total α-defensins (B) in each salivary sample from the AD and HC groups (XIC peak areas of the four identified defensins were considered in the sum, see Supplementary Table2) ( * , p < 0.05; * * * , p < 0.001).



FIGURE 2 |
FIGURE 2 | Dot-blotting immunodetection of total S100A8 (A) and total S100A9 (C) in salivary pools of AD and HC samples and distribution plot of the XIC peak area values of total S100A8 (B) and total S100A9 (D) measured by HPLC-ESI-MS in each salivary sample from the AD and HC groups (XIC peak areas of all the identified proteoforms of S100A8, such as S100A9, were considered in the sum, see Supplementary Table2) ( * , p < 0.05; * * , p < 0.01; * * * , p < 0.001).


FIGURE 2 | Dot-blotting immunodetection of total S100A8 (A) and total S100A9 (C) in salivary pools of AD and HC samples and distribution plot of the XIC peak area values of total S100A8 (B) and total S100A9 (D) measured by HPLC-ESI-MS in each salivary sample from the AD and HC groups (XIC peak areas of all the identified proteoforms of S100A8, such as S100A9, were considered in the sum, see Supplementary Table2) ( * , p < 0.05; * * , p < 0.01; * * * , p < 0.001).


FIGURE 2 | Dot-blotting immunodetection of total S100A8 (A) and total S100A9 (C) in salivary pools of AD and HC samples and distribution plot of the XIC peak area values of total S100A8 (B) and total S100A9 (D) measured by HPLC-ESI-MS in each salivary sample from the AD and HC groups (XIC peak areas of all the identified proteoforms of S100A8, such as S100A9, were considered in the sum, see Supplementary Table2) ( * , p < 0.05; * * , p < 0.01; * * * , p < 0.001).



FIGURE 3 |
FIGURE 3 | Dot-blotting immunodetection of Tβ4 in salivary pools of AD and HC samples (A) and distribution plot of the XIC peak area values of Tβ4 measured by HPLC-ESI-MS (B) in each salivary sample from the AD and HC groups ( * , p < 0.05; * * , p < 0.01).



FIGURE 4 |
FIGURE 4 | Dot-blotting immunodetection of total cystatin B in salivary pools of AD and HC samples (A) and distribution plot of the XIC peak area values of total cystatin B measured by HPLC-ESI-MS (B) in each salivary sample from the AD and HC groups (XIC peak areas of the three identified proteoforms of cystatin B were considered in the sum, see Supplementary Table2) ( * , p < 0.05; * * , p < 0.01).


FIGURE 4 | Dot-blotting immunodetection of total cystatin B in salivary pools of AD and HC samples (A) and distribution plot of the XIC peak area values of total cystatin B measured by HPLC-ESI-MS (B) in each salivary sample from the AD and HC groups (XIC peak areas of the three identified proteoforms of cystatin B were considered in the sum, see Supplementary Table2) ( * , p < 0.05; * * , p < 0.01).


FIGURE 4 | Dot-blotting immunodetection of total cystatin B in salivary pools of AD and HC samples (A) and distribution plot of the XIC peak area values of total cystatin B measured by HPLC-ESI-MS (B) in each salivary sample from the AD and HC groups (XIC peak areas of the three identified proteoforms of cystatin B were considered in the sum, see Supplementary Table2) ( * , p < 0.05; * * , p < 0.01).



TABLE 1 |
XIC peak areas values (mean ± SD) normalized on total protein concentration and frequencies of salivary proteins/peptides resulted to levels significantly different between the AD group and HC group.