Plasma Amyloid Concentration in Alzheimer’s Disease: Performance of a High-Throughput Amyloid Assay in Distinguishing Alzheimer’s Disease Cases from Controls
Background: Collection of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) for measurement of amyloid-␤ (A␤) species is a gold standard in Alzheimer's disease (AD) diagnosis, but has risks.
Thus, establishing a low-risk blood A␤ test with high AD sensitivity and specificity is of outmost interest.
Objective: We evaluated the ability of a commercially available plasma A␤ assay to distinguish AD patients from biomarkerhealthy controls.
Method: In a case-control design, we examined plasma samples from 44 AD patients (A + N+) and 49 controls (A-N-) from a memory clinic.
AD was diagnosed using a combination of neuropsychological examination, CSF biomarker analysis and brain imaging.
Total A␤ 40 and total A␤ 42 in plasma were measured through enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) technology using ABtest40 and ABtest42 test kits (Araclon Biotech Ltd.).
Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) analyses with outcome AD were performed, and sensitivity and specificity were calculated.

INTRODUCTION
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is threatening global healthcare systems
As its neuropathological hallmark, AD is characterized by an accumulation of amyloid-␤ (A␤) peptides in the brain and AD diagnosis largely depends on an estimation of brain A␤ burden.
A␤ is derived through cleavage of the amyloid-␤ protein precursor (A␤PP), a transmembrane protein, and aggregates as neurotoxic amyloid plaques ultimately impairing synaptic function
Brain A␤ antemortem is quantifiable via radioactive labelling on positron emission tomography (PET)
Amyloid PET and CSF A␤ can be used interchangeably for clinical diagnosis
Both have also been shown to predict future cognitive decline
Nonetheless, amyloid PET and CSF A␤ are used infrequently in clinical practice
Amyloid PET is cost-intensive and dependent on radioactive tracers; lumbar punctures to obtain CSF can cause minor complications such as back pain as well as more severe complications such as spinal hematoma
In contrast, blood collection is well-tolerated, making measurement of blood A␤ for estimation of brain A␤ burden suitable for large-scale application in routine diagnostics.
For instance, with sufficient sensitivity and specificity, analysis of blood A␤ could serve as a first-step screening tool for selection of patients for more cost-intensive and high-risk diagnostic measures.
Ultimately, blood A␤ analysis might have a comparable impact on diagnostic procedures as amyloid PET
However, measuring A␤ in blood is inherently difficult
Plasma concentrations of A␤ are around 10-fold lower than in CSF, whereas the total protein content is 10-fold higher
Sophisticated methods for A␤ analysis have been developed in recent years, but results from the first diagnostic and epidemiological applications of these methods have been inconsistent.
A number of studies have found an association of lower plasma A␤ concentrations (thought to reflect a greater brain A␤ burden) with more severe neuropsychological deficits
Others report results in the opposite direction
It has been suggested that one reason for this inconsistency may lie in between-study differences in the cognitive profiles of study samples given that plasma A␤ levels follow a complex temporal trajectory: concentrations increase with age but, potentially due to brain A␤ aggregation, reduce in symptomatic stages of AD
The inconsistent research findings may additionally stem from variations in A␤ measurement methods.
Of note, in-house methods with limited feasibility for upscaling are frequent
Here, we determined the ability of plasma A␤ concentration to discriminate between AD patients and biomarker-healthy, non-diseased controls.
We used a recently established, commercially available and high-throughput plasma A␤ assay that to our knowledge has never been evaluated independently of the manufacturer.
We hypothesized that A␤ concentration was lower in the plasma of AD patients than in controls.
The ratio of plasma A␤ 42/40 served as the main biomarker of interest as it reflects the more pathological of the amyloid species (A␤ 42 )

MATERIALS AND METHOD

Study design and sample size calculation
In a case-control study design, A␤ was measured in plasma samples previously stored at a biobank for AD patients and biomarker-healthy, non-diseased controls.
With a two-tailed analysis and a power of 80%, 47 observations were required per group (total N = 94) to detect statistically significant group differences in plasma A␤ (expected effect size d = 0.6).
To account for occasional technical difficulty in biomarker measurement, we arrived at a target sample size of N = 100.
The study complied with the Declaration of Helsinki.

Study sample
Cases in our study included patients with AD, who were diagnosed during a visit to a memory clinic in Berlin, Germany, between 2014 and 2018.
Controls were selected among individuals who presented to the clinic with memory concerns during the same time period, but who were otherwise neurobiologically healthy and consequently did not receive a diagnosis of AD or other forms of dementia.
The memory clinic is part of the German Dementia Competence Network (DCN).
AD patients and controls were not matched.

Clinical examinations
All participants underwent a thorough and identical clinical examination that included lumbar puncture for CSF collection and collection of blood.
Participants were not required to fast.
Plasma samples were stored at a biobank for future analysis.
CSF was collected into polypropylene tubes and frozen at -80 • C according to standard operating procedures detailed elsewhere
Total tau (t-tau), A␤ 40 , and A␤ 42 in CSF were measured in Mesoscale System (MSD) immunoassays (Mesoscale Discovery, Gaithersburg, MD, USA) at a laboratory adjacent to the clinic site.
For t-tau, the MSD MS6000 Phospho-, Total Tau Kit was used; for A␤ 40 and A␤ 42 , the MSD MS6000 Human (6E10) A␤3-Plex Kit was used
The ratio A␤ 42/40 was calculated.
Consenting participants were genotyped for apolipoprotein (APOE) status.
'APOE 4' was defined as presence of at least one 4 allele.
Participants additionally underwent computed tomography (CT) and/or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) on a separate visit.
Neuropsychological testing was mainly based on the CERAD (Consortium to Establish a Registry for Alzheimer's Disease) recommendations.
Tests included the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE)
The battery was supplemented by the Clock Drawing test as a screening tool for dementia and Trail-Making Tests A and B (TMT-A; TMT-B) as measures of processing speed and executive function.
The Logical Memory subtest of the Wechsler Memory Scale 4th edition assessed verbal memory and included immediate and delayed recall.

Clinical diagnosis of cases and controls
AD was diagnosed according to DSM-V criteria in a consensus conference involving psychiatrists, physicians and neuropsychologists from a combination of results from the neuropsychological examination, CSF biomarker analysis and brain imaging data.
Diagnostic confidence was exceptionally high compared with non-specialized centers, as AD patients were selected for enrollment into clinical trials at the memory clinic.
AD patients were thus considered both clinically and neurobiologically diseased, whereas the control group was considered biomarker-healthy.
Plasma A␤ concentration was unknown at the time of diagnosis.

Aβ in plasma
Plasma samples were extracted from the biobank in 2018 and shipped to an analysis laboratory (Araclon Biotech Ltd., Zaragoza, Spain) for measurement of total A␤ 40 (referred to as A␤ 40 hereafter) and total A␤ 42 (referred to as A␤ 42 hereafter) through enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) technology using the ABtest40 and ABtest42 test kits (Araclon Biotech Ltd., Zaragoza, Spain)
The laboratory was blinded to our research question and to patient characteristics.
Of N = 100, the analysis produced data on A␤ 40 for n = 97 (n = 50 controls; n = 47 patients) and on A␤ 42 for n = 93 participants (n = 49 controls; n = 44 patients).
Intra-assay coefficient of variation (CV) was 4.5% for A␤ 40 and 15.8% for A␤ 42 .
Inter-assay CV was 3.7% for A␤ 40 and 5.0% for A␤
The ratio A␤ 42/40 was calculated for n = 49 controls and n = 44 patients, and served as the main plasma biomarker of interest.

Statistical analysis
Differences between AD patients and controls in terms of sociodemographics, frequency of the APOE 4 allele and CSF biomarkers were compared using independent samples t-tests, Mann-Whitney tests or χ 2 tests.
In the total sample, associations of plasma A␤ 42 , A␤ 40 , and A␤ 42/40 with CSF A␤ 42 , A␤ 40 , and A␤ 42/40 were determined using univariate Spearman correlation analyses.
Plasma A␤ 42 , A␤ 40 , and A␤ 42/40 were compared between AD patients and controls, and between carriers of the APOE 4 allele (≥1 allele) and non-carriers using Mann-Whitney tests.
The diagnostic accuracy of plasma A␤ 40 , plasma A␤ 42 , and plasma A␤ 42/40 was determined in receiver operating characteristic (ROC) analyses to calculate areas under the curve (AUCs) with the outcome AD patients versus controls.
ROC analyses were performed separately for age, APOE 4, plasma A␤ 40 , plasma A␤ 42 , and plasma A␤ 42/40 , and for selected combinations of these predictors.
For plasma A␤ 42/40 as the main biomarker of interest, the optimal cut-off and associated sensitivity, specificity and Youden's index
Analyses were performed in SPSS (Version 18, IBM SPSS, Chicago, Illinois) and R.

RESULTS

Sample characteristics
AD patients were statistically significantly older and were more likely to have at least one APOE 4 allele compared with controls (Table
CSF A␤ 42 , CSF A␤ 42/40 , CSF t-tau, and neuropsychological test results were in line according to diagnostic group (data not shown).

Associations of plasma Aβ with CSF biomarkers
In the total sample, plasma A␤ 40 was significantly positively correlated with plasma A␤ 42 (Spearman's rho 0.46; p < 0.001).
Plasma A␤

Plasma Aβ in AD patients and controls
Plasma A␤ 40 , plasma A␤ 42 , and plasma A␤ 42/40 were not significantly different between AD patients and controls (Table
In ROC analyses, the area under the curve (AUC) was 0.51 (95% CI 0.40, 0.63; p = 0.809) for plasma A␤ 40 , 0.55 (95% CI 0.43, 0.67; p = 0.404) for plasma A␤ 42 , and 0.58 (95% CI 0.46, 0.70; p = 0.173) for plasma A␤ 42/40 , indicating that the ability to discriminate between AD patients and controls based solely on these plasma markers is poor.
In comparison, the AUCs based on age only or based on APOE 4 only were 0.70 (95% CI 0.59, 0.80; p = 0.001) and 0.73 (95% CI 0.62, 0.83; p < 0.001) respectively.
When plasma A␤ 42/40 as the main biomarker of interest was added to these models, the AUCs did not change (age and A␤ 42/40 , AUC, 0.70; 95% CI 0.59, 0.80; p = 0.001; p for difference 0.999; APOE 4 and A␤ 42/40 , AUC, 0.76; 95% CI 0.65, 0.87; p < 0.001; p for difference 0.429).
The AUC for a model that included age and APOE 4 was 0.79 (95% CI 0.69, 0.89; p < 0.001).
When plasma A␤ 42/40 was added to this model, the AUC was 0.80 (95% CI 0.70, 0.91; p < 0.001; p for difference 0.879 see Fig.
Taken together, these data show that plasma A␤ 42/40 did not contribute to the ability to discriminate between AD patients and controls.
Based on the ROC analysis, we determined a cutpoint of 0.076 for a plasma A␤ 42/40 concentration  with a maximum in both sensitivity and specificity.
However, at this cut-point, plasma A␤ 42/40 had low sensitivity (61.2%) and specificity (63.6%;
Youden's index 0.25) and correctly identified 28 of the 44 AD patients and 30 of the 49 controls.
Sixteen AD patients were misclassified as controls (false negatives) and 19 controls were misclassified as AD cases (false positives).
Plasma A␤ 42/40 at this cut-point had a positive predictive value (PPV) of 59.6% and a negative predictive value (NPV) of 65.2%.
We applied further experimental cut-points to plasma A␤ 42/40 in posthoc analyses to reduce the number of false positives, but all resulted in low diagnostic accuracy (Supplementary Table

Plasma Aβ in non-carriers and carriers of APOE 4
Across the full study sample, plasma A␤ 40 (median 238.1 pg/mL versus 228.9 pg/mL; p = 0.466), plasma A␤ 42 (median 21.3 pg/mL versus 16.7 pg/mL; p = 0.251), and plasma A␤ 42/40 (median 0.08 versus 0.07; p = 0.212) were each not statistically different in non-carriers and in carriers of the APOE 4 allele, respectively.

DISCUSSION
Blood-based biomarkers of AD have the potential to revolutionize AD diagnostic procedures.
Here, in a unique case-control study with exceptionally detailed assessments that included a neuropsychological examination, CSF biomarker analysis and brain imaging as gold standards in AD diagnosis, we found that plasma A␤ was not able to distinguish AD patients well from biomarker-healthy, non-diseased controls.
Sensitivity and specificity based on plasma A␤ 42/40 levels alone were low and not indicative of a diagnostic test with scope for clinical application.
Only 64% of AD patients were correctly detected based on plasma A␤ 42/40 .
Plasma A␤ 42/40 was only weakly but significantly correlated with CSF A␤ 42/40 .
This finding is in agreement with several previous investigations
CSF A␤ itself comes with measurement difficulties
In contrast to several previous studies comparing AD patients and controls
Several reasons may underlie this null result.
Firstly, plasma A␤ may in fact be unrelated to AD status.
Secondly, due to the 'noise' associated with peripheral production and clearance of A␤
Thirdly, measurement error from varying time lapse before freezing, from varying storage time of plasma samples, uncontrolled fasting status and time of day, and/or plasma A␤ analysis itself may have affected results.
To our knowledge, we provide the first application of a novel, highthroughput technique for plasma A␤ analysis
The assay had previously been used in four studies
In sum, the studies found correlations of plasma A␤ 42/40 with CSF A␤ 42/40
Further, a lower plasma A␤ 42/40 was reported in patients with mild cognitive impairment (MCI) compared with cognitively normal individuals; additionally MCI patients with lower plasma A␤ 42/40 were at increased risk of 2-year conversion to AD
In two of the four studies sensitivity, specificity and AUC of plasma A␤ 42/40 for A␤-positive PET were more promising
Yet, in one of these studies, when the full cohort was analyzed rather than a subsample, plasma A␤ 42/40 performed poorly in discriminating MCI from cognitively normal individuals
A cross-sectional analysis of people with subjective cognitive decline, too, found low AUC and low specificity of the compound alone for A␤-positive PET
The final, prospective study on conversion from MCI to AD only reported a fully adjusted model that included plasma A␤ as well as age, APOE, and education
The discrepancy of our results from many of the manufacturer-funded results remains unclear.
AD diagnosis in our study was based on neuropsychological test scores, CSF biomarker analysis and brain imaging results, and so we are confident that we have been successful in selecting neurobiologically diseased AD patients and neurobiologically healthy controls.
That, combined with recent reports of acceptable diagnostic performance of plasma A␤ when measured using different high-throughput tech-niques
Technical issues in our study were also indicated by the fact that plasma A␤ relative to CSF A␤ was far lower than the expected 10-fold difference
A␤ metabolism is strongly influenced by the APOE protein.
APOE is involved in cholesterol transport in the brain as well as in A␤ production and clearance, and binds to A␤ in CSF
The APOE gene occurs in three polymorphisms (2; 3; 4) of which the APOE 4 allele is a strong predictor of lateonset AD
Carriers of APOE 4 have greater brain A␤ burden imaged on PET
Several population-based cohort studies also point to lower plasma A␤ in carriers
Effect sizes speak against low statistical power as the root cause, corroborating plasma A␤-at least when measured using the present assay-as a peripheral biomarker with little scope for capturing AD-type neuropathological burden.
Detailed characterization of participants using genetic, CSF biomarker, and brain imaging data is a strength of our study, but some limitations must be considered.
Due to small sample size, our analyses were underpowered to detect more subtle group differences in plasma A␤.
For instance, we only had a two-tailed power of around 30% to detect a small group difference.
Nonetheless, the anticipated large effect had been reasonable given that we had selected distinct groups of neurobiologically confirmed AD patients and biomarker-healthy controls.
A large group difference is also a prerequisite for implementation of a diagnostic test in clinical settings, which is at the core of plasma A␤ research.
Time interval between plasma collection and freezing, fasting status, and time of day had not been fully standardized and this may have contributed to measurement error.
However, recent evidence suggests that plasma A␤ concentration is relatively immune to these factors
Plasma samples had been stored for between 7 months and 4 years prior to extraction from the biobank for A␤ analysis.
Though we are not aware of studies that have assessed an influence of storage time on plasma A␤, we have no reason to believe it may be less stable compared with A␤ in frozen CSF for which we have previously demonstrated long-term stability
Finally, we did not consider AD staging and included both earlyonset and late-onset AD in our sample (6 AD patients were <65 years old).
All of these factors may have played a role in generating a large range of plasma A␤ measurements thus may have contributed to our null findings.
At the same time, with exception of storage time, they are all part of a real-world setting which any diagnostic test for AD must be able to withstand for implementation in the clinic.
In a recent analysis of a mostly cognitively unimpaired older cohort, baseline plasma A␤ measured with immunoprecipitation and liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry assay predicted conversion from amyloid-negative to amyloidpositive PET during a 4-year follow-up.
Results indicated that implementing the plasma A␤ test in clinical practice would reduce PET scans by 62%
Further studies in this direction are needed in spite of the present null findings to fully determine the diagnostic value of plasma A␤ and for head-tohead comparison with other biomarkers of brain A␤ burden.
For instance, plasma t-tau
Serum NFL has also been shown to be elevated in patients with familial AD
A substantial proportion of patients with MCI or dementia with potential AD etiology appears to be misdiagnosed once followed up with amyloid PET
For A␤ in particular, different methods for measuring plasma concentration of the protein should be compared with one another and with a recently developed structure-based approach that measures misfolded A␤
The goal should be to standardize analysis methods across labs.
Here, we did not create CSF/plasma A␤ ratios, because AD diagnosis was based in part on CSF A␤ so that such ratios would have led to circular arguments, but future studies could explore their usefulness (e.g.,
Any biomarker of AD needs to offer scope for large-scale application.
Here, we used a recently established, commercially available, highthroughput technique and found that plasma A␤ correlated weakly with CSF A␤ and was unable to distinguish between AD patients and biomarkerhealthy, non-diseased controls.
Plasma A␤ at the cut-point with maximum sensitivity and specificity identified 38% of our sample incorrectly as false pos-itive or false negative.
We thus deem its performance inacceptable.
Diagnostic confidence for clinical AD diagnosis can be considered exceptionally high in our study because AD diagnosis was based on a combination of detailed diagnostic procedures that are not routinely applied in clinical practice outside of specialized memory clinics.
Plasma A␤ measured with the present assay can therefore be expected to be even less adequate in more diverse, 'real-world' samples that include 'gray zones' and prodromal stages of AD.
Nonetheless, plasma A␤ may well be a useful biomarker of age-related cognitive impairment in population-based epidemiological research studies aimed at risk stratification and elucidation of pathophysiological mechanisms underlying impairment.
The utility of the blood A␤ assay presented here is yet to be determined in that context.
Overall, we conclude that as the evidence currently stands, the plasma A␤ concentration assay may have limited ability to distinguish AD cases from biomarker-healthy, non-diseased controls.
Its evaluation in larger samples and, potentially, a shift of focus toward other blood-based biomarkers and/or efforts for technological advancement of plasma A␤ measurement, which has recently gained momentum



Fig. 1 .
Fig. 1.
Plasma A␤ 42/40 plotted against CSF A␤ 42/40 according to diagnostic group (rho = 0.22; p = 0.037 across total sample).



Fig. 2 .
Fig. 2. ROC curves for plasma A␤ 42/40 alone, plasma A␤ 42/40 with age, and plasma A␤ 42/40 with age and APOE 4, in n = 81 patients with complete data.
Outcome is "AD" with reference "controls".
To create a ROC curve above the reference line, A␤ 42/40 was transformed to "1-A␤ 42/40 " (blue line).



Fig. 3 .
Fig. 3. Diagnostic accuracy of plasma A␤ 42/40 at optimal cut-point (total n = 93).



Table 1
Sociodemographic, clinical, and cognitive characteristics in controls and AD patients


and plasma A␤ 42/40 were each significantly, albeit weakly, positively correlated with CSF A␤ 40 , A␤ 42 ; plasma A␤ 42/40 was additionally positively associated with CSF A␤ 42/40 (Table 2, Fig. 1).
Plasma A␤ 40 was not significantly correlated with CSF A␤ 40 , A␤ 42 , or A␤ 42/40 .
When stratified by case-control status, in controls, plasma A␤ 42 and A␤ 42/40 were significantly correlated with CSF A␤ 42 , whereas none of the remaining correlations were statistically significant (Table 2).
In AD patients, plasma A␤ 40 was signif-



Table 3
Plasma A␤ concentration in controls and AD patients inversely correlated with CSF A␤ 42 / 40 , but none of the remaining correlations were statistically significant.
A␤ 40 and A␤ 42 concentrations were overall around 30-fold and 26-fold higher in CSF than in plasma respectively (CSF A␤ 40 , median 6,727 pg/mL in controls and 7,345 pg/mL in AD patients; CSF A␤ 42 , median 677 pg/mL in controls and 310 pg/mL in AD patients; plasma A␤ 40 , median 237 pg/mL in controls and 237 pg/mL in AD patients; plasma A␤ 42 , median 20 pg/mL in controls and 17 pg/mL in AD patients).