Cortisol hypersecretion and the risk of Alzheimer's disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis
Background: Morning cortisol levels have been reported to be elevated among patients with Alzheimer's disease (AD); yet no meta-analysis has been conducted to confirm the existence and magnitude of this association.
It also remains unclear whether hypercortisolism is a risk factor for AD.
Methods: PubMed, EMBASE, and PsycINFO were systematically searched for eligible studies.
Cross-sectional data were pooled using random effects meta-analyses; the differences in morning cortisol levels between patients and cognitively normal controls were quantified.
Longitudinal studies were qualitatively synthesised due to methodological heterogeneity.
Results: 57 cross-sectional studies and 19 prospective cohort studies with 17,245 participants were included.
Compared with cognitively normal controls, AD patients had moderately increased morning cortisol in blood (g=0.422,
P<0.001;
I 2 =48.5%), saliva (g=0.540,
P<0.001;
I 2 =13.6%), and cerebrospinal fluids (g=0.565,
P=0.003;
I 2 =75.3%).
A moderate elevation of morning cortisol was also detected in cerebrospinal fluids from patients with mild cognitive impairment (MCI) versus controls (g=0.309,
P=0.001;
I 2 =0.0%).
Cohort studies suggested that higher morning cortisol may accelerate cognitive decline in MCI or mild AD patients, but the results in cognitively healthy adults were inconsistent.
Morning cortisol was confirmed to be moderately elevated in AD patients and may have diagnostic and prognostic values for AD.

Introduction
The healthcare and socio-economic burden of Alzheimer's disease (AD) has been increasing exponentially with the global trend of population ageing
Late-onset AD is posited to be a multi-factorial disorder caused by complex interactions between genetic, lifestyle, and environmental factors over time.
However, the precise aetiology and pathogenesis, as well its nosological heterogeneity still remain unclear
Identification of potential biomarkers beyond the "β amyloid deposition, pathologic tau, and neurodegeneration" (ATN) biomarker framework is essential for elucidating the complex pathogenesis of AD and discovering new targets for drug development
Furthermore, a reliable set of predictive biomarkers that can detect pre-symptomatic elderly subjects at high risk of AD would add significant value for patient stratification in clinical trials and preventive interventions.
A growing body of evidence suggests that abnormal level of the glucocorticoid hormone is linked with key hallmarks of AD pathogenesis, specifically β-amyloid deposition, tauhyperphosphorylation; alongside synaptic deficits
Such observations lend credence to the "glucocorticoid-cascade" hypothesis which suggests that chronic glucocorticoid secretion, as seen after prolonged stress exposure, may contribute to the aetio-pathogenic pathway leading to cognitive decline and AD in the elderly
Activation of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis results in the production of glucocorticoids, secreted in the form of cortisol in humans, as a response to stress and for maintaining homeostasis
Hormonal release follows a circadian rhythm that reaches peak levels after 30-45 minutes post morning awakening (referred to as the cortisol awakening response; CAR
AD-related HPA axis hyperactivity is most frequently observed as elevated peak cortisol levels in the morning
At the same time, several other studies reported no significant differences in morning cortisol levels between AD patients and cognitively normal controls
Despite these contradictory reports, no meta-analysis has yet been conducted to synthesise the available evidence and evaluate the existence or magnitude of the reported associations.
Robust comparisons of AD-related cortisol elevation in peripheral samples (e.g., blood, saliva, urine, and hair) and in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) may also be important for informing future research and clinical applications.
Furthermore, it remains unclear whether morning cortisol hypersecretion occurs in earlier disease stages (e.g., mild cognitive impairment; MCI).
On the other hand, summarising evidence from longitudinal studies on baseline morning cortisol levels and subsequent decline in cognitive functions or incidence of AD/MCI will help elucidate the temporal relationships and establish an aetiological and potentially predictive role of morning hypercortisolism in AD development.
In this study, we conducted the first reported meta-analysis to-date, aiming at a systematic evaluation of available cross-sectional studies that assessed morning central or peripheral cortisol levels in AD/MCI patients as compared to cognitively normal individuals.
We also synthesised longitudinal studies that examined morning hypercortisolism as a risk factor for AD development and cognitive decline among older populations.

Methods

Search strategy
Following the predefined study protocol, we systematically searched PubMed, EMBASE, and PsycINFO databases to identify journal articles published by July 2019 that reported the association between morning cortisol level and AD or cognitive impairment in human adults.
This study followed the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Metaanalyses (PRISMA) reporting guideline
Studies were identified using search terms related to cortisol, Alzheimer's disease, and cognitive impairment.
Medical Subject Headings (MeSH) terms and free text words were combined for the search.
Detailed searching strategies are displayed in Supplementary Methods.

Inclusion/exclusion criteria
Studies were included if they used a cross-sectional, case-control, or cohort design and measured cortisol levels in blood (plasma/serum), saliva, or CSF samples.
We only included studies with morning sampling (defined as measurement within the time period from morning awakening to 11:30 a.m.) which reflects circadian peak cortisol levels.
Cross-sectional studies were included if they reported cortisol levels in clinically diagnosed AD or MCI patients versus a cognitively normal group in an appropriate and extractable form for pooled analysis (e.g., mean levels for each group with standard deviation (SD), standard error (SE), or confidence interval (CI); or mean differences with SE, CI or exact P value).
For inclusion, case-control and cohort studies were required to have morning cortisol levels as exposure and subsequent AD/MCI onset or cognitive decline as outcomes.
Effect estimates of longitudinal data (e.g., hazard ratios (HR), odds ratios (OR), regression or correlation coefficients) were also required for inclusion.
Studies were excluded if they were conducted in younger populations (<50 years old); did not report sampling time; only presented graphic data that were not extractable even with graphic editing software; did not report specific diagnostic criteria for AD or MCI; or focused on populations with comorbidities characterized by chronic HPA hyperactivity (e.g., major depression, schizophrenia and bipolar disorder, anorexia nervosa, chronic alcoholism, posttraumatic stress disorder, or burnout), or populations with disorders that directly affect cortisol biosynthesis (e.g., Cushing's disease and Addison's disease).
In addition, experimental studies that measured HPA reactivity after challenges, such as the dexamethasone suppression test or other drug tests, were excluded unless they presented basal cortisol data prior to the intervention.
Duplicated data, including separate studies that used an identical population or sub-population, were removed.

Data extraction and study quality assessment
We extracted the following information from eligible cross-sectional studies for a quantitative synthesis: (1) clinical diagnosis (AD or MCI) with the diagnostic criteria used and sample sizes of patient and control groups, (2) mean morning cortisol values for each group and corresponding SD, SE, or CI, (3) sample type, time of sampling, assay method and units, and (4) population characteristics (country, age, gender, comorbidities and medications known to confoundedly affect cortisol levels).
Data from eligible case-control and cohort studies were extracted for a qualitative synthesis due to substantial methodological heterogeneity.
The data included: (1) population characteristics (country, sample size, age, gender, baseline cognitive status, follow-up years),
(2) cortisol measures (sample type, time of sampling, assay method, exposure categories), (3) cognitive outcomes and assessments, (4) statistical methods and effect estimates (based on maximally-adjusted models when possible).
We used the Cochrane recommended software PlotDigitizer (www.plotdigitizer.sourceforge.net/)
to extract graphic cortisol data in 19 papers where no precise numerical data was reported.
We also contacted 23 authors by email to request summary data; three authors provided usable data
The study quality of included papers was evaluated using the "National Institutes of Health (NIH) quality assessment tool for observational cohort and cross-sectional studies" (www.nhlbi.nih.gov/health-topics/study-quality-assessment-tools).
This tool consists of a checklist of 11 items, for which an overall quality rating of "good", "fair" or "poor" was assigned to each study after a qualitative evaluation.
Two authors (BZ and RT) independently screened the papers and performed data extraction and quality assessment.
All discrepancies were settled after review of the corresponding papers by both and consensus discussions.

Data analysis
Meta-analyses were conducted to examine differences in mean morning cortisol levels between AD/MCI patients and healthy controls in cross-sectional studies, separated by sample-type (blood, saliva, and CSF) and diagnostic-group (AD and MCI) to minimize heterogeneity.
Random-effects models with inverse-variance method were used to estimate the pooled effect size.
The Hedges' g statistic was adopted as a measure of effect size
The heterogeneity of results across studies was assessed by the I 2 statistic and Q test in each analysis.
A funnel plot was created to graphically identify publication bias in each metaanalysis with at least ten studies, followed by an Egger's test of asymmetry.
Subgroup analyses and meta-regressions were conducted to investigate potential moderators on the cortisol-AD association and potential sources of heterogeneity, such as country (European countries or elsewhere), assay method (radioimmunoassay or else), sampling time (before or after 9 a.m. for blood samples, and upon awakening or after 30 minutes post awakening for saliva samples), mean age and gender proportions.
To examine the robustness of the main findings, sensitivity analyses were performed by excluding studies without age/gender matching for controls, studies involving comorbid or medicated participants that may cause confounding bias, or studies rated as poor quality.
We also estimated the pooled unstandardized mean difference of cortisol levels (nmol/L) in plasma, serum, saliva, and CSF samples between patients and controls to facilitate clinical inference.
Statistical analyses were performed using Stata (version 14, StataCorp, College Station, TX).
All statistical tests were two-sided and the significance level was defined as P<0.05.

Results

Search results and study characteristics
The initial literature search yielded a total of 3305 records.
After screening, 57 cross-sectional studies and 19 prospective cohort studies reported in 72 papers remained (four papers presented both cross-sectional and cohort data); no eligible case-control studies were identified (Figure
Most cross-sectional studies measured blood cortisol (n=40; 20 with plasma and 20 with serum) or salivary cortisol (n=13), whilst only five studies investigated central cortisol in CSF samples (Table
The sampling time ranged from 7:00 a.m. to 11:30 a.m.
The radioimmunoassay (RIA) was the most frequently used method for cortisol measurement (n=34); other methods included fluoroimmunoassay and the enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA).
Most studies compared AD patients versus cognitively normal controls (n=39), nine studies compared MCI patients versus controls, and seven studies investigated both.
The majority of the studies used the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke-Alzheimer Disease and Related Disorders (NINCDS-ADRDA) criteria
Most included prospective cohorts assessed cortisol levels in blood (n=13) or saliva samples (n=4) at baseline, and only two studies measured CSF cortisol levels (Table
Twelve studies were initiated in cognitively healthy older adults at baseline, six featured patients with AD or MCI at baseline, and one study included both populations.
The follow-up length varied from one to ten years.
Most studies used decline in cognitive test scores as outcome measure (n=14), four reported clinical conversion/progression as outcome, and one study used both outcome measures.
The study quality of most included studies was rated as "fair" or "good" using the NIH quality assessment tool, while 8 studies had poor overall quality.
The commonest potential sources of bias among these studies are small sample sizes and lack of control for confounding factors.

Morning cortisol levels in AD/MCI patients versus cognitively normal individuals

Blood samples
The meta-analysis of 38 cross-sectional studies (2179 participants) using blood samples showed significantly increased morning cortisol levels in AD patients compared to cognitively normal controls (Figure
The effect size was moderate (Hedges' g=0.422, 95% CI: 0.289-0.556;
P<0.001) and the level of heterogeneity across studies was not excessive (I 2 =48.5%;
P=0.001).
In contrast, the meta-analysis of five studies (1149 participants) on MCI patients did not identify any difference in blood cortisol levels between affected and cognitively normal individuals (Hedges' g=0.002, 95% CI: -0.162-0.167,
P=0.978), with minor between-study heterogeneity (I 2 =17.0%;
P=0.306).

Saliva samples
The meta-analysis of five studies (284 participants) evaluating saliva cortisol also showed a moderately elevated level of morning cortisol in AD patients compared with controls (Hedges' g=0.540, 95% CI: 0.276-0.804,
P<0.001; Figure
There was only minor heterogeneity across studies (I 2 =13.6%;
P=0.327).
The meta-analysis of ten studies (2212 participants) in MCI patients did not reveal a significant difference in salivary cortisol levels between patients and controls (Hedges' g=0.106, 95% CI: -0.047-0.258,
P=0.174; Figure
P=0.117).
Both the funnel plots (Figure
suggested there was no evidence of publication bias in the above analyses.

CSF samples
Only five studies reported morning CSF cortisol levels in AD versus cognitively normal controls (618 participants), of which four also examined MCI patients (506 participants).
A moderate elevation in central cortisol was detected in AD patients compared to controls (Hedges' g=0.565, 95% CI: 0.198-0.931,
P=0.003; Figure
P=0.003).
Central cortisol was also moderately elevated in MCI patients compared to controls (Hedges' g=0.309, 95% CI: 0.125-0.492,
P=0.001; Figure
P=0.429).

Subgroup and sensitivity analyses
Results of subgroup analyses and meta-regressions for blood and salivary cortisol showed no effect modifications by aforementioned factors (P>0.05,
Table
Moreover, the pooled estimates did not change significantly in sensitivity analyses (Table
Insufficient number of studies with CSF samples limited our ability to conduct the above subgroup/sensitivity analyses for central cortisol.
The sensitivity analyses with unstandardized mean difference as effect size showed that compared with cognitively normal controls, AD patients had higher morning cortisol levels in plasma (d=51.0
nmol/L, 95% CI: 25.5-76.5,
P<0.001), serum (d=64.7 nmol/L, 95% CI: 35.0-94.5,
P<0.001), saliva (d=4.0 nmol/L, 95% CI: 0.5-7.4,
P=0.024), and CSF samples (d=6.6 nmol/L, 95% CI: 2.9-10.4,
P=0.001).
MCI patients had 4.1 nmol/L (95% CI: 1.0-7.2,
P=0.010) higher morning CSF cortisol levels on average than cognitively normal controls.

Longitudinal studies on associations between morning cortisol levels and risk of AD or cognitive decline

Baseline morning cortisol level and longitudinal changes of cognitive functioning
The characteristics of 19 cohort studies with 11,805 participants are summarised in Table
15 of these studies used longitudinal cognitive test scores as outcome measure, the results of which are described separately according to baseline disease status (5, 9, and 1 studies included MCI/AD patients, cognitively healthy older adults, and both populations at baseline) and sample types.
Among the six cohorts with MCI or AD patients at baseline, one and five cohorts measured CSF and blood cortisol at baseline.
Similarly,
In contrast, four small cohorts of AD patients showed no association between high blood cortisol and subsequent cognitive decline
One larger cohort of mildto-moderate AD patients associated high blood cortisol with faster decline in cognitive test scores
Overall, the limited but consistent evidence from cohort studies suggests that elevated morning cortisol in patients at early clinical AD stages may contribute to an accelerated subsequent cognitive decline in the clinical course of AD.
Inconsistent results were found in the 10 cohorts initiated in cognitively healthy adults at baseline (seven and three studies with blood and saliva samples).
One study in postmenopausal women reported an association of high blood cortisol with larger decline in category fluency but not in other cognitive domains
Another cohort with blood cortisol sample identified similar associations with changes in cognitive test scores only in participants with high levels of brain amyloid-β deposition according to positron emission tomography (PET) scan
In contrast, one small cohort
As for studies with saliva samples, the Whitehall II study
The Longitudinal Aging Study Amsterdam
Another cohort identified an association between high morning saliva cortisol and larger decline in visual memory among women but not men

Baseline morning cortisol level and the risk of AD or MCI incidence
Among the five cohort studies using AD or MCI incidence as outcome measure (one aforementioned study
They identified baseline plasma cortisol as a necessary component along with other five fluid-based biomarkers (distinct from amyloid-β and tau) to achieve optimal prediction performance.
The other four cohorts assessed clinical progression from cognitively normal to AD/MCI as main outcome.
The Vienna Transdanube Aging Study
95% CI: 1.03-1.17),
whereas the aforementioned Rotterdam Study
95% CI: 0.85-1.14).
The ESA Study in Canada
Finally, we have previously reported an increased risk of clinical progression to MCI/AD in preclinical adults with high CSF cortisol and pathological amyloid-β levels, and identified significant interactions between cortisol, amyloid-β, and cognitive reserve factors

Discussion
This study provides the first quantitative and qualitative synthesis of available cross-sectional and longitudinal data on associations between peripheral and central morning cortisol levels and the risk of cognitive decline and clinical AD syndrome.
Our meta-analyses confirmed a moderate elevation in blood, saliva, and CSF cortisol levels in AD patients versus cognitively normal individuals.
Only CSF cortisol was significantly elevated in MCI patients versus controls, potentially reflecting a pathogenic effect from a direct exposure to cortisol within the blood-brain barrier.
Circadian-peak cortisol hypersecretion has been reported as an endocrine and metabolic feature of AD over the last three decades
Our review of cross-sectional studies suggests this factor could be an important disease-state indicator for AD.
Indeed, a population-based study that screened 125 plasma analytes within a biomarker panel identified elevated morning cortisol as one of five predictors for AD diagnosis
Since blood cortisol can be assayed routinely in clinical settings, this measure could be used in population-wide screening for AD.
However, the diagnostic accuracy (e.g., sensitivity and specificity) of this single analyte, or in combination with a broader panel of biomarkers
Saliva cortisol, a measure of unbound and biologically active hormone, is also shown to be a reliable and non-invasive measure of comparable value for identifying AD cases
Indeed, saliva cortisol concentrations were found to correlate well with blood cortisol measures
Moreover, saliva samples are easier to obtain by participants at home, thus having the advantage of avoiding the stress response that may occur in clinical settings and also stress induced by blood sampling.
The saliva sampling time can be self-recorded by participants according to their awakening time, which can help address the influence of CAR effect on morning cortisol levels
Although peripheral cortisol is more suitable as an easily obtainable clinical biomarker, central cortisol levels assessed in CSF samples offer the added value of reflecting brain exposure levels of cortisol.
Our finding of the CSF cortisol elevation in MCI patients versus cognitively normal individuals suggests that hypercortisolism in the central nervous system may occur at early disease stages.
For instance,
Future research on central cortisol levels in MCI patients is needed to confirm theses findings.
Our synthesis of prospective cohort studies supports the potentially prognostic role of morning hypercortisolism in MCI or mild AD patients but reveals conflicting results in cognitively healthy subjects.
These findings may indicate that HPA axis dysfunction is not involved at the pre-clinical stage of AD.
Nevertheless, methodological limitations in some of the studies may explain the negative results reported.
For instance, the outcome measurements of repeated cognitive tests (or clinical diagnosis that is partially based on cognitive tests) may suffer from practice effect, the magnitude of which has been shown to be larger in cognitively healthy adults than in AD patients
Additionally, most of the studies did not use markers of AD pathology to characterise the pre-symptomatic AD phenotype
We and others have found that cortisol hypersecretion accelerates clinical progression or cognitive decline in preclinical individuals with pathological levels of Aβ42
Similarly, not all MCI patients included in the cohorts are prodromal AD patients; future cohort studies with more precise phenotyping of participants with established AD biomarkers could reveal more robust association between cortisol and AD progression.
Overall, the available evidence is not sufficient to draw firm conclusions regarding a putative aetiological or predictive role of cortisol in AD development.
Future large-scale longitudinal studies in preclinical-AD participants with both clinical conversion and comprehensive cognitive tests as outcomes are increasingly important.
In addition, pilot experimental studies of HPA or cortisol-targeted therapy
Identifier: NCT02727699 and NCT03830762).
The biological mechanisms underlying the association between cortisol hypersecretion and AD have not been fully elucidated.
One proposed mechanism is that chronic hypercortisolism may trigger neuronal loss in the hippocampus
In addition, cortisol levels are known to be elevated in chronic stress paradigms that have been implicated as a potential risk factor for AD
In fact, the moderate increase of cortisol in AD patients as synthesised in our study was lower than that was induced by acute stress or immunosuppression
Furthermore, chronic cortisol hypersecretion might also contribute to AD pathology through systemic inflammation.
For instance, chronic herpes simplex virus infection has been linked to increased AD risk
Central cortisol might modulate the recurrent brain infection through its principal target in the brain, the mineralocorticoid receptor, which has been shown to be a cofactor for herpes simplex virus proliferation
On the other hand, given the long preclinical phase of AD where the hallmark pathologies are developing, it is possible that cortisol hypersecretion may be triggered by these preexisting AD pathologies
The direction of this complex association (i.e., hypercortisolism as a cause or consequence of AD pathology) is yet unestablished and warrants further investigation
To elucidate the direction of relationship between cortisol and AD pathology, future cohort studies that measure both AD-related pathological/cognitive changes and cortisol concentrations longitudinally during follow-up, while controlling for other factors that influence HPA axis regulation (e.g., inflammation, metabolic factors, physiological stressors, comorbidities), are needed.
The longitudinal measurement of cortisol could help clarify whether abnormal cortisol secretion is merely a side effect of AD or ageing process.
Given the synthesised evidence on potential prognostic role of morning cortisol in MCI or mild AD patients in cohort studies, morning hypercortisolism in late-life could possibly serve as a marker of AD progression, secondary to the existing AD pathologies, though biomarker validation research is still required.
Several limitations in this systematic review should be noted.
Most included crosssectional studies recruited patients from clinical settings, which may lead to selection bias.
Nevertheless, clinical patients have the benefit of more precise AD diagnoses compared to community-based populations.
The possibility of residual confounding bias cannot be ruled out in this study.
Most included studies used RIA or other immunoassays to measure cortisol level, which have some methodological limitations (e.g., immunoassays for salivary cortisol may have poor specificity due to antibody cross-reactivity with cortisone in saliva
Future validation studies using Liquid chromatographytandem mass spectrometry, which has showed improved sensitivity and specificity
In addition, the methodological heterogeneity across the prospective cohort studies limited our ability to perform quantitative syntheses.
Finally, given the circadian rhythm of cortisol secretion and the variation in cortisol levels measured at different times of the day, we focused our analyses on morning cortisol levels to minimise heterogeneity.
Morning cortisol level has been proposed to reflect both basal hypercortisolemia and circadian cortisol hypersecretion
The dynamic nature of cortisol secretion gives rise to different patterns that can be evaluated experientially.
For instance, we note the existence, albeit limited, of other studies reporting associations of diurnal cortisol change, CAR, circadian nadir cortisol, 24-hour urinary cortisol, or 24-hour mean cortisol level with AD risk
Abnormal cortisol levels in response to the dexamethasone suppression test have also been observed in AD patients and warrants further investigation
Future studies investigating these additional measures, including hourly ultradian hormone secretion

Conclusions
This systematic review and meta-analysis confirmed both peripheral and central morning cortisol levels to be moderately elevated in AD patients compared to cognitively normal individuals.
Given inconsistencies in the available data, no firm conclusion could be drawn regarding the predictive role of hypercortisolism in AD symptom development among cognitively healthy adults.
Nevertheless, limited but consistent evidence implies that higher morning cortisol may accelerate cognitive decline in MCI or mild AD patients.

Declarations of Competing Interest:
Professor Lefkos Middleton reported having served as a consultant for AstraZeneca and Janssen, is presently serving as the National UK trial Coordinator for Takeda, Eli Lilly and Novartis trials; and receiving research funding from Takeda, Janssen, Novartis and EIT Health.
No disclosures were reported by other authors.
and in the decision to submit the article for publication.
2007.
Mental performance in old age dependent on cortisol and genetic variance in the mineralocorticoid and glucocorticoid receptors.

Figure captions and Tables



Figure 1 .
Figure 1.
PRISMA flowchart illustrating the stages involved in screening studies for the



Figure 2 .
Figure 2. Forest plot of 40 studies comparing morning cortisol levels in blood samples



Figure 3 .
Figure 3. Forest plot of 13 studies comparing morning cortisol levels in saliva samples



Figure 4 .
Figure 4. Forest plot of five studies comparing morning cortisol levels in CSF samples



Table 1 . Characteristics of 19 prospective cohort studies on associations between morning cortisol level and cognitive outcomes.