5-Hydroxymethylcytosine Signatures in Circulating Cell-Free DNA as Diagnostic Biomarkers for Late-Onset Alzheimer's Disease
Background: 5-Hydroxymethylcytosine (5hmC) is an epigenetic DNA modi cation that is highly abundant in nervous system.
It has been reported that 5hmC is signi cant associated with Alzheimer's disease (AD).
Changes in 5hmC signatures can be detected in circulating cell-free DNA (cfDNA), which has shown potential as a non-invasive liquid biopsy material.
However, there is no research about genome-wide pro ling of 5hmC in cfDNA and its potential for the diagnosis of AD to date.
Methods: We carried out a case-control study and used a highly sensitive and selective high-throughput sequencing of chemical labels to detect the genome-wide pro les of 5hmC in human cfDNA and identi ed differentially hydroxymethylated regions (DhMRs) in AD patients and the control.
Results: We detected a signi cant difference of 5hmC enrichment in gene bodies which were linked to multiple AD pathogenesis-associated signaling pathways in AD patients compared with cognitively normal controls.
AD patients can be well distinguished from cognitively normal controls by differentially hydroxymethylated regions (DhMRs) in cfDNA.
Specially, we found 7 distinct genes (RABEP1, CPNE4, DNAJC15, REEP3, ROR1, CAMK1D, and RBFOX1) had prediction diagnostic potential based on their signi cant correlations with MMSE and MoCA scores.
Conclusions: The present results suggest that 5hmC markers derived from plasma cfDNA can be served as an effective, minimally invasive biomarkers for clinical auxiliary diagnosis of late-onset AD.

Introduction
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the most common cause of dementia in the world
Physicians use a variety of approaches and tools to help make a diagnosis, and a de nitive diagnosis of AD can only be made postmortem
Therefore, for clinical diagnosis of AD in living patients, the National Institute on Aging and the Alzheimer's association proposed to incorporate not only the clinical judgment but also biomarker tests.
Therefore, developing a noninvasive biomarker test, such as a blood test, to assist in diagnosing AD would be of great signi cance.
Research is underway to develop such biomarker, but to date, no biomarker has been de ned based on the sensitivity and speci city needed to diagnose living individuals for routine use in clinical practice
One of the reasons is that the possible biomarkers including beta-amyloid plaques lack speci city for distinguishing dementia caused by AD from cognitive decline that is considered as a part of normal aging
Other major limitations of these biomarkers include that they are di cult to sample, impose a heavy economic burden on the patients, or require a specialist's knowledge for their interpretation
AD is a complex multifactorial neurodegenerative disorder that involves complex interactions between genes and environmental factors
The 21 variants signi cantly associated with AD susceptibility can only explain 7.6% of cognitive decline and 2.1% of clinical AD occurrence, highlighting that AD development may be driven by non-genetic factors
A number of studies have shown aberrant DNA epigenetic modi cations in speci c brain regions in individuals diagnosed with AD
5-Methylcytosine (5mC) has been revealed to be modulated by environmental factors and to be involved in the onset and progression of AD
Some studies have focused on the identi cation of 5mC in peripheral blood DNA to characterize AD in the past decade
However, there are no such studies on other epigenetic modi cations.
5-Hydroxymethylcytosine (5hmC) is another major and stable epigenetic marker that is generated from 5mC by the ten-eleven translocation (TET) family of dioxygenases that involves a wide range of biological processes from development to various diseases
More importantly, 5hmC is highly enriched in the central nervous system
A study of postmortem AD brains indicated that differentially hydroxymethylated genes were signi cantly enriched in AD-related pathology and clustered in functional gene ontology categories
Therefore, the changes in 5hmC markers may have great potential in AD diagnostics.
There are some intriguing reasons to give consideration to peripheral blood biomarkers for AD.
Firstly, it is impossible to obtain brain tissue samples from living patients.
Secondly, biopsies in the cerebrospinal uid (CSF) are very challenging from the perspective of obtaining longitudinal samples due to the risk of the CSF biopsy itself.
Cell-free DNA (cfDNA), originating from the DNA of apoptotic and necrotic cells, are found in the blood stream and individually represent a cellular derivative of the original tissue
Elevated cfDNA levels have been detected in patients with severe brain injury which is proof-of principle that cfDNA is shed from the brain to the blood stream during cell degradation
AD is characterized by brain atrophy associated with apoptotic of synapses and neurons, hence the proportion of the cfDNA in plasma originating from which will increase in AD patients.
Therefore, we hypothesized that 5hmC landscape of cfDNA may be a potential diagnostic biomarker of AD and carried out a case control study to test the feasibility.

Methods

Participants
A case control study was implemented from November 2019 to June 2020 in the Second Hospital of Shandong University.
Late-onset AD patients (> 60 years) and age-matched (± 3 years) cognitively normal subjects were recruited.
The diagnosis of AD was based on the present clinical procedure
Firstly, faceto-face interviews were conducted by trained investigators to screen suspected AD patients using Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) and the Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MOCA).
Next, according to the clinical diagnostic criteria of AD, the suspected AD patients were received a complete set of physical and nervous system examinations, including Alzheimer's Disease Cooperative Study-Activities of Daily Living Scale (ADCS-ADL), the Neuropsychiatric Inventory-Clinician rating scale (NPI-C), and magnetic resonance imaging.
Physicians determine whether the patient's suffering AD based on these clinical symptoms, and only the subjects who diagnosed as AD by two physicians were included in this study.
Participants with dementia family history, vascular dementia, depressive, psychiatric disease, mental disorder, drug or alcohol abuse were excluded.
The study was approved by The Ethics Committee of Qilu Hospital of Shandong University, and registered at the Chinese Clinical Trial Registry (No. ChiCTR2100042537).

Sample collection and cell-free DNA sample isolation
Peripheral blood (5-10 ml) was collected in EDTA anticoagulant tubes (BD).
The samples were placed on ice and sent to the lab within 2 hours.
Plasma samples were collected from peripheral blood after centrifugation for 10 min at 1600 g (4°C) and for 10 min at 16,000 g (4°C).
The prepared plasma samples were immediately stored at -80°C until puri cation.
cfDNA was extracted from 3-5 ml of plasma using the QIAamp Circulating Nucleic Acid Kit (Qiagen) according the manufacturer's protocol.
Concentrations and quality of cfDNA were quanti ed by Qubit uorometer (Life Technologies) and 2% agarose gel electrophoresis (Invitrogen).

5hmC library preparation and high-throughput sequencing
5hmC libraries were prepared following a previously described selective chemical labeling technique
Brie y, 10 ng cfDNA spiked with control oligos (0.01 pg of unmodi ed, methylated, or hydroxymethylated oligos per 10 ng cfDNA) was end repaired, 3'-adenylated, ligated to DNA Barcodes (Illumina Compatible), labeled with 5hmC and pulled down, and ampli ed with 14 cycles of PCR ampli cation using KAPA Hyper Prep Kit (Kapa Biosystems) according to the manufacturer's instructions.
The PCR products were puri ed using 1X AMPure XP beads according to the manufacturer's instructions.
The DNA concentration of each library was measured with a Qubit uorometer (Life Technologies), and sequencing was performed on the Illumina NextSeq 500 platform.

Bioinformatics analysis and statistical analysis
All of the de-multiplexed sequencing reads passed lters was rst trimmed to remove the low-quality bases and adaptor sequences by Trimmomatic (ver.
0.36) using the following parameters: ILLUMINACLIP:adapter.fa:2:30:7:1:TRUE; LEADING:3; SLIDINGWINDOW:4:15; TRAILING:3; and MINLEN:36.
For the 5hmC-captured libraries, the trimmed reads were unique mapped to reference genome UCSC/hg19 by Bowtie2 with default parameters
After ltering the duplicate reads, the mapping information for each reads pair was extracted and output as le of BED format for following analysis.
Hydroxymethylated regions (hMRs) over corresponding input of each sample were identi ed using the peak calling software MACS (version 1.4.9) with default parameters
Differential hMRs (DhMRs) analysis was performed using the PePr (version 1.1.1.18)
We used normalized reads number per 50 bp among the genome of the hMRs to calculate the reads density normalized to one million reads in the library for each genomic position (Wig les).
Screeshots of genomic regions were taken using the IGV genome browser.
Genomic annotations of differential hMRs were performed by detecting hMRs overlapping each genomic region ≥ 1 bp with bedtools
To functionally annotate putative DhMR genes, we conducted functional enrichment analysis for the identi ed DhMR genes using the Fisher's test function in R. GO and KEGG pathways analysis was performed using custom perl scripts with hypergeometric test and WebGestalt (WEB-based GEne SeT AnaLysis Toolkit).
The signi cance (p value) of the overrepresented GO terms or pathway was corrected by the Benjamini-Hochberg procedure.
All statistical analysis were performed by SPSS 24.0 software and GraphPad Prism 8.0.
Differences between control and AD group were analyzed using Student's t-test.
The correlation of the candidate diagnostic genes for AD with MMSE, MoCA, ADCS-ADL, and NPI-C scores were analyzed using Spearman's correlation analysis.
Receiver operating characteristic curve (ROC) analysis was used to calculate the area under curve (AUC) to preliminarily evaluate the predictive value of gene and AD.
P < 0.05 indicates signi cant.

Results

Basic characteristic of participants
Totally, 18 AD patients and 24 age-matched controls were included in the present study.
Table
There was no obvious difference in age, gender, total cholesterol (TC), triglyceride (TG), low density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C), and high density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C) of two groups.
AD subjects had signi cant lower levels of cognitive function than control subjects as shown by MMSE and MoCA scores (P < 0.001).

Genome-wide 5hmC pro les of cfDNA between control and AD groups
According to the mapped rate and unique mapping rate, there were good sequencing quality observed between the two groups in this study (Table
To ask whether or not the cfDNA 5hmC pro les had difference in control and AD groups, we compared the distribution of 5hmC along the gene bodies and found that the overall normalized read density of cfDNA 5hmC was signi cantly different between the two groups (Figure
Compared with the controls, AD patients showed higher 5hmC level in gene bodies whereas it was depleted at transcription start site.
Then, we analyzed 5hmC enrichment in different genomic characteristic regions and the overall genomic distribution of hMRs in all samples were shown in Figure .
1B. Genome-wide analysis of hMRs in the sequence data found that the majority are intragenic with most enrichment in exons, and depletion in intergenic regions (Figure .
1C), which was consistent with previous studies showing that the majority of 5hmC is enriched in intragenic regions of AD cases
The above results underscored that cfDNA 5hmC pro les of control and AD group indeed displayed signi cant differences.

DhMRs involved in AD pathogenesis associated signaling pathways
After compared 5hmC pro les between AD patients and controls, we identi ed 685 differentially hydroxymethylated regions (DhMRs) between control and AD groups (153 hypo-hydroxymethylated, 532 hyper-hydroxymethylated, p< 0.05).
The list of annotated DhMR genes is shown in supplementary Table
To evaluate the classi cation effects of DhMRs for AD and control samples, we carried out the principal component analysis (PCA) for DhMRs and found that AD samples showed prominent signatures and could be readily separated from control groups (Figure
Thus, we speculated that DhMRs may have the potential to distinguish AD patients from cognitively normal individuals.
Next, we performed KEGG pathway enrichment analysis and found that hyper-hydroxymethylated DhMRs annotated genes in AD samples were mainly distributed in AD pathogenesis-associated pathways, such as tight junction, MAPK signaling pathway, dopaminergic synapse, neurotrophin signaling pathway, and NF-kappa B signaling pathway (Figure
In additional, hypo-hydroxymethylated DhMRs annotated genes in AD samples were also enriched in several AD-related pathways including fatty acid biosynthesis, axon guidance, pyruvate metabolism, and TCA cycle (Figure
Taken together, these results further indicate that the DhMRs play some roles in the pathogenesis of AD and can be used to separated AD patients from cognitively normal individuals.

Correlations of DhMRs with the MMSE and MoCA scores
As shown in Table
Of these, many genes are known to be associated with AD-related pathologic processes such as DNA damage, apoptosis, tau phosphorylation, neuronal plasticity, and mitochondrial function.
We next assessed the ability of these 19 genes to classify dementia in AD patients with available clinical results.
We analyzed the correlation between these 19 genes and MMSE, MoCA, ADCS-ADL, or NPI-C scores, respectively (Table
As shown in Table
Compared with control samples, the 5hmC level of these 5 genes (RABEP1, CPNE4, DNAJC15, REEP3, and ROR1) in cfDNA were signi cant higher in AD patients (Figure
In additional, we also found that another 4 genes (CAMK1D, EFNA5, PBRM1 and CCDC141) were negatively correlated with the MMSE scores (r < -0.6, p < 0.005) and MoCA scores (r < -0.6, p < 0.01) of male participants.
As shown in Table
p = 0.0498).
An ROC curve was plotted to evaluate the diagnostic performance of genesin participants.
As shown in Figure
These results indicated that abnormal 5hmC level of the 5 genes in cfDNA might have diagnostic accuracy to distinguish AD patients from cognitively normal subjects.

DhMRs both detected in cfDNA and postmortem brain in AD patients
As we all known, the lesions of AD are in the brain.
Therefore, it is important to verify the consistency between the DhMRs detected in cfDNA and postmortem brain of AD patients.
There were not many studies on DNA 5hmC associated with AD in patients (mostly studies examined the total level of 5hmC in AD brain by immunohistochemistry methodology), only 1 study utilized the same method as we did to detected the genome-wide pro le of brain 5hmC at speci c locus.
Therefore, we compared our results with Zhao's results and found 14 DhMRs that were both detected in cfDNA in our study and dorsolateral prefrontal cortex tissue of AD patients
As shown in Table
These DhMRs annotated to 11 NP-related genes and 3 NFTs-related genes, respectively.
Only CAMK1D and RBFOX1 were both associated with NP and NFTs.
Next, we analyzed the correlation between these 13 genes and MMSE, MoCA, ADCS-ADL, or NPI-C scores, respectively.
As shown in Table
p < 0.001) and MoCA scores (r = -0.732,
p < 0.001) of total participants.
However, no signi cant correlations were observed between GNB1 and ADCS-ADL or NPI-C scores in AD patients (p > 0.05, Table
Similar to CAMK1D, RBFOX1 was positively correlated with the MMSE scores (r = 0.714, p < 0.001) and MoCA scores (r = 0.635, p < 0.01) of male participants.
However, no signi cant correlations were observed between RBFOX1 and ADCS-ADL or NPI-C scores in AD patients (all p > 0.05).
Compared with control samples, the 5hmC level of CAMK1D and GNB1 in cfDNA were signi cant higher in AD patients (Figure
The AUC of GNB1, CAMK1D, and RBFOX1 was 0.977 (sensitivity was 94.4%, speci city was 95.8%), 0.850 (sensitivity was 100.0%, speci city was 66.7%), and 0.683 (sensitivity was 83.3%, speci city was 58.3%), respectively.
These results further indicated that the 5hmC level of some AD-related genes (like CAMK1D) can be detected both in cfDNA of plasma and brain of AD patients, which may have signi cant potential as a noninvasive liquid biomarker of AD.

Discussion
5hmC is chemically stable and can be stored in fragmented cfDNA for potential detection using peripheral blood sampling
Growing evidence showed that a diagnostic model based on 5hmC pro le of cfDNA showed the potential to assisted clinical diagnosis in different disease
It is worth noting that 5hmC is highly abundant in the nervous system and apoptotic and necrotic synapses and neuros are typical characteristic of AD.
These characteristics provide us with a greater opportunity to detect the signal features of cfDNA 5hmC in the blood, which could be reliable biomarkers for AD.
In this study, we utilized hmC-Seal sequencing method to detected cfDNA 5hmC signatures in AD cases and control subjects, so as to try to uncover reliable diagnostic biomarkers for AD.
First, we found that cfDNA 5hmC pro les of control and AD group indeed displayed signi cant differences (Figure
To date, only 11 studies examining DNA hydroxymethylation associated with AD in postmortem human brain have been published
Most of them examined genome wide levels of 5hmC using immunohistochemistry methodology, but results were inconsistent with some studies reporting decreased
Only 2 papers utilized the next generation sequencing to detected the genome-wide pro le of brain 5hmC at cortex tissue of AD patients, they found the majority of DhMRs had an increase in 5hmC located in intragenic regions in human AD brain tissue
Second, our results indicated that AD patients can be well distinguished from cognitively normal individuals by DhMRs (Figure
Especially, we found that DhMRs annotated genes mainly distributed in AD pathogenesis related pathways including tight junction
Third, we further identi ed 5 genes (RABEP1, CPNE4, DNAJC15, REEP3, and ROR1), which were negatively correlated with MMSE and MoCA scores, and the AUC of these 5 genes suggesting a good performance on the diagnosis of AD (Table
Many of the 5 distinct genes have been shown to be related to AD pathology in previously studies
For example, RABEP1 is involved in endocytic membrane fusion and membrane tra cking, and a recent genome-wide association study identi ed RABEP1 to be associated with increased AD risk
CPNE4 plays a key role in neuroprotection and neurobehavioral development
DNAJC15 is a mitochondrial protein that can regulate mitochondrial metabolism, the dysfunction of which has been associated with several neurologic disorders
ROR1 plays an important role in regulating neurite extension, synapse formation, and synaptic transmission of hippocampal neurons
Furthermore, we found that 12 DhMRs annotated genes were both detected in cfDNA and postmortem AD brain (Table
CAMK1D is involved in modulating neuronal development and plasticity
RBFOX1 encodes a neuronal RNA-binding protein known to be expressed in neuronal tissues and involved in the pathogenesis of AD.
A meta-analysis of amyloid positron emission tomographic imaging data collected on 4314 participants found that RBFOX1 localized around plaques and reduced expression of RBFOX1 was correlated with higher amyloid-β burden and global cognitive decline during life
It is interesting to note that CAMK1D was negatively correlated with the MMSE scores and MoCA scores of male participants, which may be related to calcium regulated hormonal secretion
However, RBFOX1 was positively correlated with the MMSE scores and MoCA scores of male participants.
Gender-speci c associations might result from gene-gene or gene environment interactions.
It is possible that men are exposed to an environment that interacts with the RBFOX1 and/orCAMK1D.
Taken together, these results further indicated that the 5hmC level of AD-related genes (like CAMK1D) in cfDNA from plasma present a great potential to clinical auxiliary diagnosis of AD.
To our best knowledge, this is the rst research about genome-wide pro ling of 5hmC in cfDNA to evaluate the potential for diagnosis of late-onset AD patients.
Our ndings indicating that AD patients can be well distinguished from cognitively normal subjects by 5hmC signatures in peripheral blood cfDNA.
Importantly, we found RABEP1, CPNE4, DNAJC15, REEP3, ROR1, CAMK1D, and RBFOX1 had prediction diagnostic potential based on their signi cant correlations with MMSE and MoCA scores of participants.
In addition, our study provides a new strategy for developing non-invasive peripheral diagnostic biomarkers for late-onset AD.
It is also important to note the limitations of our study.
First, similar as most studies that identify AD biomarkers by epigenetic
Second, the origin of cfDNA is complex and remains poorly understood to date.
Although the proportion of the cfDNA which released into blood from apoptotic and necrotic synapses and neuros are increased, it will still be confounded by a lot of other cells from different tissues.
Thus, our results could be confounded by cellular heterogeneity inherent.
Hence, the pro le of brain region-speci c and/or neuro-speci c cfDNA 5hmC should be investigated in future research.
Finally, we cannot make a convincing causal interpretation due to the case-control design.
However, the signi cant correlation between the identi ed genes and cognitive scale scores, as well as the ne diagnostic performance indicated in the preliminary ROC analysis make us be con dent of the clinical auxiliary diagnosis in AD.

Conclusion
In summary, our results suggest that 5hmC signatures of plasma cfDNA can be served as an effective biomarkers for minimally invasive diagnosis of late-onset AD.
Building on our study, prospective cohort study in AD population of larger sample size with longitudinal follow-up and sampling over several decades to establish the causality between 5hmC signatures and the onset and progress of AD are warranted in the future.



Figures Figure 1
Figures



Figure 3 Performance
Figure 3