Are some animal models more equal than others? A case study on the translational value of animal models of efficacy for Alzheimer's disease
Clinical trial failures (> 99%) in Alzheimer's disease are in stark contrast to positive efficacy data in animals.
We evaluated the correlation between animal and clinical efficacy outcomes (cognition) in Alzheimer's disease using data from registered drugs as well as interventions tested in phase II or III clinical trials for Alzheimer's disease.
We identified 20 interventions, which were tested in 208 animal studies in 63 different animal models.
Clinical outcome was correlated with animal results in 58% of cases.
But, individual animal models showed divergent results across interventions, individual interventions showed divergent results across animal models, and animal model outcomes were determined with 16 different methods.
This result is unsurprising due to poor external validity (what do we model) of the animal models.
Although the animal models all share Alzheimer's disease symptoms, none represents the whole syndrome.
Investigators did not motivate why one model was chosen over another, and did not consider the ways the disease phenomena were generated (spontaneous, (experimentally) induced or by genetic modification), or the species characteristics, which determine the outcomes.
The explanation for the lack of correlation between animal and human outcomes can be manifold: the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease is not reflected in the animal model or the outcomes are not comparable.
Our conclusion is that currently no animal models exist which are predictive for the efficacy of interventions for Alzheimer's disease.

Introduction
With a failure rate of more than 99%, drug development in Alzheimer's disease has been largely unsuccessful: since 2002 over than 400 clinical trials failed due to lack of efficacy
One of the reasons for these failures was because data obtained from animal models did not translate to the clinic
This situation has led to the question of whether animal models for Alzheimer's disease are useful at all, especially in evaluating the efficacy of new drugs.
The poor translation of animal model data has been attributed mainly to low internal validity
Animal studies are frequently poorly designed (e.g.
non-randomized, non-blinded), minimally standardized and underpowered
In addition, the design of animal studies is often inadequately described, and positive outcomes are selectively reported
Internal validity can easily be improved with better designing and reporting, for instance, by compliance with guidelines such as the Animal Research Reporting of In Vivo Experiments (ARRIVE)
Preregistration of animal studies (e.g.
preclinicaltrial.eu)
has been suggested to lead to more transparency on study design, reducing duplication of studies and risk of selective outcome reporting
In contrast with the interest in internal validity, the external validity of animal models, i.e. how the results obtained in the model can be generalized to the human disease, is barely receiving attention
And even for marketing authorization applications, investigators are not required to substantiate the relevance of the animal models used significantly, nor are there systematic and
Received 4 March 2019; Received in revised form 21 June 2019; Accepted 1 July 2019 standardized methods to do so.
Animal models of efficacy should simulate the disease characteristics, including symptoms, response to treatment and similar diagnostic outcome assessment tools
These animal models can be categorized in the way the disease characteristics are acquired: spontaneous (by nature or natural occurring genetic variants), induced (chemical, biological or physical) or by genetic modification (transgenic)
Animal models can be compared to the human disease according to different aspects: face validity (the similarity in clinical symptoms), construct validity (the similarity in etiology) and predictive validity (the similarity in the clinical response to treatment)
For Alzheimer's disease, especially the construct validity cannot be fully defined because the etiology of the disease is still unclear.
The four main hypotheses (aging, neurotransmitter, amyloid pathway, and neuroinflammation), which involve multiple targets, have yet to be confirmed.
In this study, we investigated the correlation between human and animal outcomes of interventions for Alzheimer's disease, to assess whether some animal models of efficacy are more likely to correlate with human outcomes than others.

Material and methods

Identification of clinical trials for Alzheimer's disease
Phase III trial data were included from the drugs registered in the European Union and the United States of America for Alzheimer's disease.
These data are described in the summary review of scientific data used for marketing authorization, which are available on the websites of both the European Medicines Agency (EMA) and the Food and Drug Administration (FDA).
Data were included for four Alzheimer's disease drugs on the market, i.e.: donepezil
A targeted search was performed on www.clinicaltrials.gov to identify all phase III clinical trials intended to assess the efficacy of a chemical, biological or nutritional intervention in Alzheimer's disease based on the following search criteria: Alzheimer (condition or disease), phase III, interventional, monotherapy arm, randomized, double-blind and placebo-controlled.
Trials were included that had published results (including statistical significance testing) on cognitive outcome measures, which is one of the accepted parameters to show efficacy of an intervention for Alzheimer's disease
We chose cognition as the parameter to compare human and animal efficacy data, as cognitive outcome can be objectively tested in both clinic and in animal studies and there are far fewer correlates for other (subjective) outcome measures.
For trials without reported results in clinicaltrials.gov
database, we searched on PubMed on www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed for publications of trial data using the Trial ID: "NCTxxxxxxxx"[All Fields].
Publications were included up to 28 May 2018.
For all trials, we extracted data for the parameters listed in Table

Identification of animal models for Alzheimer's disease
Animal studies for Alzheimer's disease were identified in PubMed using the method from Leenaars and colleagues
This method systematically identifies all relevant animal studies.
The following search components (SCs) were obtained and combined: SC1 intervention (including synonyms as published on PubChem on www.
pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov),
SC2 disease of interest (Alzheimer's disease as reported in the PubMed Medical Subject Headings (MeSH)-tree), SC3 animal species by the PubMed animal filter as published by Hooijmans and colleagues
A detailed overview of the search components is listed in S1 Supplementary data.
Animal studies were included if a cognitive outcome was measured, the study was placebo-controlled, the study had a monotherapy arm of one of the interventions identified in Section 2.1, and the intervention started after induction of cognitive impairment.
Publications were included from inception up to 28 May 2018.
Animal models were grouped according to Hau's classification
For all animal studies, we extracted data from the parameters listed in Table

Reporting quality
We evaluated the compliance to an adapted version of the ARRIVE guidelines
We evaluated reporting on the following 20 parameters: population characteristics (species, strain, age and sex), housing characteristics (type of facility, type of cage, type of bedding and number of cage companions), husbandry characteristics (light/dark cycle, temperature/ humidity, quality of water, type of food, access to food/water, duration of acclimatization), and design characteristics (sample size, sample size calculation, randomization to cage and randomization to treatment, allocation concealment and blinded outcome assessment).
These parameters were assessed as reported (Y) or not reported (N).
Compliance with ARRIVE was calculated using the formula:
20 100

Analysis
For the data we extracted in Section 2.1.
and 2.2.
we calculated the overall outcome of individual trials or animal studies (Section 2.4.1.),
the overall outcome of all trials or all animal studies of a specific animal model (Section 2.4.2.).
Additionally, for each individual intervention (Section 2.4.3.) and across interventions (Section 2.4.4.), we compared clinical outcome to the outcome in the animal model.

Overall clinical trial or animal study outcome for an intervention
Characteristics of cognitive impairment in Alzheimer's disease include attention, working memory, executive function, episodic memory, semantic memory, visual and verbal memory, processing speed, procedural memory, social cognition and language
These characteristics can be assessed by different methods (both in humans and in animals), and for each characteristic different parameters can be reported.
We treated these parameters equally, since to our knowledge, there is insufficient data ranking or comparing these parameters within and between species.
We used outcome results significance testing as reported by the study authors.
We reported an overall cognitive outcome of an individual animal study.
The overall study cognitive outcome ratio was calculated using the formula:
Overall study cognitive outcome ratio number of improved cognitive parameters total number of cogntitive parameters
The overall animal study outcome can be either "improved" (when ratio > 0.5), "mixed" (when ratio = 0.5) or "no effect" (when ratio is < 0.5).

Overall clinical or animal model outcome for an intervention
Interventions can be tested in several clinical trials or in different studies with the same animal model.
We reported the overall cognitive outcome of an intervention in a trial or animal model.
We used outcome results significance testing as reported by the study authors.
The overall model cognitive outcome ratio for an intervention was calculated using the formula: = ′ ′ Overall model cognitive outcome ratio number of improved studies total number of studies ( )
The overall outcome of an intervention can be either "improved" (when ratio > 0.5), "mixed" (when ratio = 0.5) or "no effect" (when ratio is < 0.5).

Predictive value of a specific intervention in a specific animal model for clinical outcome
For each intervention, we compared the overall outcome in an animal model to the clinical outcome.
When the overall outcome was the same in both the clinic and animal model, the animal model's prediction of the clinical outcome was considered "correct", and if not, as "incorrect".
We reported "unclear" when the overall model outcome (section 2.4.2.) was 'mixed'.

Predictive value of an animal model across interventions for clinical outcome
For all interventions tested in each animal model, we compared their overall outcome to their clinical outcome.
The overall model prediction of the clinical outcome (across interventions) was calculated using the formula:

Overall model prediction for clinical outcome number of correct or unclear or incorrect interventions total number of interventions x
(%) ( ) 100

Results

Clinical trials for Alzheimer's disease
We identified 8 phase III trials for the registered drugs, published in the EMA or FDA summary review of scientific data used for marketing authorization.
A total of 134 completed interventional phase III clinical trials for Alzheimer's disease were registered on clinicaltrials.gov.
Of these, 37 (28%) reported results in the database, while 97 (72%) did not.
For the trials without results, the PubMed search identified another 38 publications.
In total 30 phase III trials, in which 20 different interventions were tested, met the inclusion criteria (Fig.
Via the same process, we identified 225 phase II trials on clinicaltrials.gov.
Of these, 60 (27%) reported results in the database, while 165 (73%) did not.
For the trials without results, the PubMed search identified another 42 publications.
However, we only included the trials in which the interventions identified in phase III were tested.
In total 6 phase II trials, in which 4 of the 20 different interventions were tested, met the inclusion criteria (Fig.
For the 36 clinical trials included in our study, 18 trials were included for which no data were published in clinicaltrials.gov
but found in PubMed.
For these trials the PubMed ID (PMID) from where the data were extracted were added in S3 Supplementary data (Comments; Column AQ).
Additionally we checked for anticipated discrepancies of primary and secondary outcome measures between the clinicaltrials.
Method parameter used to measure the outcome, and when reported by the study's author whether the outcome was: -primary; the outcome in a trial or study which has the greatest or most desirable therapeutic effect, this parameter was used to calculate the sample size -secondary; the outcomes are used to evaluate additional effects of the intervention not included in the primary outcome measure -exploratory; the outcomes are used to evaluate potential new outcomes for a specific indication Comments Any other information gov database and PubMed
Of these 18 trials, 15 trials reported the same primary or secondary outcome measures in PubMed and in clinicaltrials.gov
(Table
For 3 trials the information on primary or secondary outcome measures was only reported in PubMed.
An overview of the included phase II and III trials, including information on methods used to assess cognition and the outcome, is shown in Table
Improved clinical cognitive outcomes were reported for interventions targeting the cholinergic/glutaminergic pathway, which included all the currently registered drugs and the amyloid/tau/secretase pathway.
The overall cognitive outcome per intervention as well as the number of trials and the market authorization status in 2018 are listed in Table
All interventions showing overall improved cognitive outcome received market authorization for Alzheimer's disease.
Raw data concerning the trials is available in S3 Supplementary data.

Animal models of efficacy for Alzheimer's disease
A schematic representation of the targeted search for animal studies is shown in Fig.
We identified 899 publications of which 668 (74%) did not meet the inclusion criteria, 41 (4%) were not in the English language, and 7(1%) were not available via the University Library.
Some of the 183 included publications, published between 1988 and 2018, reported more than 1 animal study, e.g. 1 intervention tested in different animal models.
The data from 208 individual animal studies were extracted (S3 Supplementary data).
Of the 20 identified interventions (Table
The animal studies were conducted in 7 different species: 1 (1%) was in Canis lupus familiaris (dog), 2 (1%) in Drosophila melanogaster (fruit fly), 2 (1%) in Microcebus murinus (lemur), 5 (2%) in Oryctolagus cuniculus (rabbit), 7 (3%) in Macaca mulatta (rhesus monkey), 63 (30%) in Rattus norvegicus (rat) and 127 (61%) in Mus musculus (mouse).

Variation in animal models of efficacy for Alzheimer's disease
The 208 animal studies were performed in 63 different animal models (Table
These animal models were classified by the way the cognitive impairment was acquired.
We found 9 spontaneous models (natural cognitive impairment), 36 induced models (chemical, biological or physical induced cognitive impairment) and 18 genetically modified models (cognitive impairment induced by genetic modification).
Of these animal models, 33 were used only once, and therefore excluded in the further analysis.
The use of the different model classes changed over time (Fig.
Spontaneous models were used in comparable numbers over the years, while the use of both induced models and genetically modified models increased exponentially after 2000.
Since multiple animal models were used to evaluate the efficacy of interventions for Alzheimer's disease, we investigated the authors' motivation for their animal model choice (Fig.
For every animal study the authors motivated their choice of animal model, which is listed in S3 supplementary data.
The author's motivations were then classified into the following categories: the model shows aging-related cognitive impairment (15%), the model shows cognitive impairment as well as other markers of Alzheimer's disease (17%), the model shows cognitive impairment (33%), or the model was previously used (35%).

Unclear prediction of clinical outcome by animal models of efficacy for Alzheimer's disease
We compared the overall outcome of each intervention-model combination to the clinical outcome.
We found 74 intervention-model combinations.
Individual data is available in S4 Supplementary data.
The percentage of animal model's prediction of clinical outcomes is shown in Fig.
In general, 58% of animal models predicted correctly for clinical outcome of an intervention.
Per animal model class, 23% of spontaneous models, 73% of induced models, and 58% of genetically modified models correlated with the clinical outcome of an intervention.
The best correlations with clinical outcome were obtained in animal models in which interventions of the cholinergic/glutaminergic class (the currently registered drugs) were tested (Fig.
For these type of interventions 72% of the animal studies predicted the clinical outcome correctly, while 19% predicted the clinical outcome incorrectly (Fig.
The animal studies, in which interventions of the cholinergic/ glutaminergic class were tested, and which predicted the clinical outcome incorrectly, were often performed in animals models based on the amyloid pathway hypothesis or aging-related hypotheses.
The number of studies and the number of interventions carried out in each animal model is shown in Fig.
The overall outcome of each animal model is compared to the clinical outcomes across interventions (Fig.
While 10 animal models correctly predicted the clinical outcome of all tested interventions, in 2 animal models not a single prediction proved correct.
A total of 18 animal models partly predicted the clinical outcome.
The number of animal models tested with each intervention is shown in Fig.
The overall outcome of each intervention is compared to the clinical outcomes across animal models.
While the outcome of 2 interventions correctly predicted the clinical outcome, 3 interventions had not a single correct prediction.
A total of 5 interventions showed a mixed pattern.

Variations in outcome assessment methodology
The cognitive outcome was assessed by 16 different methods (Fig.
The most often used methods were: Morris Water Maze (37%), the Passive Avoidance Test (27%), Object Recognition Task (14%) and the T-or Y-maze Alteration Test (15%).
Detailed information on these methods is available in S2 Supplementary data.
Besides cognitive parameters, functional and behavioral parameters were measured in 10 (5%) animal studies.

Quality of animal studies between 1988 and 2017
The compliance to the 20 aspects of the ARRIVE guidelines was evaluated (Table
Population characteristics and sample size were most often disclosed (> 88%), while many aspects of housing and husbandry, blinding and randomization were not reported (< 24%).
Furthermore, between 1988 and 2018 the overall compliance level increased minimally (Fig.

Discussion
Animal models of efficacy for Alzheimer's disease correlated in 58% of cases with the clinical outcomes (Fig.
However, the value of these animal models to determine the efficacy of an intervention is limited since individual animal models showed divergent results across interventions (Fig.
This is unsurprising for two main reasons: poor external validity of animal models and poor internal validity of animal studies.

Poor external validity of animal models for Alzheimer's disease
One cornerstone of assessing external validity of efficacy models is the extent to which animal models can simulate the disease.
Human hallmarks of Alzheimer's disease include (age induced) cognitive impairment (Alzheimer's Association, 2018), decreased levels of neurotransmitters
A good animal model for Alzheimer's disease shows reproduction of histological, biochemical or systemic changes at cellular level, and changes at cognitive, functional or behavioral level
However, the multitude of possible targets for interventions, and the uncertainty around their level of involvement in the pathogenesis creates difficulties in selecting the right animal model.
Models identified in this study were chosen for modeling cognitive impairment (inclusion criterium) and one or more additional hallmarks of the human disease (Fig.
However, no justification was given on why one animal model was chosen over another.
We found 63 models, of which 91% was performed in mice and rats (Table
The models were further categorized by the way in which cognitive impairment was acquired: 14% in spontaneous animal models, 57% in induced models, and 29% in genetically modified models.
Since the models are a result of distinct biological processes, they all have limitations
The spontaneous models often lack the pathological features of the brain pathology like tau pathology, neurodegeneration or amyloid-Table
Data show number of trials and the ratio of improved trials per total amount of trials.
plaques.
In induced models, the disease is often induced in healthy (young) animals, via local injections in the brain, resulting in a limited transmission of the pathogenesis throughout the body.
Genetically modified models mainly express mutations found in relatively rare familial forms of Alzheimer's disease.
Additionally, most animal models only allow the evaluation of a single hypothesis for Alzheimer disease.
A few examples of mixed animal models have been reported, some of which used aged species in an induced model
Another cornerstone of assessing the external validity is the response to treatment.
We found that interventions with highest correlation (100% across models) or lowest correlation (0% across models) were mainly tested in a limited number of animal models (Fig.
Furthermore, the animal studies with "correct" outcomes were mainly a result of interventions of the class (the currently registered drugs) (Fig.
Additionally, the animal studies with "incorrect" outcome, used mainly animal models of the amyloid or aging hypothesis, which are not affected by these drugs (Fig.
Moreover, even in patients, only small beneficial effects were observed with these drugs, as shown by several systematic reviews
Unfortunately, there are currently no other drugs that offer overwhelming or even moderately positive effects in order to be included as a 'positive' control in animal models of efficacy for Alzheimer's disease.
The final cornerstone of the assessment of external validity is the outcome measure, which is cognition in Alzheimer's disease.
Human cognition includes processes of perception, attention, learning, shortterm and long-term memory, speech and social cognition, of which the profile can be determined with test batteries such as the Cambridge Neuropsychological Test Automated Battery (CANTAB).
However, the individual cognitive impairment profile is highly dependent on the disease stage as well as existing comorbidities.
This differentiation in disease severity is not reflected in animal models, since mostly only single outcome measures are used.
Additionally, the validation of cognitive tasks is still a topic of debate
Therefore, the choice of an animal species (with homology in brain physiology and function) as well as an appropriate cognitive test (testing disease relevant cognitive impairment) in animals is challenging
In our study, we found 16 different methods which all assessed different aspects of learning and memory in animals (Fig.
How and to what extent animal and human cognition relate is unclear, especially because unlike human cognitive tests, many animal methods include a positive or negative reinforcement.
To our knowledge no systematic validation and back-translation of human and animal cognitive tests exists

Poor internal validity of animal studies for Alzheimer's disease
Besides the variation in available methods to assess cognition in animals, the study outcome may also be affected by variations in how the test is carried out.
This is exemplified by variations in pool size, water temperature and number of training days in a version of the Morris Water Maze, which was used most frequently in our study.
Furthermore, we also found poor (maximal 65%) compliance with    the ARRIVE guidelines (Fig.
Despite the introduction of reporting guidelines and an increasing number of publications creating awareness of how poor design affects study outcomes
As a result, animal models, may seem better than they are in practice.

Limitations of our study
Besides the poor reporting quality, another limitation of our study is the inclusion of clinical trials with published results including statistics either in the clinicaltrials.gov
database or on PubMed.
The targeted search in PubMed used the NCT number [All Fields].
Some trials might have been missed, if this number was not reported in the fields searched by PubMed.
Next, we did not consider the effect of dosing, formulation and duration of the intervention on the outcomes.
Additionally, we reported the overall outcome ("improved" or "no effect") of an intervention in a specific animal model and not the actual effect size.
Actual effect sizes, including exposure data, when combined for each intervention, could provide a better estimation of the true effect.
Furthermore, we assumed the animal studies were of equal value, which is not necessarily the case due to differences in design and methodology.
In case of an equal amount of "improved" and "no effect" animal studies for the same intervention, the overall outcome was listed as "mixed" despite the fact that we know that part of the negative results found in animal models are not published
Clinical trials are the gold standard, while there is mounting evidence that patients with Alzheimer's disease are very heterogeneous and the patient population included in previous trials, needs further stratification.
This may affect the design of future clinical trials

Implications for drug development
The failure of animal models of efficacy for Alzheimer's disease to correlate with the effect in patients is known in the field and several reviews have discussed this issue
However, for the individual animal studies cited in these reviews, it is often unclear which interventions and outcomes were compared between animal and human.
To our knowledge, the only paper with a broad systematic approach was the study of
New in our study is that we specifically chose a clinical efficacy outcome marker and identified all relevant animal studies via a targeted search.
We assumed complete face validity of the animal models, i.e. are the same symptoms present in the model and the human disease, since we only included studies where cognitive impairment was observed and measured.
We assumed limited construct validity: as mainly single hypotheses were tested in models of a multifactorial disease.
And we evaluated the predictive validity, i.e. whether the same interventions are effective or ineffective in the model when compared to the clinic.
In that sense, we developed an approach that can be used across different indications for that purpose, using the Alzheimer's disease animal models of efficacy as a case study.
Our study shows that the 'convenient' choice of an animal model for Alzheimer disease, e.g. the model that has been used before or the model that is most often used, might not be the optimal approach.
When selecting (or developing) an animal model, it is impossible to simulate all disease phenomena in one model.
Moreover, the ability to interpret the effect of an intervention on the (induced) phenomena a model should be kept as simple as possible
Suggestions to improve (or develop new) animal models of efficacy for Alzheimer's disease:
(1) Create a translational profile of the model with use of a recently developed tool such as the Framework to Identify Models of Disease (FIMD)
This approach can also be used for new models since it indicates which aspects must be investigated to validate an animal model.
(2) Validate the model systematically, e.g.
evaluation of the effects of different rearing and housing conditions, sex, age, outcome measures and eventually validate the model across species
Include (at least the) outcome markers of clinical efficacy markers.
(3) Design, register, execute and report the animal study properly (using standards such as PREPARE, ARRIVE, preclinicaltrials.eu).
Compliance must be verified by funding agencies and editors.
(4) Share all raw data obtained in animal studies and clinical trials; this will facilitate re-use/analysis and promotes learning.
Create platforms where these data can be combined as suggested by
Similarly, these suggestions also apply to all ex-vivo and in vitro experiments to determine the efficacy of interventions for Alzheimer's Table
Included were author's reporting on these items as such.
Item reporting was not evaluated on level of correctness.
For complex diseases such as Alzheimer's disease one could consider a (properly designed) test battery of different (animal) models simulating different aspects of the disease
Additionally, the often-used words "proof-of-concept" or "proof-of-principle" in a multifactorial disease, such as Alzheimer's disease, are in reality the proof of a specific hypothesis tested.
Therefore, besides general categorization of an animal model by the way the disease is acquired (spontaneous, induced or genetically modified), further categorization of animal models based on hypothesis testing may facilitate easier pattern recognition and backtranslation to what is found in the Alzheimer patient

Conclusion
Currently, no animal models can be recommended for determining the efficacy of interventions in Alzheimer's disease.
Investigators, ethical committees and funding bodies should be reminded that, in the way animal models are currently used to test the efficacy of novel drugs in the field of Alzheimer's disease, these models are not useful to predict clinical efficacy.
There is an urgent need for new interventions, validated (and/or other) models (both in vivo and in vitro), in which translational outcomes are measured and animal studies are properly designed and reported.



Fig. 1 .
Fig. 1.
Flow diagram of the selection of phase III trials (A), phase II trials (B) and animal studies (C).



Fig. 2 .
Fig. 2. Evolution of the amount of animal studies using different animal model classes between 1988 and 2017.



Fig. 3 .
Fig. 3. Author's reported motivation for their choice of animal model of efficacy for Alzheimer's disease.



Fig. 4 .
Fig. 4. Percentage of interventions with correct (blue), unclear (orange) or incorrect (red) predictions for their clinical outcome in animal models for Alzheimer's disease (panel A) as well as the percentage of cholinergic/ glutaminergic (closed bar pattern), amyloid/tau/secretase (squared bar pattern), neuroinflammation (diamond bar pattern) intervention classes which predicted their clinical outcome correct (panel B), unclear (panel C) or incorrect (panel D) in these models.
Data are grouped per animal model class: all animal models (ALL), spontaneous models (SP), induced models (IN) or genetically modified models (GM).
Values in the bars show the number of intervention-model combinations.



Fig. 5 .
Fig.5.
Percentage of animal studies with of cholinergic/glutaminergic interventions (the current registered drugs), with correct (blue), unclear (orange) or incorrect (red) predictions for their clinical outcome in animal models for Alzheimer's disease.
Data are grouped per animal model class: all animal models (ALL), spontaneous models (SP), induced models (IN) or genetically modified models (GM).



Fig. 6 .
Fig. 6.
Percentage (left Y-axis) and number (right Y-axis) of animal studies (dotted line) or interventions (straight line) with correct (blue bars), unclear (orange bars) or incorrect (red bars) predictions for their clinical outcome in an animal models for Alzheimer's disease.
Data are grouped per animal model class: all animal models (ALL), spontaneous models (SP), induced models (IN) or genetically modified models (GM).
Animal models were carried out in different species; Drosophila megalogaster (dm), Macaca mulatta (mam), Mus musculus (mum), Orycolagus cuniculus (oc) or Rattus norvegicus (rn).
Animal model name abbreviations are explained in Table4.



Fig. 7 .Fig.
Fig. 7. Percentage (left Y-axis) and number of animal models for Alzheimer's disease (right Y-axis) with correct (blue bars), (orange bars) or incorrect (red bars) predictions for their clinical outcome.
Data are grouped per intervention class: cholinergic/glutaminergic, amyloid/tau/secretase or neuroinflammation.



Fig. 9 .
Fig. 9. Reporting quality assessment of animal studies for Alzheimer's disease between 1998 and 2018.
The ARRIVE guideline was introduced in 2010.



Table 1
Parameters for data extraction from clinical trials and animal studies.
component tested in trial or study PubChemID Unique identifier for an intervention as listed in the PubChem compound database at www.pubchem.ncbi,nlm.nih.gov
ATC index (4th level) Drug classification as listed in the WHO ATC/DDD index at www.whocc.no/atc_ddd_index
Pharmacological target Pharmacological target as listed in the PubChem compound database: anti-cholinergic/anti-glutaminergic, amyloid/tau/secretase pathway, antineuroinflammation or other Market authorization Market authorization status in the European Union or in the United States of America: approved (Y) or not approved (N) Trial code or Trial NCT-number (clinical trials) -Ascension number of publication in PubMed (animal studies) at www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov
Trial or Model Name Name for trial or animal model.
Animal models are further described in Table 4 Trial of Model Motivation Reason for trial or choice of model: efficacy (clinical) and previous research, model of cognitive impairment, model of aging-induced cognitive impairment, model of cognitive impairment or other hallmarks of Alzheimer's disease (animal model)



Table 2
(Dekker et al., 2019)ional clinical trials with reported cognitive outcome measures for Alzheimer's disease.Objective tests for cognition used in clinical trials are(Dekker et al., 2019): Animals Category Fluency Assessment (ACF), Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale -cognitive subscale (ADAS-cog), Clock Drawing Assessment (CDT), Digit Symbol Substitution Test (DSST), Verbal Fluency Assessment (FAS), Minimal Mental State Examination (MMSE), One Card Learning Test (OCL), Severe Impairment Battery (SIB), Trail Making Test (TMT) and Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale (WIAS).
Data show the outcome of the trials: primary (P) or secondary (S).



Table 4
Description of the animal models of efficacy for Alzheimer's disease showing cognitive impairment.