Resting-State Functional Connectivity Disruption as a Pathological Biomarker in Autosomal Dominant Alzheimer Disease
Aim: Identify a global resting-state functional connectivity (gFC) signature in mutation carriers (MC) from the Dominantly Inherited Alzheimer Network (DIAN).
Assess the gFC with regard to amyloid (A), tau (T), and neurodegeneration (N) biomarkers, and estimated years to symptom onset (EYO).
Introduction: Cross-sectional measures were assessed in MC (n = 171) and mutation noncarrier (NC) (n = 70) participants.
A functional connectivity (FC) matrix that encompassed multiple resting-state networks was computed for each participant.
Methods: A global FC was compiled as a single index indicating FC strength.
The gFC signature was modeled as a nonlinear function of EYO.
The gFC was linearly associated with other biomarkers used for assessing the AT(N) framework, including cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), positron emission tomography (PET) molecular biomarkers, and structural magnetic resonance imaging.
Results: The gFC was reduced in MC compared with NC participants.
When MC participants were differentiated by clinical dementia rating (CDR), the gFC was significantly decreased in MC CDR >0 (demented) compared with either MC CDR 0 (cognitively normal) or NC participants.
The gFC varied nonlinearly with EYO and initially decreased at EYO = À24 years, followed by a stable period followed by a further decline near EYO = 0 years.
Irrespective of EYO, a lower gFC associated with values of amyloid PET, CSF Ab 1-42 , CSF p-tau, CSF t-tau, 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose, and hippocampal volume.
Conclusions: The gFC correlated with biomarkers used for defining the AT(N) framework.
A biphasic change in the gFC suggested early changes associated with CSF amyloid and later changes associated with hippocampal volume.

Introduction
A lzheimer disease (AD) is the leading cause of demen- tia in the United States.
The occurrence of AD has been linked with b-amyloid (Ab) peptide aggregating into plaques in the brain
Ab levels vary naturally following a circadian rhythm
Excess production from neuronal hyperexcitability may underlie plaque formation
The amyloid cascade hypothesis
Autosomal dominant Alzheimer disease (ADAD) is caused by *100% penetrant mutations in genes that encode for the amyloid precursor protein (APP)
The ability to estimate when mutation-positive (mutation carriers
ADAD typically occurs at an earlier age compared with late-onset AD (LOAD)
Pathologic changes start decades before clinical symptoms manifest in ADAD
Recently, a set of biomarker criteria has been proposed to stage LOAD disease progression
This model describes that the earliest changes involve amyloid accumulation (A), followed by tau (T) deposition, and eventually neurodegeneration (N) that lead to cognitive dysfunction
Changes in amyloid biomarkers, such as cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) Ab 1-42 and Pittsburgh compound B (PiB) amyloid positron emission tomography (PET), have been observed *15-20 years before symptom onset in ADAD
Tau (T) biomarkers, such as CSF phosphorylated tau 181 (p-tau 181 )
Neurodegeneration (N) biomarkers, such as CSF total tau (t-tau)
CSF-based measures are sensitive to global levels of amyloid accumulation and tau deposition, but lack information pertaining to what brain regions are affected.
Imaging, on the contrary, provides spatially detailed information regarding impacted brain regions.
In fact, PET imaging has revealed that amyloid may accumulate in a pattern of brain regions distributed across multiple functional brain networks
This has led some to hypothesize that the pathological spread of disease through the brain occurs via brain networks
However, a gap persists regarding when changes in brain networks occur with respect to AT(N) biomarkers in ADAD.
Resting-state functional connectivity (FC) noninvasively measures the association of signaling among brain regions and can be used to identify resting-state networks (RSNs)
The inter-relationships among RSNs is sensitive to neuronal dysfunction and is associated with the degree of cognitive impairment
A reduction in both intra-and internetwork FC occurs in ADAD
Global metrics of amyloid and tau accumulation aggregate spatially selective patterns for increased sensitivity.
Similarly, a global FC signature can be derived from a combination of changes in intra-and internetworks that spans multiple RSNs
It remains important to know where changes in this global FC signature occur in the temporal progression of ADAD.
The purpose of this study is to evaluate the role of FC within the AT(N) framework in ADAD.
Prior work has focused on select FC network differences, however, we use a data reduction strategy to compile information across multiple intra-and internetwork connections into a single global FC signature of ADAD.
We assess FC strength based on a global FC signature between noncarriers (NC), MC asymptomatic (CDR 0), and MC symptomatic (CDR >0).
We also evaluate the relationship between the global FC signature and established biomarkers that comprise the AT(N) framework and model the global FC signature as a function of EYO.

Methods

Participant characteristics
The cohort consisted of 171 individuals with ADAD mutations (MC) and 104 individuals from ADAD families who were genetically at-risk for inheriting the mutation but were not carriers (NC).
All participants were enrolled in the international Dominantly Inherited Alzheimer Network (DIAN) and extracted from Data Freeze 11.
Inclusion into this current analysis required that participants complete a general physical (including neurologic) examination, health and medication history, clinical assessment for dementia
All participants or their representatives provided written informed consent that was in accordance with the Washington University Institutional Review Boards or their respective institutions provided approval.

Clinical dementia rating
Experienced clinicians conducted semistructured interviews of each participant and a knowledgeable collateral source.
The CDR was used to evaluate the degree of impairment
A score of CDR 0 indicates cognitively normal, CDR 0.5 corresponds to very mild dementia, and CDR ‡1 specifies mild to moderate dementia.
Participants with a score of CDR >0 had a clinical diagnosis of AD dementia using previously described criteria

EYO estimation
Parent age at symptomatic onset was determined from semistructured interviews with the participant, a knowledgeable collateral source, and/or other informants familiar with the parental history of disease.
The age at onset of the affected parent was determined by estimating the time of onset of consistent symptoms (e.g., memory/cognition, motor, or behavior)
The EYO for each individual from DIAN was defined as age at testing minus the age at symptom onset for that individual's affected parent

Biochemical analyses
A lumbar puncture was performed in the morning under fasting conditions to obtain CSF using previously described methods
Samples were shipped on dry ice to the DIAN biomarker core laboratory.
CSF concentrations of Ab 1-42 , t-tau, and phosphorylated tau 181 (p-tau 181 ) were measured by immunoassay (INNOTEST Ab 1-42 and INNO-BIA AlzBio3, Innogenetics).
All values met qualitycontrol standards, including a coefficient of variation of 25% or less and kit ''controls'' that were within the expected range as defined by the manufacturer.
Measurement consistency between plates of a common sample was included in each run.
Imaging MRI data from only 3T Siemens Tim Trio scanners (Erlangen, Germany) were analyzed.
Scanners were cali-brated and used similar protocols.
Structural images were acquired using the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) protocol.
T1-weighted scans were automatically segmented into regions of interest according to the Desikan atlas through FreeSurfer (Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging, Charlestown, MA).
Blood oxygen level-dependent (BOLD) FC was also acquired using previously described methods
During the BOLD FC scans, participants were instructed to remain still with their eyes open and not fall asleep.
PET imaging was performed using FDG to measure glucose metabolism and PiB to measure amyloid load.
PET imaging analyses were performed using a previously described PET Unified Pipeline
Data from the 40-to 70-min postinjection window for PiB and 40-to 60-min window for FDG were converted to standardized uptake value ratios (SUVR) in the defined regions of interest using the cerebellar cortex as a reference region
Partial volume correction was performed with a regional spread function
Global Ab was summarized as the average SUVR for the precuneus, lateral temporal, gyrus rectus, and prefrontal regions that have previously been shown to delineate AD from cognitively normal controls
FDG from the precuneus was utilized as changes in this region are reliable and occur early in DIAN participants
FC preprocessing BOLD FC preprocessing followed previously described methods
Intensity inhomogeneity was corrected using FSL FAST
Echoplanar imaging (EPI) distortion due to magnetization inhomogeneity was corrected using a mean field map
Atlas transformation was computed by registering the EPI mean image to an atlas-representative template via the MP-RAGE (EPI !
MP-RAGE !
template).
The template was generated from a separate cohort of 12 cognitively normal individuals.
Compensation for head motion, distortion correction, and atlas transformation were sequentially combined to generate a volumetric time series that was resampled in 3mm 3 atlas space.
Frames corrupted by excessive head motion were identified on the basis of both DVARS and frame displacement (FD) measures
In greater detail, the DVARS criterion was 0.9% root mean square of the frameto-frame signal change from the entire brain
The FD criterion was 0.3 mm.
Frames were censored if either criterion was exceeded.
The time series were band-pass filtered to retain frequencies between 0.005 and 0.1 Hz.
For purposes of filtering, only a linear interpolation was applied over censored frames.
Censored frames were excluded from all subsequent steps.
Denoising was accomplished using a CompCor-like strategy
In brief, nuisance regressors were FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY DISRUPTION IN AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT ALZHEIMER DISEASE derived from three compartments (white matter, ventricles, and the extra-axial space) and then dimensionality reduced to create a matrix for singular value decomposition (SVD).
White matter and ventricle masks were segmented in each individual using FreeSurfer 5.3
Time series also were extracted from high-variance voxels (temporal standard deviation >2.5% relative to the whole-brain mode) in the extra-axial space (excluding the eyes).
Nuisance regressors were derived from white matter, ventricles, and the extra-axial space.
The final set of nuisance regressors included six parameters derived from rigid body headmotion correction, the global signal (GS) averaged over the (FreeSurfer-segmented) brain, and the GS temporal derivative.
The preprocessed time series was nonlinearly warped to Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI) 152 space (3 mm 3 voxels) space using FNIRT

FC postprocessing
A putative set of 246 functional regions-of-interest (ROIs) were organized into 12 RSNs that included the sensorimotor (SM), sensorimotor-lateral (SMlat), cingulo-opercular (CO), auditory (AUD), ventral attention (VAN), visual (VIS), salience (SAL), default mode network (DMN), memory (MEM), dorsal attention (DAN), subcortical (SUB), and frontoparietal (FP)
ROIs were defined as 10-mm-diameter spheres whose center coordinates were in MNI atlas space
All ROIs were dis-tinct and occupied unique voxels.
A 246 • 246 FC matrix was obtained for each individual as follows.
First, the preprocessed FC data were transformed on to the MNI atlas.
Second, the mean time series was computed within each ROI excluding the censored frames.
The pairwise correlation between all ROI time series was then derived.
Correlation values were Fisher transformed for normality.
The mean 246 • 246 FC matrix across all participants is shown in Figure
We used each ROI's RSN designation
FC values along the diagonal blocks represent intra-RSN correlations, and values in the off diagonal blocks represent inter-RSN correlations.
The mean 12 • 12 FC matrix across all participants is shown in Figure

FC principal component analysis
Data reduction was performed to isolate a global FC signature metric of global FC changes
The intra-and internetwork pattern of FC values from each participant was compiled, and a single global FC signature was selected.
Specifically, the 12 intranetwork and 12 • (12 À 1)=2 = 66 internetwork averages (total of 12 þ 66 = 78) were compiled from all participants (n = 275) into a single 275 • 78 matrix.
The principal component analysis (PCA) of this matrix was performed by SVD.
PCA is a multivariate analysis that reveals internal data organization and its variance.
This PCA revealed distinct FC patterns of intra-and internetwork averages across all RSNs.
Each pattern comprised weights describing the influence from each of the 78 intra-and internetwork FC composites on that pattern.
The magnitude of a given weight reflects the strength of influence, while the sign, positive or negative, indicates whether the corresponding intra-or internetwork FC composite tends to increase or decrease, respectively, across participants.
Each pattern was also accompanied by a set of scores that represented its association with each participant's pattern of FC values.
The variability of these scores related to the total variability of FC values among participants.
A low score indicates that the primary pattern is weakly present or absent from a participant.
This implicates a strong deviation from, or decline in, the network connectivity specified by the primary pattern.
The primary pattern that captured the largest percentage of total interindividual FC variance (21%) was designated the global FC signature for ADAD (Fig.
The same data reduction was applied to NC participants.
The primary pattern from NC was very similar to the pattern computed for all participants, indicating that patient characteristics (abnormal levels of Ab 42 , tau, and neurodegeneration) are not strong factors in determining the primary pattern.

EYO modeling
Global FC signature versus RSN.
We compared the abilities of the global FC signature and intranetwork values of the 12 RSNs included in this study to, separately, predict EYO using a leave-one-out cross-validation.
Specifically, for each FC metric:
1. FC and EYO data were split into two sets: train and test.
The training set comprised data from N À 1 mutation-positive participants, and a test set comprised data from a single mutation-positive participant.
2. A linear predictive model was computed using the training set:
3. The linear model (i.e., coefficients b 0 and b 1 ) was used to predict EYO of the test set:
The error in EYO was computed:
Steps 1-4 were repeated such that the FC data for each mutation-positive participant were used in the test set.
6.
The sum of squares (SS) was computed for both EYO err and EYO:
7. The coefficient of determination (R 2 ), the proportion of the variance in actual EYO that is predictable from the FC, was computed:
Nonlinear modeling.
AD biomarkers exhibit nonlinear time courses across disease progression
Proposed biomarker models suggest nonlinear time courses with sigmoidal shape
The sigmoid transition time (i.e., when peak rate-of-change occurs) varies based on the biomarker.
We investigated a sigmoidal shape of the global FC signature for MC participants to estimate transition times.
An unweighted moving average of the global FC signature for MC participants was computed as a function of EYO using bin sizes of -5 years to capture long-term trends.
A model of staggered logistic decline evaluated the relationship between the global FC signature and EYO (t) for MC participants:
, where A is carrying capacity, r is growth rate, and t 1 and t 2 are transition times.
Here the carrying capacity describes the maximum FC that can be sustained.
The growth rates and carrying capacities for both curves were constrained by goodness-of-fit using the Shapiro-Wilks test of normality on the residuals
Nonlinear leastsquares regression was performed using the ''nlm'' function in R
The Akaike Information Criterion (AIC), Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC), and Levene's test were used to further evaluate model performance by comparing with polynomial models (i.e., linear, quadratic, and cubic)

Association between global FC signature and AD biomarkers
Associations were computed between a participant's global FC signature and A/T/(N) biomarkers, including CSF biomarkers (log-transformed Ab 1-42 [A1], p-tau 181 [T1], and total-tau [N1]), PET molecular biomarkers (PiB mean cortical SUVR [A2] and FDG uptake in the precuneus [N2]), and a structural MRI biomarker (hippocampal volume [N3]).
To investigate the relationship between global FC signature and AD biomarkers while adjusting for mediating associations, the partial correlation matrix (P) was computed by matrix inversion of the correlation matrix (R) such that the partial correlation between the i-th and j-th biomarkers was defined as follows:
where s ij were the elements of the inverted correlation matrix S = R À 1 .

Results

Demographics
Cross-sectional FC data were obtained for NC (n = 104) and MC (n = 171) participants.
NC individuals were older than MC CDR 0 ( p < 0.05) participants, but younger than MC CDR >0 ( p < 0.05) participants.
Similarly, MC CDR 0 participants were younger than MC CDR >0 participants ( p < 0.05) (Table

FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY DISRUPTION IN AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT ALZHEIMER DISEASE

Spatial topology of the global FC signature of ADAD
We observed a global FC signature of ADAD, with strong contributions from both intra-and internetwork connections that spanned multiple RSNs (Fig.
This global FC signature was influenced by both positive and negative correlations and, for visual clarity, was separated along the diagonal based on the direction of influence on the global FC signature.
Networks whose positive correlations had a strong influence included the SM, SMlat, CO, AUD, VIS, and MEM (intranetwork).
Networks whose negative correlations had a strong negative influence included the FP, MEM (internetwork), DAN, and DMN.

The global FC signature associates with markers of disease progression
The global FC signature decreased with pathology.
We observed that the global FC signature was significantly decreased in MC (yellow) compared with NC (gray) participants (Fig.
When MC participants were further differentiated by CDR status, the global FC signature significantly decreased in MC CDR >0 (Fig.
NC and MC CDR 0 participants were not significantly different ( p > 0.05).
For MC participants, a negative association was observed between mutation EYO and the global FC signature (Spearman's q = À0.33,
p = 1.2e-05;
Fig.
The association between the global FC signature and EYO remained significant after controlling for CDR status.
We also observed that the global FC signature predicted, on average, 5 to 18 percent more variance for the actual EYO than internetwork RSN values (Fig.
With regard to EYO, the global FC signature varied nonlinearly across the time course of the disease (Fig.
This was consistent with a dual-logistic behavior model characterized by two transition times that were offset by *17 years (Shapiro-Wilk's W = 0.97, p = 0.28).
This nonlinear model (AIC = À161, BIC = À153) performed significantly better than the first-order (AIC = À128, BIC = À123), second-order (AIC = À128, BIC = À121), and third-order (AIC = À126, BIC = À118) polynomial models (Levene's F = 4.04, p = 0.002), and suggested a two-stage process.
The global FC signature was elevated early in the disease time course (EYO < À16.7 years) in MC followed by a period that resembled control levels until further decreasing near the estimated time of symptom onset (EYO = 0.5 years).

Association between global FC signature and biomarkers
Strong associations were observed between CSF total tau and CSF p-tau 181 (r = 0.86, p < 10E-16), mean cortical PiB SUVR and CSF total tau (r = 0.53, p = 1.7E-9), mean cortical PiB SUVR and CSF p-tau 181 (r = 0.65, p = 2.2E-16), and precuneus PET FDG and hippocampal volume (r = 0.53, p = 1.6E-09).
Strong associations were observed between the global FC signature and several AD biomarkers (Fig.
The global FC signature was compared with each AD biomarker classified according to the amyloid (A), tau (T), and neurodegeneration (N) framework (Fig.
With regard to A criteria, the global FC signature was negatively associated with amyloid deposition as measured by mean cortical PiB SUVR ( p = 0.03), and was positively correlated with CSF Ab 1-42 ( p = 0.007).
With regard to T criteria, the global FC signature was negatively associated with CSF p-tau 181 ( p = 0.009).
With regard to (N) criteria, the global FC signature was negatively associated with CSF total tau ( p = 0.02), and positively associated with both precuneus PET FDG ( p = 0.002) and hippocampal volume ( p = 0.001).
For each of these biomarkers, a worse global FC signature score was associated with greater pathology.
To investigate the strength of the direct pathological relationship between any two biomarkers (including the global FC signature), we controlled for potential mediating effects of general pathological decline.
Specifically, an unbiased model was computed using a partial correlation matrix that controlled for other biomarkers (Fig.
In this unbiased model, no assumption of a specific temporal sequence of biomarkers was included.
This network model strongly differentiated AT(N) biomarkers and agreed with previously hypothesized trajectories with amyloid measures strongly associating with each (A1 and A2), measure of tau (T1) strongly tied to neurodegeneration (N1), as well as measures of neurodegeneration group together (N1, N2, and N3) (Fig.
In this model, the global FC signature most strongly associated with CSF Ab 1-42 (A1) and hippocampal volume (N3).
These results provide further evidence of a two-stage process concerning the global FC signature with changes associating with early and late biomarkers.
Moreover, these results suggest that each stage may be associated with changes in either amyloid accumulation or volumetrics.

Discussion
These results provide evidence that disruption of multiple functionally connected brain networks occurs in ADAD MC that is both stage dependent (asymptomatic versus symptomatic) and state dependent (biomarker status).
Disruption of the global FC signature was greatest in symptomatic MC carriers.
This indicates that changes in the global FC signature are tightly coupled with clinical presentation.
However, even after adjusting for symptom severity using CDR, disruption of the global FC signature was significantly associated with disease progression, as measured by EYO.
Furthermore, the global FC signature was, on average, a better predictor of EYO compared with intranetwork values of individual RSNs.
Changes in the global FC signature were also associated with pathological biomarkers classified using the AT(N) framework for designating temporal progression of AD.
Two independent methods showed that disruption of the global FC signature (1) occurred primarily during early (EYO * À17) and late (EYO *0) stages, and (2) was associated with early-stage (CSF Ab 1-42 ) and late-stage (hippocampal atrophy) biomarker changes.
Taken together, these results suggest that the global FC signature may be sensitive to distinct processes affecting synaptic activity: Ab accumulation early on in disease progression and neurodegeneration during later stages.
Our results are consistent with previous FC studies that investigated the disruption of specific RSNs in ADAD, but also shed new light on patterned changes across the entire spatial topography.
Previous studies have primarily focused on FC changes within a single network.
Changes have typically focused on the DMN, as this network has been associated with amyloid deposition
In our current analysis, a global FC pattern of disruption was observed that included both intra and internetwork brain connections.
These results suggest that prior studies primarily focusing on changes within a single network may overlook important changes seen within not only a network but also changes between networks.
Our analysis is a logical progression from previous work that demonstrated that intra-and internetwork brain connections across multiple networks were affected with progression to cognitive impairment in ADAD
In our current analysis, RSNs that associated with cognitive impairment included cognitive processing networks, including MEM, FP, DAN, and DMN, as well as sensory cortical regions such as the SM, SM-lat, VIS, and AUD.
Cognitive processing regions that have been associated with the changes in pathological biomarkers, such as amyloid and tau accumulation and volume loss, and disruption of FC in these regions, may be associated with positivity of one or more biomarkers.
Interestingly, neither FC nor pathological changes are typically observed in primary sensory regions.
These results suggest that the FC disruption observed may be a precursor to subsequent pathology.
Disruption was greatest for symptomatic mutation carriers (MC CDR >0) compared with mutation NC.
Our data showed that the greatest changes in the FC signature occurred for the symptomatic disease stage based on clinical staging and genetic profile.
Specifically, our data showed that 50% of the MC symptomatic cohort overlapped with the worst 25% of the asymptomatic MC cohort.
This degree of overlap can be attributed to the classification scheme that is based on subjective responses during the clinical interview.
This sensitivity to symptom manifestation bolsters the capability of this imaging marker as a tool for disease conversion.
Future studies may assess the capability of an FC signature to redefine group classification to better identify individuals on the cusp of conversion.
Our results are consistent with previous FC studies that investigated disease progression using linear modeling, but also provide new insight regarding the time line of FC disruption.
Linear modeling of disease progression suggests that FC disruption begins before the onset of symptoms.
Consistent with previous results, we used a linear model and observed that FC disruption in certain RSNs occurred *5 years before expected symptom inset (EYO À5)
However, previous reports show that AD biomarkers exhibit nonlinear time courses across disease stages (
In an updated model of disease progression, we observed that the global FC signature also exhibited a nonlinear time course that was consistent with proposed biomarker models
Specifically, disruption of the global FC signature was marked by two dramatic changes that occurred during very early (*17 EYO) and late (*0 EYO) disease stages in AD progression.
The time period leading up to the initial decrease of the global FC signature could suggest a very early period of hyperconnectivity
The production of Ab has been linked to increased synaptic activity that can manifest as nonconvulsive seizures that are present before cognitive symptoms
FC hyperactivity has also been observed in LOAD particularly in areas with advanced Ab accumulation
It remains unclear whether this hyperactivity is detrimental due to synaptic excitotoxicity or compensatory due to increased pathological burden
Our data suggest that this hyperactivity in FC may be a compensatory mechanism to preserve cognitive stability provided this observed state was years before symptom onset
However, prolonged hyperactivity can lead to cognitive deficits and overall loss in connectivity strength
This coincides with the second sharp decrease in the global FC signature that occurred at EYO = 0.
This is consistent with evidence from MRI studies that show volume loss accelerates near EYO = 0
Together our data show an overall pattern that initiates with a decline from a hyperactive state that briefly returns to baseline levels before declining near symptom onset.
These results suggest a dual-pathology process that reflects biological changes in the absence of behavioral changes.
Understanding these distinct processes is clinically important for treatment intervention as individuals may respond differently based on their point on these curves.
The ability to characterize changes in a global FC signature during pre-clinical stages of AD was further supported by a separate linear model that focused on AT(N) biomarkers.
A number of studies focusing on pathological biomarkers have proposed an AT(N) sequence in LOAD
Our model for ADAD was given no a priori assumptions concerning the sequence of biomarker events, except that the sequence should be consistent for participants.
Despite our assumption of no specific temporal sequence of biomarker progression, our work further supports that ADAD and LOAD have similar temporal patterns for AD biomarkers regardless of the age of onset or genetic association
Furthermore, we found that disruption of the global FC signature was preferentially associated with both CSF Ab 1-42 and hippocampal atrophy, biomarkers that characterize pathological changes occurring during the early and late stages of AD, respectively.
This suggests that genetic mutations set in motion a time line of AT(N) biomarker changes with brain amyloidosis (possibly with certain soluble amyloid peptides proposed to be more closely associated with neuronal excitotoxicity) (A) followed by tauopathy (T) and eventually reduced glucose metabolism and brain volumetrics (N)
Our results contribute to the understanding of how, in AD etiology, changes in global network functionality precipitate eventual short-term episodic memory deficits, the hallmark of AD.
Based on these results it may be possible to use the global FC signature as a marker of underlying neuronal response to trials that introduce anti-Ab therapies very early in the disease.
Advantages for FC as an outcome measure in clinical trials include lack of radiation unlike PET biomarkers, and being less invasive than a lumbar puncture for CSF.
Further studies should also look at changes in comparison with LOAD.
Longitudinal studies of changes in FC in this cohort are needed to more robustly evaluate the nature of neuronal dysfunction with disease progression.



FIG. 1 .
FIG. 1. PCA reveals a distributed pattern of FC changes across cortical and subcortical RSNs.
Left: The mean FC matrix across all participants.
An FC matrix from 248 regions of interest was computed for each participant.
Positive correlations are shown in the upper triangle, and negatives are shown in the bottom triangle.
Notched black lines on the top and to the right indicate RSNs.
The black box outline is a visual aid highlighting the intranetwork FC values of the DMN.
Middle: The mean FC-composite matrix across all participants.
For each participant, an FC-composite matrix was generated by computing the mean intra-and internetwork FC matrix values (total of 78) for all 12 RSNs.
Here the black box highlights the mean intranetwork FC value of the DMN.
Right: The global FC signature is derived from the primary PCA pattern and reflects positively and negatively weighted mean FC-composite values.
The strongest positive weights include the SM, SMlat, CO, AUD, VIS, and MEM.
The strongest negative weights included the FP, MEM, DAN, and DMN.
The black box outline highlights the weight of the mean intranetwork FC value of the DMN.
AUD, auditory; CO, cingulo-opercular; DAN, dorsal attention; DMN, default mode network; FC, functional connectivity; FP, frontoparietal; MEM, memory; PCA, principal component analysis; RSNs, resting-state networks; SAL, salience; SM, sensorimotor; SMlat, sensorimotor-lateral; SUB, subcortical; VAN, ventral attention; VIS, visual.
Color images are available online.



FIG. 2
FIG. 2. (A) The global FC signature as a function of mutation status, CDR, and EYO.
(A) Violin and box plots of the global FC signature for NC (gray) and MC (yellow), MC CDR 0 (green), and MC CDR >0 (red) participants.
NC had a higher global FC signature compared with MC.
MC CDR >0 had significant decreases in the global FC signature compared with NC and MC CDR 0 participants.
A black bar represents a significant group difference.
(B) Line plot showing the association between global FC signature and mutation EYO for MC participants.
The global FC signature was associated with EYO in MC ( p < 0.05).
The dashed line (black) is the mean global FC signature in NC participants, and the dark gray band is the confidence interval defined as two standard errors of the mean.
(C) Coefficient of determination (R 2 ) for the global FC signature and the intranetwork values of 12 RSNs.
The length of the vertical bar represents the strength of that FC value for predicting EYO.
(D) The global FC signature for MC individuals exhibits a biphasic behavior with regard to mutation EYO in -5-year bins.
When the global FC signature was fit to the bin means (yellow curve), two logistic curves were observed (magenta and cyan).
A two-stage process was observed, with early and late changes seen in the global FC signature.
CDR, clinical dementia rating; EYO, expected years to symptom onset; MC, mutation carrier; NC, noncarrier.
Color images are available online.



FIG. 3 .
FIG. 3. The global FC signature as a function of Alzheimer disease (AD) biomarkers in mutation-positive (MC) individuals.
Analyses investigated amyloid (A; green), Tau (T; purple), and neurodegenerative (N; orange) biomarkers.
Scatter plots show that the global FC signature was (A) positively associated with CSF Ab 1-42 , negatively associated with mean PiB SUVR, negatively associated with CSF p-tau 181 and total tau, and positively associated with both precuneus FDG uptake and hippocampal volume.
(B) The correlation matrix of all biomarkers, including global FC signature (left), was inverted to compute the partial correlation matrix (middle).
Network map of relationships was plotted among the global FC signature, and AD biomarkers based on the partial correlation matrix.
The fully (light edges) and minimally (dark edges) connected graphs are shown.
All associations were corrected for age.
CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; FDG, 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose; PiB, Pittsburgh compound B; p-tau 181 , phosphorylated tau 181 ; SUVR, standardized uptake value ratios.
Color images are available online.



Table 1 .
Demographic and Clinical Comparison of Non-and Mutation Carrier Groups