A blood screening tool for detecting mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer's disease among community‐dwelling Mexican Americans and non‐Hispanic Whites: A method for increasing representation of diverse populations in clinical research
Introduction: Representation of Mexican Americans in Alzheimer's disease (AD) clinical research has been extremely poor.
Methods: Data were examined from the ongoing community-based, multi-ethnic Health & Aging Brain among Latino Elders (HABLE) study.
Participants underwent functional exams, clinical labs, neuropsychological testing, and 3T magnetic resonance imaging of the brain.
Fasting proteomic markers were examined for predicting mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and AD using support vector machine models.
Results: Data were examined from n = 1649 participants (Mexican American n = 866; non-Hispanic White n = 783).
Proteomic profiles were highly accurate in detecting MCI (area under the curve [AUC] = 0.91) and dementia (AUC = 0.95).
The proteomic profiles varied significantly between ethnic groups and disease state.
Negative predictive value was excellent for ruling out MCI and dementia across ethnic groups.
Discussion: A blood-based screening tool can serve as a method for increasing access to state-of-the-art AD clinical research by bridging between community-based and clinic-based settings.

K E Y W O R D S
Alzheimer's disease, diversity, Hispanic, inclusion, Mexican American, mild cognitive impairment, screening tool

BACKGROUND
There has been a substantial underrepresentation of Hispanic populations in Alzheimer's disease (AD) research
In fact, Hispanics make up the largest minority population in the United States
It is anticipated that the percentage of Hispanics aged 65 and older will triple by the year 2050
Approximately 65% of Hispanics in the United States are of Mexican American ethnicity;
and AD among Mexican Americans.
Novel tools are needed to increase representation of Mexican Americans in AD observational studies and clinical trials (herein referred to as AD clinical research).
One factor contributing to the lack of inclusion of Mexican Americans in AD clinical research is the access barrier posed due to the location of the research itself.
Specifically, most AD research has been conducted in dementia specialty clinics; however, Mexican Americans rarely present to such clinics.
Two examples of novel methods having substantial impact on increasing diversity in AD clinical research are the National Institute on Aging Alzheimer's Disease Centers (ADCs)
ADC ACTC sites are located across a broad range of US metropolitan areas; however, only 8% of participants in the National Alzheimer's Coordinating Center (NACC) database are of Hispanic ethnicity.
Representation is even lower among clinical trials for AD in which between < 1% and 4% of participants identify as Hispanic.
Furthermore, few trials to date have examined the potential impact of race/ethnicity on safety or efficacy outcomes.
Lopez et al. found that the efficacy and safety for cholinesterase inhibitors were similar for Hispanics and non-Hispanic Whites;
Given the lack of awareness of AD among the Hispanic community, 2 a system that allows a community-based approach to build trust and increase awareness is an ideal option for screening Mexican Americans into AD clinical research.
A significant hurdle for community-based studies is the use of comprehensive AD assessment protocols, which incorporate a medical examination, neuropsychological testing, clinical blood work, and neu-roimaging.
This barrier is not only due to access owing to the need to bring participants to clinics rather than seeing participants in their natural environment, but also due to distrust and language barriers.
Additionally, the recent shift to the 2018 AT(N) research framework calls for incorporation of confirmatory biomarkers of disease pathology,
In alignment with the AT(N) terminology, we distinguish clinically defined AD
previously discovered
The Food and Drug Administration defines COU as "a statement that fully and clearly describes the way the medical product development tool is to be used and the medical product development-related purpose of the use."
Here, we sought to examine a proteomic profile approach for the COU of a blood-based tool for screening out MCI and dementia within community-based settings.
As part of this COU, the blood-based screening tool is seen as the first step in a multi-tiered neurodiagnostic system rather than seeking a "magic bullet" biomarker to serve all needs.
Within this COU, the goal of the first screening step is to rule out disease (i.e., high negative predictive value [NPV]) with the intent that screen-positive cases will be referred for a second level assessment (Figure
NPV is the probability of a participant not having dementia based on a negative test result.
NPV is impacted by sensitivity (SN) and specificity (SP), as well as the prevalence of the disease state (dementia or MCI in this case) within the population of intended use.
It is likely that SN and SP estimates will vary between clinic-based literature documents the need to examine the impact of race and ethnicity on biomarkers of AD.
Based on our prior work demonstrating the importance of metabolic markers in AD among Mexican Americans,
We also added blood-based proteins of the AT(N) framework to the proteomic profile.

METHODS
The Health & Aging Brain among Latino Elders (HABLE) study 31 is a community-based multi-ethnic, study of MCI and clinically defined AD
All methods are administered in English or Spanish.
The neuropsychological testing battery is reported in Table
Informant interviews are completed using structured questionnaires to complete the Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR)
A method was implemented within the electronic data capture (EDC) system to assign cognitive diagnoses based on the following criteria, which were confirmed

Blood collection and processing procedures
Fasting blood samples were collected according to the international guidelines for AD biomarker studies.
Our previously validated proteomic profile was assayed using electrochemiluminescence (ECL) per our published methods on the following biomarkers: fatty acid binding protein 3 (FABP3); beta 2 microglobulin (B2M); C-reactive

Statistical methods
Statistical analyses were completed using R (V 3.3.3).
Support vector machine (SVM) analyses were conducted.
SVM is based on the con-cept of decision planes that define decision boundaries and is primarily a classifier method that performs classification tasks by constructing hyperplanes in a multidimensional space that separates cases of different class labels.
Ten times repeated 5-fold cross-validation was used to directly perform SVM parameter tuning and an optimal cutoff was determined using grid search, which is a traditional way of performing hyperparameter optimization.
In the 5-fold cross-validation, the data are divided into five folds.
The model is trained on four folds with one fold held back for testing.
This process gets repeated to ensure each fold of the dataset gets the chance to be the held-back set.
When the process is completed, the evaluation metrics are summarized using the mean.
This method provides a more reliable estimate of out-ofsample performance by reducing the variance associated with a single trial of cross-validation.
All proteomics were entered into a single algorithm based on our prior methods.
8]
Analyses were conducted as follows:
(1) detecting MCI versus cognitively unimpaired in the entire cohort, of MCI was 14% and dementia was 6%.
Among Mexican Americans, the prevalence of MCI was 17% and dementia was 7%.
Among non-Hispanic Whites, the prevalence of MCI was 11% and dementia was 6%.
Table

MCI
In the entire cohort, the proteomic profile (optimized cutscore = 0.995) yielded an area under the curve (AUC) of 0.91, SN of 0.82, and SP of 0.96.
Based on an MCI prevalence of 14%, the NPV was 97%.
See Figure
Inclusion of demographic factors, using an optimized cut-score of 0.988, yielded an AUC of 0.94, SN of 0.83, SP of 0.98, and NPV 97%.
When examining the Mexican American cohort, the proteomic profile (optimized cut-score = 0.809) yielded an AUC of 0.91, SN of 0.76, and SP of 0.99.
Based on an MCI prevalence of 17%, the NPV was 95%.
See Figure
When demographic factors were added to the model (optimized cut-score = 0.773), the AUC was 0.99, SN was 0.95, and SP was 0.99; NPV was 99%.
When examining the non-Hispanic White cohort (optimized cutscore of 0.991), the proteomic profile alone yielded an AUC of 0.94, SN of 0.87, and SP of 0.99.
Based on an MCI prevalence of 11%, the NPV was 98%.
See Figure
Inclusion of demographic factors (optimized cutscore of 0.985) yielded an AUC of 0.99, SN of 0.90, and SP of 0.99; NPV was 99%.

Dementia
In the entire cohort, the proteomic profile (optimized cut-score = 0.99) yielded an AUC of 0.95, SN of 0.82, and SP of 0.99.
Based on a dementia prevalence of 6%, the NPV was 99%.
See Figure
itionally, it is unknown if race/ethnicity impact these markers.
These, and other, novel markers will be examined within this COU leveraging the HABLE biorepository.
When examining the variable importance plots for MCI and dementia across ethnic groups, there were clear differences.
Among Mexican Americans, inflammatory and metabolic markers were in the top half of all markers whereas plasma-based markers associated with AD pathology (i.e., amyloid, tau, and neurodegeneration) were in the bottom of the variable importance plot.
Among non-Hispanic Whites, however, the top half of the proteomic profile was largely inflammatory and traditional markers of AD pathology with most metabolic markers (except for insulin) being in the bottom of the variable importance plot.
Therefore, metabolic markers are more relevant to MCI among Mexican Americans whereas inflammatory and AD-pathology related biomarkers are more important among non-Hispanic Whites.
The profile of dementia among Mexican Americans, however, was inflammatory and neurodegeneration (i.e., NfL) while the non-Hispanic White profile shifted to become largely metabolic, inflammatory, and ADpathology marker related.
Therefore, the current results suggest a shift in biological profiles from MCI to AD that is different among Mexican Americans compared to non-Hispanic Whites.
In fact, metabolic factors appear to be more relevant in MCI among Mexican Americans whereas these factors become more relevant to dementia among non-Hispanic Whites.
The AD-pathology markers were not major drivers of the profiles for detecting MCI or dementia among Mexican Americans whereas they were significant contributors to diagnostic accuracy of both among non-Hispanic Whites.
It is also noteworthy that demographic factors increased the accuracy of the profiles (MCI and AD) more among Mexican Americans than non-Hispanic Whites.
Future work will determine whether these profiles vary by sex and ethnic status.
These findings of the inflammatory and metabolic nature of MCI and dementia are of importance.
In our prior work, we identified a proinflammatory endophenotype of AD
We also proposed a metabolic endophenotype
Combined, this data suggests that both inflammatory and metabolic factors require additional investigation for precision medicine approaches to novel AD clinical trials, and the efficacy of these interventions may vary not only by disease state, but also by ethnicity.
The cross-sectional nature of the current findings is a limitation.
However, the HABLE study is currently collecting Visit 2 examinations so longitudinal assessments will be available.
A second limitation is the age of enrollment of 50 and above.
Given the younger age of onset of cognitive loss among Mexican Americans, as well as the differential importance of the identified biological mechanisms, it is important to study younger age ranges of these ethnic/racial groups to fully understand the life course nature of MCI and AD, as well as associated biomarkers, if appropriate prevention strategies are to be attempted.



F I G U R E 1
Multi-tiered screening process for research study and/or clinical trials enrollment.
CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; PET, positron emission tomography and community-based settings due to a broad range of factors, including the more heterogeneous participants (e.g., characteristics, co-morbidities) enrolled into community research.
Additionally, recent


at consensus review: (1) MCI: complaint of cognitive change (self or RESEARCH IN CONTEXT 1. Systematic review: The authors reviewed the literature using traditional sources (e.g., PubMed).
Despite the fact that Hispanics are the largest ethnic minority population in the United States, and Mexican Americans are the largest Hispanic population in the United States, this ethnic group remains severely underrepresented in Alzheimer's disease (AD) clinical research.
No current methods are available to bridge community-based and clinic-based AD clinical research settings, which could drastically increase representation in these studies.
2. Interpretation: Our findings demonstrate that a bloodbased screening tool can rule out mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and clinically defined AD among both Mexican Americans and non-Hispanic Whites with more than 95% accuracy.
Additionally, the proteomic profiles vary according to diagnostic classification as well as ethnicity.
Therefore, diagnosis and ethnic-specific screening tools may be required.
3. Future directions: This article provides the foundation and justification to prospectively test blood-based screening tools for increasing inclusion of minority populations in AD clinical research.
Additionally, the current screening tool will soon be tested among African Americans.
other), CDR scale sum of boxes (CDR-SB) score of 0.5 to 2.0, 35 and performance at or below 1.5 standard deviations below the mean on age, education, and primary language adjusted z-score scores on at least one cognitive test; (2) Dementia: CDR-SB > = 2.5, cognitive test score at or below two standard deviations below the mean on adjusted zscores on two or more neuropsychological tests; (3) Normal cognition: no complaints of cognitive change (self or other), CDR-SB = 0, cognitive test scores considered broadly within normal testing limits.
The HABLE protocol is conducted under institutional review board-approved protocols and all participants and/or caregivers sign written informed consent.
All participants are evaluated at the Institute for Translational Research (ITR) at the University of North Texas Health Science Center, Fort Worth, Texas.
The HABLE database is available the through the ITR webpage data portal. 36


protein (CRP); thrombopoietin (TPO); alpha 2 macroglobulin (A2M) eotaxin 3; tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNFa); tenascin C (TNC); interleukin (IL)-5, IL-6, IL-7, IL-10, IL-18; I-309; factor VII (factor 7); soluble intercellular adhesion molecule 1 (sICAM1); circulating vascular cell adhesion molecule 1 (sVCAM1); pancreatic polypeptide (PPY); thymus activation regulated chemokine (TARC); and serum amyloid A (SAA).
The Quanterix Simoa HD-1 platform was used for assay of plasma amyloid beta (Aβ) 40 , Aβ 42 , total tau (3-plex plate), and neurofilament light (NfL).
The ITR Biomarker Core has conducted n > 5000 assays with CVs < = 5%.



F I G U R E 2
Classifying mild cognitive impairment (MCI) in the entire cohort.
A2M, alpha 2 macroglobulin eotaxin 3; AUC, area under the curve; B2M, beta 2 microglobulin (B2M); CRP, C-reactive protein; GLP-1, glucagon-like peptide 1; FABP3, fatty acid binding protein 3; IL, interleukin; NC, normal control, non-cognitively impaired; NfL, neurofilament light; NPV, negative predictive value; PPY, pancreatic polypeptide; PYY, peptide YY; SAA, serum amyloid A; factor VII (factor 7); sICAM1, soluble intercellular adhesion molecule 1; sVCAM1, circulating vascular cell adhesion molecule 1; SVM, support vector machine; TARC, thymus activation regulated chemokine; TNFa, tumor necrosis factor alpha; TNC, tenascin C; TPO, thrombopoietin (2) detecting MCI versus cognitively unimpaired split by ethnicity, (3) detecting dementia versus cognitively unimpaired in the entire cohort, and (4) detecting dementia versus cognitively unimpaired split by ethnicity.
Analyses were conducted using proteomics alone and then proteomics + demographic factors (age, sex, education) per our prior methods. 27,28
3 RESULTS A total of n = 1649 participants (n = 106 dementia; n = 234 MCI; n = 1309 cognitively unimpaired) had the requisite data and were included in this study.
When separated by ethnicity: Mexican American: normal control n = 659, MCI n = 147, dementia n = 60; non-Hispanic White: normal control n = 650, MCI n = 87, dementia n = 46.
To estimate NPV (to examine the COU as a rule-out screening tool), we used the prevalence of diagnosis in the cohort.
In HABLE, the prevalence (or base rate for use in Bayesian calculations of predictive accuracy 39 )



F I G U R E 3 4 DISCUSSIONF I G U R E 5
for classification accuracy, variable importance plot, and ROC curve.
Inclusion of demographic factors in the profile yielded an AUC of 0.98, SN of 0.95, and SP of 0.99; NPV was 99%.
Classifying mild cognitive impairment (MCI) by ethnicity.
A, Classifying MCI among Mexican Americans.
B, Classifying MCI among non-Hispanic Whites.
A2M, alpha 2 macroglobulin eotaxin 3; AUC, area under the curve; B2M, beta 2 microglobulin (B2M); CRP, C-reactive protein; GLP-1, glucagon-like peptide 1; FABP3, fatty acid binding protein 3; IL, interleukin; NC, normal control, not-cognitively impaired; NfL, neurofilament light; NPV, negative predictive value; PPY, pancreatic polypeptide; PYY, peptide YY; SAA, serum amyloid A; factor VII (factor 7); sICAM1, soluble intercellular adhesion molecule 1; sVCAM1, circulating vascular cell adhesion molecule 1; SVM, support vector machine; TARC, thymus activation regulated chemokine; TNFa, tumor necrosis factor alpha; TNC, tenascin C; TPO, thrombopoietin Among the Mexican American cohort, the proteomic profile (optimized cut-score = 0.98) yielded an AUC of 0.87, SN of 0.60, and SP of 0.99.
Based on a dementia prevalence of 7%, the NPV was 97%.
See Figure 5A for classification accuracy, variable importance plot, and ROC curve.
The addition of demographic factors (optimal cut-score = 0.96) resulted in an AUC of 0.90, SN of 0.73, and SP of 0.99; NPV was 99%.Among the non-Hispanic White cohort, the proteomic profile (optimized cut-score = 0.976) resulted in an AUC of 0.97, SN of 0.94, and SP of 1.0.
Based on a dementia prevalence of 6%, the NPV was 99%.
See Figure5Bfor classification accuracy, variable importance plot, and ROC curve.
The addition of demographic factors (optimal cutscore = 0.961) yielded an AUC of 0.97, SN of 0.94, and SP of 0.99; NPV was 99%.
F I G U R E 4 Classifying dementia among entire cohort.
A2M, alpha 2 macroglobulin eotaxin 3; AUC, area under the curve; B2M, beta 2 microglobulin (B2M); CRP, C-reactive protein; GLP-1, glucagon-like peptide 1; FABP3, fatty acid binding protein 3; IL, interleukin; NC, normal control, non-cognitively impaired; NfL, neurofilament light; NPV, negative predictive value; PPY, pancreatic polypeptide; PYY, peptide YY; SAA, serum amyloid A; factor VII (factor 7); sICAM1, soluble intercellular adhesion molecule 1; sVCAM1, circulating vascular cell adhesion molecule 1; SVM, support vector machine; TARC, thymus activation regulated chemokine; TNFa, tumor necrosis factor alpha; TNC, tenascin C; TPO, thrombopoietin The availability of tools that can be implemented within ethnically diverse, community-based settings can increase representation of the population in research, which is urgently needed in AD clinical research.
Community-based methods are more successful in the recruitment of diverse populations; however, implementation of advanced neurodiagnostic methods within these settings is a challenge.
Therefore, we tested a blood-based screening tool within a multi-ethnic, community-based setting to determine the accuracy in ruling out MCI and clinically defined AD.
Leveraging the communitybased methods to build trust within the community and then applying a blood-based screening tool as the bridge to the clinic-based setting can be implemented as outlined in Figure 1.
Our results support the potential utility of blood-based biomarkers for this specific COU.
The COU of screening out MCI and dementia among multi-ethnic, community-based settings as a means for increasing inclusion in AD clinical research cannot be tested with clinic-based designs.
Clinicbased studies cannot mirror community-based populations due to selection bias, access barriers, as well as differences in disease prevalence, which directly affects diagnostic accuracy estimates.
In the present community-based setting, the prevalence of dementia was 6% and MCI was 14% and, therefore, the most important first step is to identify those without disease.
What are the potential benefits of a blood-based screening tool for community-based settings, such as pro-vided here?
First, access to state-of-the-art AD clinical research has been limited among Mexican American (and other underserved) populations.
In contrast, the advanced tools needed for comprehensive dementia (and AD) research studies are largely available among academic specialty clinics.
Therefore, a blood-based screening tool can be most feasibility used in community settings (urban and rural) that are in proximity to dementia clinics using community-based protocols.Those who screen negative undergo limited assessments while those who screen positive can then be referred to the specialty clinic setting.
This approach can leverage the "best of both worlds" and drastically open access to state-of-the-art research among underserved communities.A practical illustrative example of the utility of this approach is as follows.
If US NACC-or ACTC-wide projects sought to enroll a population of Mexican Americans with dementia and MCI for clinical research, a total of n = 20,000 participants could be screened from the rural and urban communities near existing ADC or ACTC sites.
Estimating the prevalence found in the current study would result in approximately n = 3400 MCI cases (n = 20,000 x 0.17) and approximately n = 1162 dementia cases (n = 16,600 x 0.07).
If the blood test cost $300 per person, the total screening costs would be ≈$6 million.
However, if screening were conducted via amyloid PET scans, screening cost would be $60 million (estimated $3000 per person).While the current proteomic profile yielded excellent results, it is possible that additional blood-based biomarkers may add to Classifying dementia by ethnicity.
A, Classifying dementia among Mexican Americans.
B, Classifying dementia among non-Hispanic Whites.
A2M, alpha 2 macroglobulin eotaxin 3; AUC, area under the curve; B2M, beta 2 microglobulin (B2M); CRP, C-reactive protein; GLP-1, glucagon-like peptide 1; FABP3, fatty acid binding protein 3; IL, interleukin; NC, normal control, non-cognitively impaired; NfL, neurofilament light; NPV, negative predictive value; PPY, pancreatic polypeptide; PYY, peptide YY; SAA, serum amyloid A; factor VII (factor 7); sICAM1, soluble intercellular adhesion molecule 1; sVCAM1, circulating vascular cell adhesion molecule 1; SVM, support vector machine; TARC, thymus activation regulated chemokine; TNFa, tumor necrosis factor alpha; TNC, tenascin C; TPO, thrombopoietin this process.
In addition to amyloid and total tau, phospho-tau217



A
third limitation to the current study is the lack of comparison of AT(N) plasma biomarkers across assay platforms or direct comparison to cerebral amyloid status (PET or cerebrospinal fluid).
Recent work suggests that mass spectrometry-based plasma amyloid may result in high classification accuracy for detecting clinical or amyloid positivity status.
Future studies can assay plasma AT(N) biomarkers across a wide range of platforms by leveraging the HABLE biorepository.
Additionally, the HABLE study is currently collecting PET amyloid and tau scans longitudinally and, therefore, future work will directly compare blood-based and PET-based biomarkers of AT(N).
A fourth limitation is the lack of inclusion of factors related to social determinants of health (SDOH); however, ongoing work is directly assessing the impact of SDOH on a broad range of biomarkers (including A, T, and N) within this cohort.
A final limitation is the lack of inclusion of African Americans, who currently reflect the largest proportion of AD and ADRDs in the United States.
No prior studies have simultaneously examined AT(N) biomarkers across the three largest racial/ethnic populations of the United States.
Therefore, the HABLE study (now entitled the Health & Aging Brain Study -Health Disparities, HABS-HD, to better reflect the community it serves) is currently enrolling n = 1000 African Americans to undergo comprehensive AT(N) based assessments.
Strengths of the current study include sample size, the multi-ethnic nature of the cohort, and the leveraging of both community-based and clinic-based methods.
Overall, our findings support the COU of a blood screening tool for increasing representation of diverse communities in AD clinical research.