Binding Sites of a Positron Emission Tomography Imaging Agent in Alzheimer’s β-Amyloid Fibrils Studied Using <sup>19</sup>F Solid-State NMR
Amyloid imaging by positron emission tomography (PET) is an important method for diagnosing neurodegenerative disorders such as Alzheimer's disease.
Many 11 C and 18 F labeled PET tracers show varying binding capacities, specificities, and affinities for their target proteins.
The structural basis of these variations is poorly understood.
Here we employ 19 F and 13 C solid-state NMR to investigate the binding sites of a PET ligand, flutemetamol, to the 40-residue Alzheimer's β-amyloid peptide (Aβ40).
Analytical high-performance liquid chromatography and 19 F NMR spectra show that flutemetamol binds the current Aβ40 fibril with a stoichiometry of one ligand per four to five peptides.
Half of the ligands are tightly bound while the other half are loosely bound.
C and 15 N chemical shifts indicate that this Aβ40 polymorph has an immobilized N-terminus, a non-β-sheet His14, and a non-β-sheet C-terminus.
We measured the proximity of the ligand fluorine to peptide residues using 19 F-13 C and 19 F-1 H rotational-echo-double-resonance (REDOR) experiments.
The spectra show that three segments in the peptide, 12 VHH 14 , 18 VFF 20 and 39 VV 40 , lie the closest to the ligand.
REDOR-constrained docking simulations indicate that these three segments form multiple binding sites, and the ligand orientations and positions at these sites are similar across different Aβ polymorphs.
Comparison of the flutemetamol-interacting residues in Aβ40 with the small-molecule binding sites in other amyloid proteins suggest that conjugated aromatic compounds preferentially bind β-sheet surface grooves lined by aromatic, polar, and charged residues.
These motifs may explain the specificity of different PET tracers to different amyloid proteins.

Introduction
The structural biology of neurodegenerative diseases has largely centered on the determination of the three-dimensional structures of the protein aggregates involved in these diseases
Because amyloid fibrils represent the thermodynamically stable structures at the end stage of disease, disaggregating these fibrils pose a significant challenge.
To prevent, detect, and slow disease progression, one approach is to investigate the structure and dynamics of early-to-intermediate states of these proteins
A widely used neuroimaging modality is positron emission tomography (PET), in which positive β-decay of radioactive nuclei such as
The location of positron annihilation is deduced from the positions of the detected γ photons, thus allowing the localization and quantification of the concentration of radiotracers in living tissues.
C has a short half-life of 20 minutes while
Thus many
One of the most important applications of PET is the imaging of the two pathological hallmarks of Alzheimer's disease (AD): the extracellular neuritic plaques formed by the β-amyloid peptide (Aβ) and the intracellular neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs) formed by the protein tau
Because aromatic conjugated dyes such as thioflavin T and Congo red bind cross-β amyloid fibrils, a series of
Among these,
PiB binds Aβ aggregates in AD cortical tissues with a high affinity (K d of ~2 nM), favorable lipophilicity, two-fold higher uptake in AD brains than healthy controls,
A [ 18 F]3'-F-derivative of PiB, 3'-F-PiB, has similar properties as the parent compound, and is known as flutemetamol or GE-067, with a tradename Vizamyl.
F-flutemetamol PET is especially diagnostic of advanced phases of Aβ pathology that occurs in symptomatic AD cases
Although amyloid PET imaging is important in the clinic, why multiple structurally similar compounds show different affinities, specificities, and stoichiometries to their target proteins is still poorly understood.
Some PET tracers bind only Aβ fibrils while others target only tau NFTs
Even among Aβ-binding thioflavin derivatives, fluorescence experiments on synthetic Aβ fibrils found significantly different binding stoichiometries (B max ) and binding constants 19 .
For PiB, radioligand assays indicate that B max and binding affinities differ widely among Aβ peptides obtained from different sources, including AD brains, healthy brains, transgenic mouse brains, and synthetic Aβ fibrils
The structural basis for these variations in binding characteristics is largely unknown.
Determining the binding sites and binding geometries of PET ligands on the molecular level is necessary for designing more effective radiotracers, as well as small molecules that can potentially disaggregate these fibrils.
The presence of fluorine atoms in PET tracers provides an attractive opportunity for determining the binding sites of these PET ligands by NMR.
The stable and NMR-active isotope of fluorine is
F is a 100% abundant spin-1/2 nucleus that possesses the second highest gyromagnetic ratio (γ) among all stable NMR-active isotopes.
As a result,
This strong dipole coupling allows relatively long inter-atomic distances of 1-2 nm to be measured
In addition, the
For these reasons,
To speed up distance measurements, we recently developed twodimensional (2D) solid-state NMR experiments that measure many
eteronuclear
Each pair of 2D REDOR experiments yield multiple distance restraints, thus facilitating structure determination.
Here we apply
We grew homogeneous fibrils without seeding using recombinant
HPLC analysis and
C-
These segments include a double histidine (His) motif, a double phenylalanine (Phe) motif, and the double valine (Val) motif at the C-terminus of the peptide.
Distance-constrained molecular docking yielded the binding orientations and positions of the ligand, which are similar for different Aβ structures.
These results give insights into the residue-level interactions that stabilize this PET ligand in various Aβ structures.

Materials and Methods

Expression and purification of Aβ40
We expressed Aβ40 in E. coli as a soluble His-tagged fusion protein NT*-Aβ40 with a TEV recognition site.
This construct produces a human Aβ40 peptide without additional residues after cleavage.
The plasmid pT7His 6 NT* -TEV recognition site -Aβ(1-40)
The plasmid was transformed into E. coli BL21(DE3) competent cells.
An overnight culture was grown in a 250 mL unbaffled flask filled with 50 mL LB medium containing 50 µg/mL kanamycin at 37ºC with 225 rpm shaking (with an orbit diameter of 1.9 cm in this work).
5 mL of the overnight culture was inoculated into a 0.5 L LB medium in a baffled 2.8 L flask, and cells were grown at 37˚C with 250 rpm shaking until OD 600 reached 0.8-0.9.
Cells were centrifuged at 3,000 g and 4˚C for 5 min, and the pellet was resuspended in a baffled 2.8 L flask with 1 L of M9 medium containing 3 g/L 13 C 6 -labeled D-glucose, 1 g/L
Cells were grown in this M9 medium at 37˚C and 250 rpm until an OD 600 of 0.9, then protein expression was induced with 0.5 mM IPTG for 4 h.
After protein expression, cells from the M9 culture were centrifuged at 4,000 g and 4˚C for 10 min.
Cell pellet was resuspended in 80 mL lysis buffer containing 20 mM Tris, 8 M urea, pH 8.0 and lysed using a tip sonicator (40% power, 5 s on, 5 s off, 10 min).
The cell lysate was centrifuged at 15,000 g for 20 min to remove cell debris and protein aggregates.
The supernatant containing the NT*-Aβ40 fusion protein was purified using a Ni-NTA affinity column.
Fractions containing the fusion protein (Fig.
After dialysis, TEV protease was added at a ratio of 1:10 TEV : substrate (w/w), and cleavage reaction was conducted in 50 mL cleavage buffer (20 mM pH 8 Tris, 0.5 mM EDTA and 1 mM DTT) at 4ºC without shaking overnight.
After cleavage was assessed by SDS-PAGE to be complete (Fig.
After filtration through a 0.45 μm syringe filter, Aβ40 was purified by reverse-phase HPLC using a semi-preparative C4 column (250 mm length, 10 mm I.D., 10 µm particle size, 300 Å pore size, Higgins analytical) using a linear gradient of 15-40% buffer B in 25 min (buffer A: water with 0.1% TFA, buffer B: acetonitrile with 0.1% TFA, column heated to 60 ºC).
The purity of the peptide was verified by SDS-PAGE (Fig.
The pure fractions were combined and lyophilized to give the Aβ40 powders
The yields of purified Aβ peptides were 10 mg and 15 mg per liter of M9 culture for

Fibrillization of Aβ40 peptide
The purified recombinant Aβ40 peptide was fibrillized using a previously published protocol
The lyophilized peptide was monomerized by sequential dissolution in HFIP and DMSO, then fibrils were grown at a low concentration of ~46 μM in pH 7.4 phosphate buffer at 37˚C for 3 days under shaking.
Specifically, Aβ40 was first dissolved in HFIP (5 mg/mL) and sonicated for 5 min.
Aliquots of 40 μl HFIP solution were transferred into 1.5 mL low-binding microcentrifuge tubes.
25-50 tubes of samples were prepared to obtain a sufficient quantity of fibrils for solid-state NMR experiments.
The HFIP solution was evaporated, and 20 μl DMSO was added to each tube to dissolve the peptide film to 10 mg/mL.
The solution was vortexed and sonicated for 30 min, after which 980 μL of 10 mM pH 7.4 sodium phosphate buffer was added to reach a peptide concentration of 0.2 mg/mL.
First dissolving the peptide in DMSO led to fibrils with biological activity in mouse inoculation
This procedure was previously shown to reproduce the Osaka Aβ chemical shifts measured on recombinant protein
The peptide solution was shaken at 37˚C and 900 rpm for 3 days for fibril growth.
To collect the fibrils, we spun the tubes at 13,200 rpm and 4˚C for 20 min using a benchtop microcentrifuge, and combined all the pellets into one tube.
No Aβ40 peak was detected from the supernatant by analytical HPLC (Fig.

Binding of flutemetamol to Aβ40 fibrils
Like many PET tracers, the hydrophobic flutemetamol has very low solubility in aqueous solution
To overcome this difficulty, we adopted a recently published procedure that uses bovine serum albumin (BSA) to increase the solubility of the ligand and facilitate its binding to Aβ40
BSA and flutemetamol were co-solubilized at equimolar concentrations of 50 μM in a 20 mM pH 7.4 sodium phosphate buffer containing 25% DMSO.
We then removed DMSO by dialyzing 225 mL of this solution against 2 L of 20 mM sodium phosphate buffer for 4 h with fresh buffer change every hour.
The dialyzed solution was centrifuged at 11,000 g for 20 min at 20˚C using a JA-10 rotor to remove insoluble flutemetamol.
The supernatant was analyzed by HPLC to determine the flutemetamol concentration, which was 15 μM.
We then added 75 mL suspension of 40 μM Aβ40 fibrils to 187 mL of the 15 μM flutemetamol-containing supernatant to reach a 1 : 1 molar ratio of flutemetamol to Aβ monomers.
The solution was shaken at 250 rpm at 37˚C for an hour to facilitate mixing of the ligand to the fibril, then centrifuged at 18,000 rpm at room temperature for 40 min using a JA-20 rotor to collect the fibrils.
The ligand-bound Aβ fibrils from six 50 mL centrifuge tubes were combined into two 1.5 mL tubes and either dried to ~50 wt% water or kept at the same hydration level before being spun down into MAS rotors using a benchtop centrifuge.

Measurement of flutemetamol binding affinity to Aβ40 fibrils
To measure the binding affinity of flutemetamol to Aβ fibrils, we titrated solubilized flutemetamol to preformed Aβ40 fibrils to reach 0-11 μM final concentrations of flutemetamol and 11 μM Aβ40.
We also prepared a control sample by adding flutemetamolcontaining solution to a peptide-free buffer.
The solutions were shaken in an incubator at 250 rpm and 37˚C for an hour, then centrifuged at 13,000 rpm for 20 min.
The supernatant was analyzed by HPLC at 358 nm to determine the concentration of free flutemetamol, [Tracer] free .
The concentration of bound flutemetamol, [Tracer] bound , was calculated as the difference of the free flutemetamol concentration between the peptide-free and peptidecontaining samples.
The apparent dissociation constant K D and the maximum flutemetamol concentration (B max ) bound to 11 μM Aβ40 fibrils were determined by fitting [Tracer] free and [Tracer] bound using the equation (Fig.
T racer bound = B max T racer free K D + T racer free
We found a K D of 1.6 ±0.2 μM and a B max of 2.4±0.1 μM (Fig.
This B max value indicates a binding ratio of one flutemetamol to 4.6 peptides for the 11 μM Aβ40, or a binding mole fraction of 22%.
To determine whether flutemetamol is bound homogeneously to the fibrils, we treated both ligand-bound fibrils and ligand-free fibrils with 50 µL of 6 M guanidinium chloride in 20% DMSO solution.
This procedure releases loosely bound flutemetamol in the ligand-bound fibrils.
We then centrifuged the solution and measured the amount of flutemetamol in the supernatant by HPLC.
About 12% of the total added flutemetamol was detected in the supernatant.
Since the initially added flutemetamol concentration was equimolar to Aβ monomers, this means that ~12 mol% of flutemetamol relative to Aβ40 monomers is loosely bound to the peptide.
Since the total bound flutemetamol is 22 mol% of the fibrils, this means ~10 mol% of flutemetamol relative to Aβ monomers is tightly bound.
To determine whether the flutemetamol-bound Aβ fibrils contain residual BSA after ultracentrifugation, we prepared another control sample in which BSA but not flutemetamol was added to the 25% DMSO/20 mM sodium phosphate buffer.
The solution was mixed with either 11 μM Aβ40 or with buffer only.
After centrifugation, we measured the BSA concentrations in the supernatant at 280 nm by HPLC.
The difference in BSA concentrations between the supernatant without and with Aβ40 fibrils is the concentration of BSA bound to Aβ40 fibrils.
Only 0.2 ± 0.4 μM of BSA was found to remain with the 11 μM Aβ fibrils.
Given the uncertainty, essentially no BSA remained in the fibrils, while the bound flutemetamol has a molar ratio of 1 : 4.6 with respect to peptide monomers.

Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) experiments
Aβ fibrils were adsorbed onto freshly glow-discharged, 200-mesh formvar/carbon-coated copper grids (Ted Pella), washed with 0.1 M ammonium acetate followed by 0.01 M ammonium acetate, and stained with 2% (wt/vol) uranyl acetate.
TEM images were taken on a JEOL JEM-1400 Transmission Electron Microscope at the University of Kansas Medical Center Electron Microscopy Research Laboratory.

Solid-state NMR experiments
Apo Aβ40 fibrils, flutemetamol-bound fibrils, and ligand-free BSA control fibrils were packed into 3.2 mm Revolution NMR rotors by benchtop centrifugation.
Each rotor contained ~30 mg hydrated material, in which ~5 mg was the dry mass of the peptide.
We also packed flutemetamol-bound Aβ40 fibrils into a Bruker 1.9 mm MAS rotor for
The hydrated mass of this rotor was ~17 mg, in which ~8.8 mg was the dry peptide mass.
All
All
C chemical shifts were referenced externally to the adamantane CH 2 chemical shift at 38.48 ppm on the tetramethylsilane (TMS) scale.
N chemical shifts were referenced to the
F chemical shifts were referenced to the 5F-Trp at -122.1 ppm on the CF 3 Cl scale.
All experiments were conducted at an MAS frequency of 14 kHz.
Sample temperature was kept at 287 K for most experiments.
This was controlled by keeping the water 1 H chemical shift (δ H2O ) at 4.89 ppm, using the equation T eff (K) = 96.9
× (7.83-δ H2O )
Typical radiofrequency (rf) field strengths for the 3.2 mm MAS probe were 50-83 kHz for 1 H, 15-62.5 kHz for
2D
In these experiments,
To measure flutemetamol contact with Aβ40, we first carried out a 1D selective
To obtain additional site resolution and extend the distance reach, we next implemented a 2D 13 C-
S3a
This experiment was conducted at an MAS frequency of 14 kHz, at which 1 H homonuclear decoupling was necessary during the 1 H-19 F REDOR period.
We used the frequency-switched Lee-Goldberg (FSLG) sequence for homonuclear decoupling
The transverse 1 H rf field strength of the FSLG train was 107.5 kHz, which fit 75 FSLG cycles into a REDOR mixing time of 2.3 ms.
The 19 F-dephased 1 H magnetization was then transferred to
More detailed experimental parameters are listed in Table
One-and two-dimensional solid-state NMR spectra were processed and plotted in the Topspin software, and resonance assignment of the 3D correlation spectra were conducted in the NMRFAM-Sparky software
Backbone (ϕ, ψ) torsion angles were calculated from the assigned chemical shifts using the TALOS-N software
F spinning sideband patterns were fit using the solid lineshapes analysis tool in the Topspin software.
The 19 F chemical shift anisotropy (CSA) is reported in terms of the anisotropy parameter δ = δ zz -δ iso , asymmetry parameter η = δ yy -δ xx /δ
1 H-19 F REDOR simulations-REDOR simulations were conducted using the SIMPSON software
Powder averaging used the REPULSION 168 scheme
A
F pulse flip angle imperfection was taken into account by averaging the REDOR simulations with effective
Molecular docking of flutemetamol to Aβ fibrils-A molecular structure model of flutemetamol was generated using ChemDraw and exported as a ".mol" file.
This structure was energy-minimized in Chem3D using the MMFF94 force field
The optimized conformation shows a ~13 Å long and ~3 Å wide molecule.
This structure was outputted as a ".pdb" file for docking simulations.
We used the HADDOCK software
ur structures were chosen to represent distinct fibril polymorphs and structure determination methods.
A two-fold symmetric structure of in vitro fibrillized Aβ40 solved using solid-state NMR (PDB: 6TI5)
Another two-fold symmetric structure was obtained from AD brain vasculature Aβ40 fibrils and was solved using cryoEM (PDB: 6SHS)
This structure model contains 2 × 6 monomers.
Because flutemetamol spans approximately 3.5 β-strands when lying parallel to the fibril axis, we reduced these structural models to 2 × 4 monomers prior to input into HADDOCK to speed up the simulations.
A three-fold symmetric structure of in vitro fibrilized Aβ40 (PDB: 2LMQ) contains 3 × 6 monomers
This model was not modified despite its large size because the structure is not translationally symmetric. A
hree-fold symmetric structure of brain-seeded fibrils (PDB: 2M4J) 3 contains 3 × 3 monomers and was used directly for docking.
These Aβ40 structural models and the flutemetamol structure were inputted into the HADDOCK software for peptide-ligand docking.
Because V12, H13, H14, V18, F19, F20, V39, and V40 were found to be in close proximity to the ligand from the REDOR experiments, we ran eight separate simulations in which each of these residues was set as an "active" residue.
HADDOCK uses the active residue list to generate Ambiguous Interaction Restraints, which impose an energy penalty for placing the ligand too far from the active residue.
No explicit distances were inputted into the HADDOCK simulations.
In most simulations, we specified a single copy of the active residue and placed it in an interior strand.
When all copies of a residue were set as active, control simulations showed very similar results, except that there was a stronger preference for the ligand to lie parallel to the fibril axis, contacting multiple copies of the active residue.
In the single-active-residue simulations, the binding poses are more varied, and are sometimes tilted toward the β-strand backbone.
We also included nonpolar hydrogens in the molecular structures and left all other settings at their default values.
We left random patches and center of mass restraints off, and used 1000 structures for rigid-body docking, 200 for semi-flexible refinement, and 200 for the final refinement.
The HADDOCK software clusters and ranks the docking results according to an internal scoring function, which is a linear combination of various energy terms and buried surface area.
We overlaid the top ten clusters for each simulation, or fewer for simulations that produced less than ten clusters in total.
We discarded docking sites located on the first and last strands of the fibril.
If these sites exist physically, they would account for only a small fraction of bound flutemetamol.
The three-fold in vitro Aβ40 structure shows irregularity at the N-terminus, thus we discarded sites near the N-terminus.
For each fibril structure, we combined results for all eight simulations for the eight active residues and discarded repeated instances of the same site for visual clarity.
This yielded an ensemble of docked sites.
The binding energy (kcal/mol) for each site was calculated using the

Results

Flutemetamol binding to Aβ fibrils
The hydrophobic flutemetamol has very low solubility in aqueous solution.
Even in the presence of 2% DMSO, the solubility is only ~0.2 μM, which makes it difficult to prepare ligand-bound Aβ fibrils for solid-state NMR experiments.
Thus, we adopted a recently published procedure that uses BSA as a carrier protein to solubilize and titrate flutemetamol to preformed Aβ fibrils
BSA is an abundant blood plasma protein that binds a wide range of hydrophobic compounds
In 25% DMSO solution, both flutemetamol and BSA can be dissolved to 50 μM.
We dialyzed this flutemetamol-containing BSA/DMSO solution to remove DMSO, then centrifuged the solution to remove insoluble flutemetamol, giving a flutemetamol concentration of 15 μM.
This flutemetamol-BSA solution was then titrated to preformed Aβ40 fibrils, and BSA was quantitatively removed by centrifugation.
HPLC analysis shows that this BSA-mediated titration method results in a bound flutemetamol mole fraction of 22%, in which 12% is loosely bound, releasable after treatment of the fibrils with 6 M guanidinium chloride, while 10% is tightly bound.
Flutemetamol binding to Aβ40 fibrils assessed by
Powder flutemetamol shows a
Binding to hydrated fibrils did not change the isotropic chemical shift nor the sideband intensity envelope (Fig.
However, the peptide-bound flutemetamol has much broader linewidths of 4.4 ppm compared to powder flutemetamol (1.7 ppm), indicating that the bound ligand is more disordered.
Comparison of the CP intensities of the powder and the peptide-bound ligand indicate that the immobile fraction of the ligand represents ~10 mol% of the Aβ peptide.
This 1:10 binding stoichiometry is in excellent agreement with the HPLC-determined fraction of tightly bound ligand.
To obtain more quantitative information about the bound ligands, we measured a
Interestingly, the DP spectrum exhibits a second
Thus, a second population of ligand exists that undergoes small-amplitude motion.
The intensity of this mobile component is 36% of the full spectrum.
This mobile component also exhibits residual CP intensity, but only at ~20% that of the DP intensity.
This CP intensity is much lower than the 1.3-fold enhancement of the CP intensity over DP for the immobilized fraction.
Since the
Instead, it likely reflects the long distances of the mobile ligand from the peptides.
The 1 H T 1 of powder flutemetamol is estimated to be ~6 s based on 1 H-19 F CP experiments with varying recycle delays, while the 1 H T 1 of the hydrated peptide fibrils is ~1 s.
Thus, with the recycle delay of 2 s for the 1 H-
These 19 F NMR spectra, taken together with binding assays, indicate that two populations of flutemetamol coexist when bound to the fibrils: a tightly bound and immobile fraction that represents ~10 mol% of the peptide, and a loosely bound fraction that represents ~12 mol% of the peptide.
Secondary structure of apo Aβ40 fibrils from
The apo peptide produced straight and homogeneous filaments that are 17-20 nm wide (Fig.
This apparent width is 2-3 fold larger than those of previously reported Aβ40 fibrils
One-and two-dimensional
In the Gly region of the 2D 15 N-
Since Aβ40 contains 6 glycine residues, this observation indicates the presence of more than one conformation for some residues.
We assigned the
For the apo peptide, about 85% of the spectral intensities correspond to a major conformation whereas ~15% of the intensities result from a second conformation (Fig.
The latter is mostly found for residues
The flutemetamol-bound peptide has very similar chemical shifts and similar coexistence of a major conformer and a minor conformer.
Therefore, ligand binding does not cause noticeable perturbation of the peptide conformation.
In the major conformer, the N-terminal D1 and A2 exhibit rigid β-sheet signals, while the next five residues 3 EFRHD 7 lack intensities, indicating that they are dynamic
The rest of the peptide shows strong intensities, indicating it is immobilized.
We detected clear intensities for
Moreover, H14 exhibits α-helical Cα and Cβ chemical shifts (Fig.
so observed α-helical chemical shifts at V36 (Fig.
The root-mean-square deviation (RMSD) of CO, Cα and Cβ chemical shifts between the current Aβ40 fibrils and previously studied Aβ fibrils range from 2.5 ppm to 4.5 ppm (Fig.
TALOS-N (ϕ, ψ) torsion angles derived from these chemical shifts indicate three β-strands in the current polymorph, spanning residues S8-H13, Q15-E22, and V24-M35 (Fig.
The β-strand conformation of
Unexpectedly, the major breaks between β-strands in the current Aβ40 conformation are consistent with the β-strand breaks at H14, V24, and V36 found in the meningeal AD brain Aβ fibril structure
The non-β-strand character of the C-terminal C-terminal bend in an AD brain-seeded Aβ fibril sample
These observations suggest that the current Aβ polymorph might recapitulate some aspects of AD brain-derived Aβ aggregates.
Since flutemetamol-bound fibrils show similar chemical shifts and intensity distributions as the apo peptide (Fig.
To evaluate whether incubating preformed Aβ40 fibrils with BSA solution during ligand titration might have perturbed the fibril conformation, we measured the 2D spectra of a BSA control sample produced by subjecting the fibrils to ligand-free BSA solution.
This control sample exhibited the same majorand minor-conformer chemical shifts (Fig.
The coexistence of the same two conformers in all three samples indicate that this structural polymorphism
Flutemetamol-interacting residues in Aβ40 fibrils from
C spectra of the peptide were measured in the absence (S 0 , black) and presence of
Only carbons that are close to the fluorine will show intensity differences (ΔS, red).
For the
The sidechain-selective REDOR difference spectra show methyl signals of Leu, Ile and Val, whereas the Cα-selective REDOR difference spectra show the signals of Val, Ile and H14 (58.5 ppm) and Phe/Gln (54.5 ppm) (Fig.
The 22-ppm peak for Leu/Val Cγ or H14 Cβ exhibits particularly high difference intensities, indicating the involvement of at least one of these sidechain carbons in ligand binding.
To detect other sidechain signals, we also measured broadband
We detected various Cβ difference peaks, for example at 40 ppm for Ile, Phe and Lys.
The highest ΔS intensity is observed at 18.8 ppm, which contains signals from V12, V18, A21 or A30 sidechains.
This peak shows a ΔS/S 0 ratio of ~0.03.
Since the tightly bound ligand has a stoichiometry of 10% relative to the Aβ monomers, this difference corresponds to a real ΔS/S 0 of ~0.3, suggesting that some of the sidechains are very close to the fluorine.
To better resolve the signals of flutemetamol-interacting residues, we next turned to 2D 13 C-
Similar to the 1D REDOR experiments, the 2D spectra were measured in the absence (S 0 , cyan) and presence of
Because the 1 H-
The 2D spectrum resolves a number of sites (Fig.
In the 18.6 ppm cross section (Fig.
In the 20.6-ppm cross section, cross peaks are observed at 59.1 ppm, 56.0 ppm, 48.6 ppm, and 33.8 ppm, which can be assigned to H14, V24, A21 or A30, and V39, respectively.
In the 34.9-ppm cross section, correlations at 59.0 ppm and 19.0 ppm confirm that V18 is close to the ligand.
A weak peak at (36.7, 52.8) ppm in the 2D difference spectrum can be assigned to K16.
In the carbonyl region of the 2D spectrum, a correlation peak at (58.9, 172.0) ppm can be assigned to H14 or I31.
Importantly, we observed strong difference intensities for the aromatic Phe and His residues along the diagonal of the 2D spectrum (Fig.
Since there are only two Phe residues (F19 and F20) and three His residues (H6, H13 and H14) in the peptide, we assigned these Phe and His signals to F19/F20 and H13/H14.
The 2D CC spectrum show ΔS/S 0 values of 1.8-3.1%,
which correspond to S/S 0 values of 96.9 -98.2% (Fig.
Based on the secondary structure predicted from the chemical shifts (Fig.
Thus, these two sets of residues are unlikely to form a single binding site for flutemetamol.
Thus, multiple binding sites must exist in the fibrils.
Taking into account the 1 : 10 stoichiometry for the tightly bound flutemetamol, and assuming two equally populated binding sites, we broadly estimate a distance range of 6-7 Å for the nearest peptide protons to the ligand fluorine (Fig.
These REDOR spectra, taken together, indicate that three clusters of residues, V12 and H13/H14, V18 and F19/F20, A21 or A30, and V39/V40, are in close proximity to the ligand fluorine.
These three clusters of residues, 12 VHH 14 , 18 VFFA 21 , and the C-terminus, constitute at least two binding pockets for flutemetamol.

Experimentally constrained docking of flutemetamol to Aβ fibrils-To investigate
whether the residues identified by REDOR experiments to be close to flutemetamol are energetically favorable for binding the ligand, we conducted docking analysis to several Aβ40 structures.
In the Alzheimer brain, flutemetamol and PiB detect Aβ fibrils in cored plaques, diffuse plaques, and cerebral amyloid angiopathy
PiB also binds synthetic Aβ40 fibrils assembled in vitro
Therefore, these PET ligands bind multiple Aβ polymorphs 3, 74 , which must share common binding sites.
These binding sites should have similar local conformations and should stabilize the ligand by similar molecular interactions.
We selected four Aβ40 structural models (Fig.
The three structural models solved using solid-state NMR have a common β-arch fold with a U-turn at
The AD vasculature Aβ fibrils have a distinct elongated C-shaped structure, with two turns at H14 and V36.
Since our current Aβ sample has unusual α-helical chemical shifts at H14 and V36, our current Aβ polymorph may have structural similarities with this AD brain vasculature Aβ.
Based on the REDOR results that 12 VHH 14 , 18 VFF 21 and 39 VV 40 are the closest to the ligand, we assigned these eight residues as active residues one at a time for HADDOCK simulations.
Fig.
In both models, the surface-accessible 12 VHH 14 segment accommodated two flutemetamol molecules, sites 1 and 2, one on each side.
The long axis of the ligand straddles 3.5 β-strands along the fibril axis.
The aromatic plane of the ligand is slightly tilted from the local β-sheet plane in the in vitro structure model (Table
In the AD brain vasculature Aβ structure,
The ligand at site 1 is significantly disordered in the three-fold symmetric in vitro Aβ model (Fig.
The next common binding site, site 3, is located between K16 and V18 on the external β-sheet surface, and the ligand plane lies approximately parallel to the local β-sheet plane.
The two-fold symmetric in vitro Aβ40 structure gives the clearest view of the stability of this binding site (Fig.
Similar interactions are observed in the three-fold symmetric in vitro structure (Fig.
The three-fold symmetric brain-seeded Aβ structure differs qualitatively from the other structures for these residues, because the F20 sidechain points into the fibril core rather than the fibril surface (Fig.
Despite this difference, V18 and K16, together with E22, retain a binding pocket for flutemetamol, and allows more than one docked orientation.
This suggests that polar interactions, provided by the cationic K16 on one side and the anionic E22 on the other side, might be more important for sequestering the ligand than hydrophobic interactions.
Site 3 is missing in the two-fold AD brain vasculature Aβ structure (Fig.
We attribute this to the fact that K16 and V18 face the N-terminal β-strand formed by 3 EFRHD 7 , which may have prevented ligand entry into this confined space.
Since this N-terminal segment is dynamically disordered in our current polymorph, we expect site 3 to be occupied by flutemetamol.
The fourth common binding site is associated with F20 and F19.
In both the two-fold (Fig.
In the three-fold symmetric brain-seeded Aβ structure, this site is absent due to the inward-facing direction of both F20 and F19 sidechains (Fig.
In the two-fold AD brain vasculature Aβ structure (Fig.
We speculate that this internal site might be accessed from the ends of the long fibrils through molecular diffusion
This binding site was found without specifying an active residue, suggesting this site is energetically favorable.
In addition to the four sites centered around the two aromatic segments of the peptide, the cryoEM structure of brain-derived Aβ40 structure (Fig.
We also conducted free docking simulations, without the NMR constraints, for the two-fold symmetric in vitro Aβ40 structure and the twofold symmetric meningeal AD brain Aβ40 structure (Fig.
These unconstrained simulations reproduced some of the binding sites found in the REDOR constrained docking.
For the in vitro Aβ40 structure, site 4 near F20 and site 5 near H13 and V40 are found, while in the meningeal Aβ40 structure, site 4 near F19 is found, but no histidine-binding sites nor C-terminal sites were observed.
Therefore, experimental measurements are required for locating all the binding residues of flutemetamol in the Aβ fibrils.

Discussion
Determining the binding sites of PET tracers in amyloid fibrils is important for understanding the specificity and affinity of these ligands for diagnosis of neurodegenerative disorders.
Here we identified the Aβ residues that are in close contact with flutemetamol using REDOR NMR, thus placing important constraints on the binding sites of this PET ligand.
We found three sets of residues that are in close proximity with flutemetamol,
These residues do not cluster in a single location in Aβ structures, therefore they constitute at least two binding sites.
The REDOR-constrained docking simulations indicate that as many as five binding sites can be formed by these residues, because the same cluster of residues can interact with the ligand on different sides (Fig.
These multiple binding sites are consistent with the much broader
Although the peptide-ligand REDOR distances were measured necessarily on the specific Aβ fibril polymorph prepared here, we hypothesize that the ligand-proximal residues we detected may be common to many Aβ polymorphs, because it is the local residue-level molecular interaction that governs binding.
The similar binding poses of flutemetamol in docking simulations of different Aβ structures support this notion.
Our solid-state NMR data, biochemical analysis and molecular docking show that flutemetamol predominantly interacts with the two aromatic cores of the peptide, H13/H14 and F19/F20.
In addition, the ligand also interacts with the C-terminal
The two aromatic cores are surrounded by polar residues
Since H14 and F20 are separated into two grooves by the intervening K16 and V18 in all known Aβ40 structures, these two segments most likely form distinct binding sites.
Docking simulations indicate that different Aβ polymorphs share these common binding sites.
The V12/H14 pair and V18/F20 pair can both stabilize the ligand through CH-π and π-π interactions.
In the simulations, the only Aβ polymorph in which V18/F20 does not interact with the ligand is the brain vasculature Aβ fibril, where an N-terminal β-strand restricted entry of the ligand to these residues.
However, in this structure, another binding site is found near F19, facing the interface between the two protofilaments.
The ligand is sandwiched between F19 on one monomer and A30 on the other monomer.
In the
The fluorine-carbon distances in the various docked poses range from 4 Å to 7 Å, in qualitative agreement with the measured 1 H-
In most docked poses, flutemetamol lies with its long axis parallel to the fibril axis, but the aromatic plane can be parallel, perpendicular to or tilted from the local β-sheet plane, depending on the sidechains interacting with the ligand.
Fig.
The multiple docked sites may be randomly populated in the fibrils, and the same site is expected to be occupied much more sparsely than every 3-4 strands because of the overall mole fraction of ~10% for the tightly bound ligand.
This low stoichiometry is reasonable because occupation of one site over 3-4 β-strands may block diffusion of additional ligand molecules to adjacent strands for the internal binding sites
Flutemetamol binds the current Aβ polymorph with a B max of 2.4 μM, which corresponds to ~22 mol% of the 11 μM Aβ fibrils (Fig.
Among the bound ligand, about 10% is tightly bound and immobilized while 12% is loosely bound and partly mobile.
These two fractions are distinguished by their
Radioligand assays of brain homogenates suggest that 3 H-labeled PiB binds to a high-affinity site with a K D of ~2.5 nM and a maximum specific binding (B max ) of 565 pmol per 1 nmol of AD brain Aβ, i.e. 1 tracer per 2 Aβ peptide
However, the B max value drops by 1000-fold when the ligand is added to synthetic Aβ40 fibrils, suggesting that the polymorph structure of the fibrils has a significant impact on the binding capacity.
Our ~22% binding stoichiometry is much closer to the B max of AD brain Aβ aggregates than to the B max of the previously reported synthetic in vitro fibrils, suggesting that the current Aβ polymorph may be a reasonable mimic of brain Aβ aggregates.
In addition to the high-affinity site, AD brain Aβ aggregates show a low-affinity binding site with a K d of ~250 nM
It is worth noting that the radioligand binding assay
Moreover, we conducted our titration on micromolar concentrations of the ligand and Aβ, thus we are only able to detect binding sites with micromolar K D values.
This does not preclude the existence of nanomolar binding sites in our samples.
The fact that the REDOR spectra show multiple residues in contact with the ligand fluorine, and the
Some of these binding sites may have a high (nM) binding affinity while others may have weaker affinity, giving rise to more mobile ligands.
Multiple binding sites have also been reported for thioflavin T analogs using fluorescence experiments
It is of interest to compare the flutemetamol-interacting residues found here with the Aβ residues that interact with green tea flavonoid epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG)
Reif and coworkers reported that EGCG increased the intensities of the aromatic sidechain
EGCG binding also removed the β-strand conformation of residues 10-20, leading to the formation of non-toxic Aβ40 oligomers.
Sulindac sulfide perturbed the chemical shifts of 18 VFF 20 as well as
Thus, sulindac sulfide shows a similar affinity to the pair of Phe residues as flutemetamol does to Aβ40.
Interestingly, these authors did not detect significant interactions of two PET tracers, methylated-PiB and 4,4'-diaryl-2,2'-bithiazole (DABTA)
Using BSA, they titrated these two PET ligands at a 1 : 1 molar ratio to Aβ40, but the actual binding stoichiometry was not reported.
H-detected NMR spectra of perdeuterated and 13 C,
Methylated PiB reduced the concentration of a minor peptide conformation, suggesting that this PiB derivative might increase the structural homogeneity of this Aβ40 polymorph by stabilizing the inter-strand loop.
Thus, the binding site of methylated PIB appears to be qualitatively different from the binding sites of flutemetamol found here.
Two possible reasons might explain this difference.
First, the PiB analog used in the previous study methylates a phenol oxygen and an amine nitrogen at the two ends of the molecule, thus the compound is less polar than the parent compound.
This non-polar nature may weaken the ligand interactions with the polar N-terminal region of Aβ.
Second, the Aβ40 polymorph in the prior study differs from the polymorph obtained here, which might also cause different binding sites.
Other studies of small-molecule binding to amyloid proteins also gave insights into the molecular interactions that stabilize conjugated aromatic ligands to amyloid fibrils.
Meier and coworkers investigated the binding of Congo red and luminescent conjugated polythiophenes (LCPs)
Based on chemical shift perturbations, ligand-to-protein 1 H-
These cationic and polar sidechains interact electrostatically with the negatively charged sulfates and carboxylates on Congo red and LCPs, respectively.
CryoEM maps of AD tau paired helical filaments bound to the PET tracer, APN-1607, showed two neighboring binding grooves separated by three polar residues, R349, Q351, and K353
The acidic carboxylated ligand tafamidis binds transthyretin at a position held by K16 and E54
In most of these binding sites, the elongated ligands straddle multiple β-strands in a groove of the β-sheet surface that is lined by polar and cationic residues such as Lys and Arg or by aromatic residues such as Phe and His.
The multivalent stabilization may account for the selectivity of these ligands for certain proteins.
Although Aβ has a high propensity to assemble into multiple different structures
Therefore, the flutemetamol binding sites obtained here are consistent with the specificity of PiB to Aβ but not to tau in AD brains.
The Aβ40 fibrils produced in this study exhibits chemical shifts that are distinct from all previous Aβ fibrils studied using solid-state NMR.
The current polymorph is characterized by well-ordered and immobilized H13 and H14, non-β-sheet conformation at H14, and non β-sheet conformations at V36 and its C-terminal residues.
The non-β-sheet conformations at H14 and V36 have qualitative resemblance to their conformations in the meningeal AD brain Aβ fibrils 2 .
The fibril growth protocol of the current study differs from the protocols in previous solid-state NMR studies in several important aspects.
In our study, the peptides were first monomerized using HFIP and DMSO and then fibrilized at a monomer concentration of 46 μM
The sequential treatment by HFIP and DMSO is known to produce aggregate-free Aβ
In comparison, previous studies used guanidinium chloride or DMSO but not HFIP to solubilize the peptide and used significantly higher peptide concentrations of 100-210 μM for fibril formation
The higher monomer concentrations and possibly incomplete solubilization in previous studies might have selectively amplified certain β-sheet conformations than others.
A second difference in the fibrillization protocols is that the current study did not use seeding, whereas most previous fibril formation protocols used seeded growth either in a single step
Third, the degree of agitation in the fibril growth protocols differ.
We applied continuous shaking at 900 rpm during 3 days of fibril growth, whereas most previous studies either used gentle shaking
To our knowledge, the only other study that employed a similar shaking speed of 950 rpm was that of Bertini and coworkers
These differences may all contribute to the distinct Aβ polymorphs found in this study.
In conclusion, the
These residues include the two aromatic motifs H13/H14 and F19/F20, and the C-terminal V39/V40.
Together, these segments constitute at least two spatially distinct binding sites for the ligand.
Experimentally constrained docking simulations indicate that flutemetamol binds with its long axis predominantly parallel to the fibril axis, and the ligand is stabilized by polar and aromatic residues at these sites.
Flutemetamol binds the Aβ40 fibril polymorph studied here with a stoichiometry of 22%, in which 10% is tightly bound.
Our results suggest that polar, charged, and aromatic amino acid residues on the β-sheet surface may be the most important residues for sequestering aromatic-rich PET ligands.
This information might be useful for designing next-generation amyloid PET tracers with desired affinity and specificity.



Figure 1 .
Figure 1.Chemical structures of thioflavin T,



Figure 2 . 19 F
Figure 2. 19 F NMR spectra of flutemetamol.
(a) Chemical structure of 19 F-labeled flutemetamol.
(b) 19 F CP spectrum of powder flutemetamol, measured with a 40-s recycle delay.
Spectral simulation yields a 19 F CSA δ of -73.7 ppm and an asymmetry parameter η of 0.49.
(c) 19 F CP spectrum of Aβ-bound flutemetamol, measured with a 2-s recycle delay.
Spectral simulations of the sideband pattern indicate very similar 19 F CSA parameters as the powder sample.
(d) 19 F DP spectrum of Aβ-bound flutemetamol, measured with an 18-s recycle delay.
A second component with an isotropic chemical shift of -124.2 ppm is observed, which has a reduced CSA of +62 ppm and narrower linewidth than the -134.8
ppm isotropic component.
Asterisks denote residual peptide-bound TFA (-75 ppm) and free TFA (-85 ppm) in the samples.
The latter is only detected in the DP spectrum while the former is detected in both the CP and DP spectra.
All spectra were measured under 14 kHz MAS.



Figure 3 .
Figure 3. Characterization of apo, BSA control and flutemetamol-bound Aβ fibrils.
(a) TEM image of apo Aβ40 fibrils.
(b) 1D 13 C and 15 N MAS spectra of apo (blue), BSA control (orange) and flutemetamol-bound (red) Aβ40 fibrils.
(c) 2D 15 N-13 Cα correlation spectrum of apo Aβ40 fibrils.
Assignment is obtained from 3D correlation spectra.
(d) 2D 13 C-13 C correlation spectrum of apo Aβ40.



Figure 4 .
Figure 4. Representative 3D spectral strips for chemical shift assignment of apo Aβ40 fibrils.
(a) 12 VHHQ 15 strip.
(b) 35 MVGGVV 40 strip.
Note the α-helical chemical shifts of H14 and V36.
The NCACX spectrum provides intra-residue correlation peaks whereas the NCOCX and CONCA spectra provide inter-residue correlations.



Figure 5 .
Figure 5.1D
(a)
(b) Methyl-and Cα-selective
For clarity, the difference spectrum (ΔS) is scaled up 32-fold with respect to the control spectrum (S 0 ).
(c)
Both (b) and (c) indicate that multiple residues are dephased by the fluorine.



Figure 6 .
Figure 6.2D
The REDOR mixing time was 2.3 ms.
(a) Aliphatic and carbonyl regions.
(b) Selected 1D cross sections.
The ΔS spectrum is scaled up 32-fold to facilitate comparison with the S 0 spectrum.
These REDOR spectra are significantly line-broadened (LB = -30 and GB = 0.02) to maximize the signal-to-noise ratios.
(c) Aromatic region of the 2D spectrum (left).
The 1D
Both spectra were measured using a mixing time of 2.3 ms and gave consistent results.



Figure 7 .
Figure 7. Experimentally constrained molecular docking of flutemetamol to two-fold symmetric Aβ40 structural models.
The common docked sites are numbered as 1-5.
H13 and H14 are shown in magenta, F19 and F20 in purple, E22 and D23 in cyan, K28 in orange, and all other residues in yellow.
Flutemetamol is shown in red.
(a) Two-fold symmetric in vitro Aβ40 structure from solid-state NMR 63 (PDB: 6TI5).
(b) Two-fold symmetric meningeal AD brain Aβ40 structure 2 (PDB: 6SHS).
(c-d) Additional views of flutemetamol binding sites in the solid-state NMR structure (c) and the cryo-EM structure (d).
A single active residue was used in each simulation.
Flutemetamol (green sticks) straddles several β-strands in most docked poses.
The fluorine atom is shown in orange.
(e-f) Simulations using one active residue per peptide and hence four active residues in each simulation.
(e) Docking results at H14 and F20 for the two-fold symmetric solid-state NMR structure.
(f) Docking results at



Table 1 .
Docking results of flutemetamol to Aβ40 fibrils.