The Dual Role of Microglia in the Progression of Alzheimer's Disease
Neuroinflammation is a complex immune response to brain trauma and disease
Over the past 2 decades, researchers have determined that microglia are one of the key initiators of inflammatory reactions in neurodegenerative diseases, such as Alzheimer's disease (AD;
Findings from early animal studies first identified the presence of microglia-mediated inflammation in mouse models of AD
These results motivated the development of in vivo positron emission tomography (PET) radiotracers, such as [ 11 C] PK 11195, to quantify microglia-dependent neuroinflammatory reactions in humans with and without AD pathology
The [ 11 C] PK 11195 PET tracer selectively binds to the mitochondrial translocator protein (TSPO), which is thought to be upregulated during microglial activation
Clinical research efforts have since shown that the binding of [ 11 C] PK 11195 is significantly higher in distinct areas of the brain in people with AD than in age-matched neurotypical individuals, suggesting that there are region-specific pathological factors driving the microglial inflammatory response
Overall, while these findings propose that microgliainduced inflammation is closely tied to AD pathology, they do not establish a direct link between inflammation and changes in brain function.
In a recent article,
(2) whether the link between these two measures is related to the degree of cognitive impairment present in these groups.
To evaluate these questions, the researchers quantified neuroinflammation using the [ 11 C] PK 11195 tracer in a crosssectional cohort that included patients with AD or mild cognitive impairment (MCIϩ), as well as in age-, sex-, and education-matched healthy control subjects.
The same subjects also underwent resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging to characterize baseline functional connectivity at the network level
In addition, subjects were assessed on three cognitive tests to establish their relative cognitive index.
Using these measures, the researchers examined their first question: does microglia-mediated inflammation measured with [ 11 C] PK 11195 relate to the restingstate functional connectivity of different brain networks?
Consistent with their predictions, increased [ 11 C] PK 11195 binding in the inferior and medial temporal areas was significantly related to increased internetwork functional connectivity among the default mode network (DMN), the hippocampus, and other subcortical areas, as well as decreased intranetwork functional connectivity within the main brain areas involved in the DMN
Next, the authors tested whether the associations between neuroinflammation and network connectivity were linked to cognitive performance in each group.
As predicted, the joint connection between neuroinflammation and network-level functional connectivity was negatively associated with performance on the cognitive tests in the patient group but not in control subjects.
These results suggest that people in the AD/MCIϩ sample that had a stronger association between increased neuroinflammation and differences in functional connectivity also had overall worse performance on the three measures of cognitive capacity
The multivariate analytical strategy used by
Most research in humans to date has focused on either the molecular and structural basis of AD or its functional and cognitive components separately.
However, AD is a complex multifactor disease affecting all of these variables.
The results of the research by
It is important to note that the rationale for investigating the influence of neuroinflammation on brain network function and cognition
However, several influential studies have shown that the functional role of microglia change dynamically with aging and AD progression according to the genes they express
We can understand this idea by considering what one may call the "two faces" of disease-associated microglia.
The first face is immunosuppressive and involves the expression of triggering receptor expressed on myeloid cells 2 (TREM2), a transmembrane receptor protein that controls microglial activity and survival
While some genetic variants of TREM2 increase the chances of developing late-onset AD by twofold to fourfold, the primary function of TREM2 before or during the preliminary period of AD is to phagocytose amyloid peptides, which it does without triggering evident inflammation
Thus, increased levels of TREM2 during this phase of brain aging is seen as a defensive or neuroprotective factor linked to amyloid clearance
Yet as AD progresses, it appears that the role of TREM2 evolves as well.
In more advanced stages of the disease, TREM2-expressing microglia interact with accumulating tau tangles, and this interaction has been shown to cause extensive inflammation and neurodegeneration
Moreover, the later phases of AD are associated with heightened microglial activation as a result of the innate immune defense system of the brain.
Complement C3 is among the most highly upregulated genes involved in this immune reaction
C3-expressing microglia are responsible for inducing excessive release of proinflammatory molecules and the proliferation of neurotoxic A1 reactive astrocytes
Thus, the C3 "face" of microglia is understood to be more harmful than helpful.
This has been confirmed by studies using C3-knock-out mice that no longer seem to exhibit the same inflammatory or degenerative outcomes that occur in mouse models of amyloid and tau when C3 is present
Overall, it is apparent that microglia can either assist the clearance of agerelated amyloid accumulation or can promote extensive inflammation in reaction to amyloid or tau, eventually causing widespread neurodegeneration.
Importantly, this difference might be driven by the temporal stage of the disease.
In earlier periods of AD, microglia can be neuroprotective; but as either amyloid or tau pathology evolves, they can become neurotoxic (Fig.
Therefore, the microglia in these individuals may have already lost their protective function and shifted toward their proinflammatory state.
Because of this, these findings should be complemented by longitudinal studies using a similar multimodal approach in cognitively normal older adults at genetic risk for AD.
This would allow researchers to track the possible "changing face" of microglia within the same individuals from preclinical to prodromal disease stages.
With a more refined understanding of what mechanisms determine whether microglial activity has a neuroprotective or neurotoxic role in brain aging, researchers can begin to fully describe the dual role of microglia in the progression of AD.
In conclusion, while the study by
To prevent abnormal network activity and, as a result, to alleviate cognitive deficits, reducing neuroinflammation by decreasing microglia activation couldbeapotentialmechanism.However,the differential expression of neuroprotective or neurotoxic signals by microglia in the aging brain poses a major problem to this proposal: it would be extremely detrimental to inhibit neuroprotective microglia activity in preclinical AD patients.
Doing so could potentially set the stage for uncontrolled amyloid and tau pathology due to inhibited phagocytosis and possible disruption of other important but as of yet unknown functions of the immune system of the brain.
Therefore, techniques that not only discriminate between the different types of microglia but also identify the factors controlling such varied expression may be a more reasonable therapeutic approach.



The
Dual Role of Microglia in the Progression of Alzheimer's Disease X Kate M. Onuska Graduate Neuroscience Program, Schulich School of Medicine & Dentistry, Western University, London, Ontario N6A 5C1, Canada Review of Passamonti et al.



Figure 1 .
Figure 1.
A schematic showing a hypothetical dual role for disease-associated microglia (DAM) in the progression of Alzheimer's disease (AD).
The x-axis corresponds to time in years.
Time 0 indicates the onset of symptomatic AD (i.e., mild cognitive impairment).
The bottom panel depicts changes in the relative expression of genes upregulated and downregulated by DAM.
These changes are associated with the transition from immunosuppressive phagocytosis to immunoreactive inflammation (Saito and Saido, 2018).
The bottom y-axis represents the relative expression of immunosuppressive and immunoreactive genes regulated by DAM (e.g., TREM2 and C3).
The top panel portrays non-DAM and DAM that are clustered according to their distinct transcriptional profiles (Keren-Shaul et al., 2017).
The top y-axis outlines the functionally different populations of microglia (e.g., non-DAM, neuroprotective DAM, and neurotoxic DAM).