Protein and Imaging Biomarkers in the Eye for Early Detection of Alzheimer’s Disease
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is one of the most common causes of dementia worldwide.
Although no formal curative therapy exists for the treatment of AD, considerable research has been performed to identify biomarkers for early detection of this disease, and thus improved subsequent management.
Given that the eye can be examined and imaged non-invasively with relative ease, it has emerged as an exciting area of research for evidence of biomarkers and to aid in the early diagnosis of AD.
This review explores the current understanding of both protein and retinal imaging biomarkers in the eye.
Herein, primary findings in the literature regarding AD biomarkers associated with the lens, retina, and other ocular structures are reviewed.

INTRODUCTION
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a common neurodegenerative disorder of older adults and a leading global cause of dementia
It is estimated that among patients over age 70, roughly 1 in 10 experience substantial memory loss, with more than half of all cases attributable to AD
The median cost to care for a patient with AD is believed to be in excess of 50,000 United States Dollars (USD) per individual, annually
According to the Alzheimer's Association, government sponsored health care is expected to spend over 200 billion USD caring for those suffering from AD and dementia
AD involves progressive non-reversible neuronal and synaptic degeneration throughout the cerebral cortex.
Characteristic microscopic features are accumulation of amyloid plaques and neurofibrillary tangles
Several theories have been proposed to explain the pathophysiology of AD including the amyloid propagation hypothesis
Currently, AD is a clinical diagnosis based on symptoms and neuropsychological testing; however, early detection via imaging and measurements of protein biomarkers is an active area of investigation, with the ultimate goal of detecting AD in its preclinical stages in order to maximize the potential for earlier treatment intervention and improved outcomes.
The toll of this debilitating neurodegenerative disease on patients and their families has prompted exploration of methods for early detection via the use of biomarkers.
Researchers have assessed the role that imaging with magnetic resonance (MRI) or positron emission tomography (PET) can play; however, the cost of these imaging modalities limits them as a diagnostic screening tool.
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) biomarkers can play a role in diagnosing AD at earlier stages but are also limited by cost and their invasive nature.
The use of blood to detect biomarkers such as neurofilament light chain (NfL), amyloid-␤ (A␤) 42/40 ratio, and phosphorylated tau (p-tau)181 has the advantage of being relatively inexpensive and minimally invasive as a test, and recent studies show they may be clinically meaningful.
Over the last 20 years, the eye has emerged as a target of efforts geared toward early detection, as the eye is an extension of the central nervous system and offers the opportunity for non-invasive and multi-modal evaluation for early biomarkers of AD.
Moreover, eye disease shares risk factors with AD and may therefore represent a vulnerable population deserving of additional screening
This article is a review of biomarkers for early AD diagnosis that include promising protein and image-based intraocular targets.
The focus on both proteins and biomarkers obtained by noninvasive imaging makes this review unique from prior reviews which have primarily emphasized either one or the other, and by doing so we offer a comprehensive assessment to address the possible applicability of both sources from the eye as distinct and potentially synergistic markers for early AD detection.

BRIEF REVIEW AND CURRENT STATE OF BIOMARKER RESEARCH
The detection of AD in patients through distinct biomarkers is an area of active study.
Researchers have explored the role that noninvasive and invasive image-based modalities such as functional, structural, and amyloid PET imaging could play in identifying unique changes to the brain specific to AD
Several studies have also analyzed patient serum or CSF samples for clinically meaningful AD biomarkers, often in combination with observed imaging changes
It has been shown repeatedly that earlier intervention and therapy can have significant benefits for AD patients, further highlighting the importance and necessity of developing methods to identify biomarkers for early detection of this disease
Currently, some of the most promising and heavily investigated biomarkers for supporting the diagnosis of AD include low CSF levels of A␤ 42 or A␤ 42 :A␤ 40 ratio, amyloid PET imaging, various biomarkers of tau deposition, including increased CSF total tau, and tau PET imaging
In 2018, the NIA-AA issued updated guidelines for diagnostic testing to help researchers form a biological, biomarker-based definition of AD, framed within the ATN classification system established by
Asignifies changes on amyloid PET imaging and CSF levels of A␤ 1-42 , T -indicates biomarkers of tau, including tau PET or CSF p-tau, while N stands for neurodegeneration as reflected by CSF total tau (t-tau), F-2-fluoro-2-deoxy-d-glucose PET (FDG-PET), and atrophy on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).
Ultimately, the recommendations put forth by the NIA-AA were for research purposes with the eventual goal of refining clinical practice.
The authors deliberately did not include specific recommendations but created a general framework for better understanding the sequence of events that leads to AD, assisting with potential treatments and drug therapy
To date, there remains no clinical guidelines or recommendations on utilizing biomarker testing as part of routine screening or for early diagnosis of AD prior to symptom onset.
Additionally, while the methods utilizing imaging modalities and CSF sampling have shown considerable promise in aiding probable or suspected clinical diagnosis, these tests are expensive, may involve radiation exposure, and are often invasive.
The identification of cheaper, minimally-invasive methods for detecting both known biomarkers and new biomarkers in other organs and fluids remains a goal for researchers in the field.

THE HUMAN CRYSTALLINE LENS
The optically clear crystalline lens is located in the anterior segment of the eye, posterior to the iris
Via accommodation, the lens, in tandem with the cornea, refract light onto the retina beginning the process of visual perception.
The lens fibers are long, normally transparent cells that are known to accumulate misfolded protein aggregates over time
The development of cataract is a common clinical condition that occurs with increasing age and can lead to vision loss over time.
The removal of the lens from cataract formation is the most common surgical procedure in the US, and each year approximately 3 million people in the US undergo cataract surgery.
In 2003, Goldstein et al. were among the first to demonstrate amyloid-␤ protein precursor (A␤PP) and A␤ deposition was detectable in cadaveric human lens samples of patients with diagnosed AD.
They reported, that via immunohistochemistry (using monoclonal antibodies against A␤, specifically 4G8/␤A4) and confirmed through tryptic digest, tandem liquid chromatography/mass spectrometry, that A␤ deposition could be identified at the level of the lens.
The authors also reported a characteristic and distinct cortical cataract opacification in known AD patients, and additionally concluded that amyloid deposition was identifiable in the human lens as in the brain and that the molecular machinery necessary for the accumulation of A␤ was present in the lens itself, and not derived from the brain
In 2010, Moncaster et al. expanded on their initial findings to analyze the lenses of patients suffering from trisomy 21, Down syndrome (DS)
Chromosome 21 contains the gene encoding for A␤PP
Those suffering from this condition typically experience symptoms and onset of dementia and AD at an earlier age, compared to healthy patients
Moncaster et al. utilized peptide sequencing, immunoblot analyses, and ELISA to demonstrate accumulation of A␤ amyloid aggregates within the lens.
Additionally, the authors indicated that staining and slit lamp examination showed the same characteristic supranuclear opacifications previously described
A subsequent study in 2012, by the same group of authors, aimed to identify genetic factors that linked the formation of age-related cataracts to AD. Jun et al. examined lens opacity imaging from 1,249 patients from the Framingham Eye Offspring Study and genome wide association studies and identified a statistically significant correlation of cortical cataracts with AD-related brain changes and suggested that genetic variations in Catenin Delta 2 gene (gene associated with both brain and eye development) may represent a link in cortical cataract formation and AD associated changes to the brain, identified by MRI
A 2013 study by Kerbage et al. explored the use of a combination topical compound that binds to aggregated A␤ peptide and laser scanning device, called SAPPHIRE system, to examine in vivo human lenses and found a 2-fold increase in fluorescent signature in the thickest supranuclear region in their AD patients compared to controls
The authors conducted a similar study in 2015, showing a statistically significant difference in fluorescent signature via the use of the fluorescent ligand eye scanning techniques and demonstrated that lens findings significantly correlated with florbetapir F18 PET amyloid brain analysis and imaging findings
Given the safety, relative ease, and multitude of non-invasive techniques to examine the lens, the Goldstein, Moncaster, Jun, and Kerbage studies have sparked considerable interest from the scientific community to delve further into identifying neuropathological changes associated with AD in the lens.
However, subsequent studies exploring their findings presented inconsistent results.
A study published in 2013 in Experimental Eye Research, by authors Michael et al., was unable to replicate the findings from Goldstein and Moncaster.
The authors, analyzing the brains and lenses of 21 patients with AD and 15 without, could not successfully identify A␤ deposition in any of the cadaveric lenses from their study
The authors performed a follow up study in 2014, utilizing confocal Raman micro-spectroscopy and were unable to reveal the presence of A␤ in the cataracts of known AD patients
In 2014, authors Ho et al. were unable to detect any A␤ deposition in the crystalline lens or retina of eleven neuropathologically diagnosed AD patients, four DS patients, and six age-matched controls
In a 2017 study published in the Journal of Neuropathology and Experimental Neurology, Williams et al. were unable to identify evidence of deposits in any part of the globe after immunostaining (monoclonal antibody 6F/3D)
Both the Ho article from 2014 and the Williams article from 2017 examined postmortem eyes of known AD patients for evidence of inclusions, or proteinaceous deposits of other known AD biomarkers such as tau.
Neither study was able to demonstrate deposits of tau at any level or compartment in the eye as well.
It should also be noted that the original articles from Goldstein and Moncaster asserted evidence of A␤ deposition at the lens and did not directly address deposition of other aggregates such as tau that are historically linked to AD in the brain

for summary of articles).
It is unclear why recent studies have been unable to replicate the findings of Goldstein and Moncaster.
Some of the proposed theories include discrepancies in staining technique, use of monoclonal antibodies with differing epitopes, as well as fixation modality
The Michael study acknowledges that their cadaveric samples were from patients with a clinical diagnosis of AD as opposed to the pathological confirmation used in the Goldstein and Moncaster studies
This difference may explain the discrepancy in findings between Goldstein/Moncaster and Michael studies, but fails to apply to the Ho study, as their cadaveric samples had confirmed pathological diagnosis of AD
Additionally, while the Ho, Michael, and Williams studies were unable to demonstrate clear evidence of A␤ in the lens, there are technical and procedural limitations to consider when evaluating their conclusions.
One is the technical challenges of fixing, processing, and staining lens material compared to brain tissue.
Secondly, the Ho, Michael, and Williams studies do not utilize a secondary analytical method, such as tandem liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) to confirm their findings of an absence of A␤ in the analyzed tissues.
Contrast this to Goldstein, Moncaster, and Jun who utilized tryptic digest sequencing with electrospray ionization LC-tandem mass spectrometry to confirm the identity of A␤ in their lens samples.
The lack of a specific secondary analytic technique to confirm findings weakens the challenges put forth by the authors in the Ho, Michael, and Williams studies.
It should also be noted that confocal Raman microscopy has relatively poor sensitivity as well as low signal specificity when attempting to detect low levels of A␤, as would be expected in the lens
Alternately, LC-MS is specific in identifying a unique tryptic peptide sequence that corresponded to an internal peptide in A␤PP, and sensitive in detecting levels of A␤ at levels several orders of magnitude less than that detectable by Raman microscopy.

INTRAOCULAR FLUID
While examination of the anterior segment of the eye (cornea, anterior chamber, lens, ciliary body) has been of interest to researchers looking for early signs of AD, there also have been several studies that have explored the role of eye fluids (aqueous and vitreous humor) and posterior segment (retina and choroid)
The aqueous humor is a transparent fluid composed primarily of water, amino acids, and electrolytes which fills both the anterior and posterior chambers of the anterior segment of the eye.
It serves as a source of micronutrients and immunologic materials for avascular structures such as the cornea and provides intraocular pressure
Studies have looked into sampling the aqueous for evidence of deposition of A␤
Indeed, authors Goldstein et al. were among the first to demonstrate that beta amyloid, specifically A␤ 1-40 and A␤ 1-42, could not only be detected and measured in the aqueous humor, but that levels of such compounds were comparable to that of CSF samples
The vitreous chamber accounts for 80% of the total volume of the globe
The vitreous serves an important role in supporting the posterior lens and providing shape and structure to the posterior segment of the eye
Several studies have identified AD-associated pathological proteins in both the aqueous and the vitreous humor
In 2019 our group published a study that was among the first to find an association of those levels with human cognitive function.
Wright et al. sampled the vitreous humor of patients following vitrectomy surgery for eye disease, and found that higher levels of A␤ 40 , A␤ 42 , and total tau in the vitreous were associated with lower cognitive function, measured by Mini-Mental Status Examination (MMSE)
Notably, these associations were preserved when adjusting for the patients' local eye disease.
The findings for total tau were consistent with findings from CSF studies where high CSF levels of tau corresponded with worse cognitive function.
On the other hand, A␤ showed an opposite relationship to cognitive function than that observed in the CSF, suggesting that A␤ accumulation in the vitreous follows a different dynamic than that in the CSF where it is inversely related to brain amyloid deposition.
Our group subsequently identified NfL in the vitreous humor and reported a positive correlation between NfL levels and A␤ 40 , A␤ 42 , and total tau in 77 vitreous samples
The NfL levels noted in the vitreous was adjusted for systemic diseases such as diabetes and was not associated with the patients' clinical eye condition nor APOE genotype.
These cumulative findings in the vitreous humor reaffirm other studies suggesting that patients with eye disease are an at-risk population for the development of AD and suggest that further investigation in patients with eye disease may yield results potentially generalizable to the population at large (Table

RETINA
The neurosensory retina has been a particular tissue of interest for the detection of amyloid plaque deposition.
AD and brain A␤ burden has been shown to be associated with A␤ deposits in the retina in animal models
Several studies have used curcumin, a fluorochrome, to label the presence of A␤ plaques at the retina
Hamaoui et al. reported A␤ in postmortem donor retinal tissue from AD patients and speculated that retinal A␤ plaques accumulated and progressed at ) plaques within the inner layers of the retina of AD patients; this study was important because it was also able to noninvasively image A␤ plaques at the retina, via the use of curcumin staining and retinal imaging in live patients
It should be noted, however, the curcumin binding and fluorescence is not specific for A␤ and not definitive evidence of retinal A␤.
Curcumin has been described as binding to dense amyloid structures and not specifically to A␤ peptide
Additionally, several studies previously mentioned in this review have been unable to detect evidence of retinal amyloid deposition via immunostaining
Although these discrepancies may be related to staining technique or methodology, the limited and occasionally confounding data preclude any consensus conclusions on the topic
Histopathological analyses from the late 1980s and early 1990s of cadaveric ocular tissue from AD patients revealed evidence of retinal ganglion cell loss
Similar methodology has been used to identify evidence of marked thinning of the retinal nerve fiber layer (rNFL), the innermost layer of the retina and an unmyelinated extension of the fibers of the optic nerve, in AD patients compared to controls
While the presence and associations of pathological proteins in eye fluid and retinal tissue is of interest, obtaining a biopsy of vitreous fluid and retina as a source of screening for AD is not practical because it requires an invasive needle injection or surgical intervention in the operating room.
However, there is opportunity to access aqueous humor and lens material in the operative setting for patients undergoing cataract surgery, as it provides us with a mechanism to access eye fluid and tissue for possible screening purposes.
Since this is a common procedure, the investigation of pathological proteins for AD in the eye may be more compelling than lumbar puncture for CSF procurement.
Additionally, patients with cataracts and other eye diseases that require surgery are at higher risk for AD

NONINVASIVE IMAGING OF THE RETINA
More recently, current studies investigating the role of the eye in AD focus on retinal biomarkers imaged by optical coherence tomography (OCT).
OCT is a noninvasive photographic test using light waves to take cross sectional images of the retina and macula, providing information on the retina's distinctive cell layers.
For example, the rNFL is thinner, retinal volume is reduced, and the choroidal thickness of the eye is reduced in patients with mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and AD compared to cognitively normal (CN) controls
A meta-analysis from 2017 by den Haan et al. looked at 25 studies involving 887 patients with AD, 216 with MCI, and 864 CN and demonstrated a statistically significant reduction in mean peripapillary rNFL layer thickness and macular thickness in patients with MCI and AD
A 2017 study from the Netherlands compared retinal sublayer thickness, as determined by OCT, to brain MRI of 2124 patients.
Mutlu et al. discovered that reduced gray and white matter volume was correlated with thinning of the inner retinal sublayers including the rNFL, the ganglion cell layer, and inner plexiform layer
A similar study by Casaletto et al. used OCT and 3T Brain MRI to compare retinal sublayer thickness with medial temporal lobe volume (MTL) and like Mutlu found that reduction in MTL volume (which they reported as a hallmark of AD) was correlated with thinning of the rNFL as well as total macular and macular ganglion cell layer
While AD patients demonstrated significant decrease in rNFL thickness compared to healthy controls, there was no significant difference when compared to preperimetric glaucoma.
Authors conclude changes observed on SD-OCT are non-specific.
From a functional standpoint, a large prospective multicenter study based in the UK enrolled over 32,000 participants and performed baseline OCT imaging as well as a series of four cognitive tests on participants.
Researchers discovered that those with rNFL thickness in the bottom 40% were nearly twice as likely to perform worse on one of the four cognitive tests, when compared to participants with relatively thicker rNFL, indicating that rNFL thickness could be used as a potential biomarker or early indicator of dementia and neurodegenerative disease
In addition to retinal thinning and retinal sublayer changes, researchers have also explored potential changes in retinal vasculature in AD patients
One of the earliest studies utilized laser doppler to show evidence of narrowing of venous blood column diameter and venous blood flow rate in AD patients compared to controls
Given the relative complexity of the retinal vasculature, however, more precise imaging modalities and instrumentation were needed to highlight specific vascular changes within the retina of AD patients.
More recent studies have thus implemented the use of OCT angiography (OCTA) to better discern the exact specific vascular changes occurring at the retina in AD patients
OCTA is a relatively new technology that provides information of the retino-choroidal microvasculature in a non-invasive manner.
It is an additional software enhancement to the commercially available OCT and provides supplementary vascular information similar to what can be imaged with an angiogram, but without the use of an invasive intravenous dye.
It can capture images and quantify both the superficial vascular plexus (SVP) and deep vascular plexus (DVP) of the retinal microvasculature.
Several studies have highlighted impairments of flow, as measured by either flow density or vessel density, of the SVP, a network of vessels that branch off of the central retinal artery
A recent study by Yan et al. compared 37 patients with AD to 29 age matched controls and found a positive correlation between retinal vascular density and reduced rNFL thickness, measured by OCTA, in patients with mild AD
Another study by Chua et al. found significantly reduced macular vessel density in both the SVP and DVP in patients with AD, while those with MCI showed reduction in the SVP only
Another study by Wu et al. showed similar results in the DVP in AD patients but a different result in MCI patients, which affected the DVP more than the SVP, from the Chua study
While initial data shows promise for OCT imaging of the retina as a biomarker for early detection, there are several challenges to consider
More recent studies utilizing higher resolution OCT, namely spectral domain OCT have not been able to consistently identify the same changes, or a significant difference in mean retinal thickness between AD and control patients as described earlier
Moreover, some studies have reported that a distinct retinal change unique to AD has not been identified, making it hard to discern AD related retinal thinning from other eye disease such as glaucoma and diabetic retinopathy
Additionally, while several large studies and meta-analyses have supported the utility of measuring retinal cell layer thickness by OCT, OCTA is still a relatively new technology and individual studies investigating its role in MCI and AD have thus far been done in relatively small groups of patients, indicating that the use of OCTA as a tool to measure retinal vascular changes in those with MCI and AD is still in its early stages of investigation.
Additionally, OCTA is now commercially available but not universally deployed in all practice settings primarily due to its cost and general uncertainty by clinicians if the advancement of this technology is a significant or incremental improvement in the diagnosis and management of eye disease over OCT alone, which is available universally in almost all eye physician and optometry offices.
Lastly, measurements obtained by OCT and OCTA, because they are photographic tests, are unlikely to confirm AD pathology and at best can be used as a screening tool requiring further diagnostic confirmation.
In short, larger, more extensive longitudinal studies are needed to identify more precise, specific patterns of retinal vascular changes, retinal thinning, and rNFL and GCL thinning changes during the course of dementia and AD, before any of these observed structural changes could be considered as a possible novel biomarker of AD.

CONCLUSION
The goal of uncovering biomarkers in the eye that may be used for early or preclinical detection of AD is possible but remains elusive.
Research on the eye fluid and lens and other ocular structures to detect early signs of AD continues to be promising, particularly because it is accessible during cataract surgery, and while some early data has emerged with regard to A␤ deposition in the lens and retina that are potentially unique to AD, there is some confounding data and disagreement.
Similarly, noninvasive imaging of the retina with OCT has shown promise and disagreement about distinct, identifiable AD-related changes in the retina.
The more recent discovery of A␤, tau, and NfL in eye fluids with cognitive association is compelling but more studies are needed to replicate these findings and clarify what role they may play in early AD detection.
A future consideration may be a combined approach utilizing the eye that includes noninvasive imaging of the retina as a more sensitive marker, and the detection of proteins A␤, tau, and NfL in eye fluid, lens, or retina as a more specific marker, which could resemble the combination of imaging by MRI/PET scanning and detecting proteins in CSF via lumbar puncture.
What is clear is that considerably more research is needed in these particular areas of exploration.
As examination and imaging techniques improve it is conceivable that larger meta-analyses and longitudinal studies exploring how the lens, retina or other parts of the eye change uniquely with dementia and AD, could identify key patterns or findings of biomarkers for early AD diagnosis.


ISSN 2542-4823 © 2021 -The authors.
Published by IOS Press.
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial License (CC BY-NC 4.0).



Fig. 1 .
Fig.1.
Invasive and non-invasive theoretical approaches researchers have proposed for examining the eye, at all levels including the lens and retina, to look for changes specific to Alzheimer's disease
This is original artwork by Holly Fischer.
The authors have permission to use the figure per licensing requirements mentioned on Wikimedia common.
Link to the license: (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/legalcode).
The artwork was modified to include labels for major eye structures, and text boxes which feature theoretical descriptions of eye examination techniques to look for evidence of Alzheimer's disease.A 2019 study by Kim et al. reports a similar reduction in thickness of the inner retinal layers in patients with severe AD compared to controls
Researchers discovered that those with rNFL thickness in the bottom 40% were nearly twice as likely to perform worse on one of the four cognitive tests, when compared to participants with relatively thicker rNFL, indicating that rNFL thickness could be used as a potential biomarker or early indicator of dementia and neurodegenerative disease
One of the earliest studies utilized laser doppler to show evidence of narrowing of venous blood column diameter and venous blood flow rate in AD patients compared to controls
Given the relative complexity of the retinal vasculature, however, more precise imaging modalities and instrumentation were needed to highlight specific vascular changes within the retina of AD patients.
More recent studies have thus implemented the use of OCT



Table 1
Studies looking for evidence of A␤ in the lens


While Michael et al. attempted to confirm their findings with Raman microscopy, a negative finding utilizing this technique is not definitive evidence of a total absence of A␤.
The use of LC-MS in the Goldstein, Moncaster, and Jun studies confirms the presence of A␤ at the lens, and authors Michael, Ho, and Williams do not invalidate this finding.
The question that now that remains is, are levels of A␤ in the lens ultimately associated with and potentially predictive of AD?



Table 2
Studies exploring presence of AD associated biomarkers in the vitreous humor



Table 3
Studies looking at evidence of retinal changes/retinal pathology associated with Alzheimer's disease