Aerobic Exercise Sustains Performance of Instrumental Activities of Daily Living in Early-Stage Alzheimer Disease
Background and Purpose-Individuals with Alzheimer's disease (AD) experience progressive loss of independence performing activities of daily living.
Identifying interventions to support independence and reduce the economic and psychosocial burden of caregiving for individuals with AD is imperative.
The purpose of this analysis was to examine functional disability and caregiver time in individuals with early-stage AD.
Methods-This was a secondary analysis of a randomized controlled trial of 26 weeks of aerobic exercise (AEx) versus stretching and toning (ST).
We measured functional dependence using the Disability Assessment for Dementia, informal caregiver time required using the Resources Utilization in Dementia Lite, and cognition using a standard cognitive battery.
Results-We saw a stable function in the AEx group compared to significant decline in ST group (4%; F=4.2, p=0.04).
This was especially evident in more complex, instrumental activities of daily living, with individuals in the AEx group increasing 1% compared to an 8% loss in the ST group over 26 weeks (F =8.3, p=0.006).
Change in memory was a significant predictor of declining instrumental activities of daily living performance (r=0.28 95% CI [0.08 ∞], p=0.01).
Informal caregiver time was not different between the AEx and ST groups.
Conclusions-Our analysis extends recent work by revealing specific benefits for instrumental activities of daily living for individuals in the early stages of AD and supports the value of exercise for individuals with cognitive impairment.

INTRODUCTION
Alzheimer's disease (AD) affects more than 5 million Americans.
Much of this spending is a direct result of persons with dementia (PWD) being unable to independently care for themselves.
Dementia is the leading cause of functional disability,
dividuals with AD experience near total decline in function over the course of the disease.
6]
Sustained independence is strongly associated with quality of life.
combat the social and economic consequences of dementia progression, it is of major clinical relevance to identify interventions that slow functional decline.
Physical inactivity is among the most influential risk factors for the loss of independence of ADL among those who are already experiencing cognitive impairment.
Several studies have shown promising benefits of exercise for slowing functional decline.
Several randomized controlled trials have investigated exercise as a symptomatic and disease modifying treatment for AD.
]
The current report is a secondary analysis of the disability data previously reported as part of our Alzheimer's Disease Exercise Program Trial (ADEPT), a 6-month study comparing AEx to a stretching and toning program delivered at local YMCA facilities.
Our primary finding was that AEx supported functional independence but was not associated directly with measures of cognition.
For this analysis, we were interested in further characterizing AEx benefit on specific functional domains.
Previous evidence strongly suggests that AEx benefits executive function.
0]
3]

METHODS
Details of the trial are published elsewhere,
NCT01128361) was designed as a pilot randomized controlled trial of 26 weeks of AEx versus a non-aerobic stretching and toning control program (ST) delivered at 16 YMCA of Greater Kansas City facilities.
The study included adults over 55 in the earliest stages of AD-related cognitive decline.
Participants were assigned to AEx and ST groups in a 1:1 ratio.
Inclusion criteria included participants with MCI or dementia with etiologic diagnosis of probable AD based on clinical and cognitive test results using standard criteria,
MCI was defined as a change in cognition and preservation of functional independence reported by the participant, study partner or clinical researcher during the interview and impairment in at least one cognitive domain during a cognitive battery assessment that included tests from the National Alzheimer's Coordinating Center Unified Data Set.
Study partners reported on informal caregiving, that is care or supervision not provided care for pay.
Study partners saw participants most days of the week and supported the participant's involvement in the study, and were thus well positioned to provide information on informal care provision for the participant.
Exclusion criteria included clinically significant psychiatric disorder; systemic illness or infection likely to affect safety; clinically-evident stroke; myocardial infarction or coronary artery disease in the last 2 years; uncontrolled hypertension in the last 6 months; cancer in the last 5 years; drug or alcohol abuse in the last 2 years; insulin dependent diabetes; or significant pain or musculoskeletal symptoms that would prohibit exercise.
We obtained written informed consent approved by our Institutional Review Board (IRB) from all participants and a study partner who supported their involvement in the study.
The study was approved the university's IRB.
Participants were block randomized, stratified by age (split at 75) and sex, to balance treatment arms.
Testers were blinded to the participant's intervention arm at all timepoints.

Outcome measures
Functional disability as measured by the Disability Assessment for Dementia
The Disability Assessment for Dementia (DAD) was our primary outcome measure of functional independence for the current analysis.
The DAD asks the study partner to assess independence in activities in the previous two weeks.
Scores are percentages of complete independence on tasks.
Activities can be categorized into BADL and IADL sub-scores.
They can also be categorized by cognitive processing involved, giving initiation, planning and organization and performance sub-scores.
We assessed informal caregiving by the study partner using the Resource Utilization for Dementia (RUD-Lite) Lite Scale.
.
RUD-Lite is a brief survey of informal and formal supervision, support and healthcare for individuals with dementia.
It quantifies informal and formal care in the last month through a semi-structured interview.
Our primary measure of interest was total caregiving time (in hours) by all caregivers (not just the participant's study partner) providing assistance with BADL, IADL and supervising remaining time.
A comprehensive cognitive test battery was also administered to create standardized composite scores of memory and executive function.
We created composite cognitive scores by averaging standardized scores within the domains of executive function and memory.
Raw scores were standardized to the mean and standard deviation of healthy older adult baseline scores from a companion study (M=0, SD=1).

Intervention
Participants were asked not to alter current physical activities other than those prescribed by the study team.
The AEx group began the intervention with a weekly goal of 60min of aerobic exercise in Week 1 and increased their weekly exercise duration by approximately 21min per week until they achieved the current public health recommended target duration of 150min per week, distributed over 3-5 sessions.
Target heart rate (HR) zones were gradually increased from 40-55% to 60-75% of HR reserve based on resting and peak HR during cardiorespiratory fitness testing.
Exercise trainers supervised all exercise sessions during Weeks 1-6.
Supervised sessions were gradually reduced to 1 per week based on perceived ability to be safe and independent and in consultation with the participant's study partner and study staff.
The stretching and toning (ST) group performed a series of non-aerobic exercises that rotated weekly (core strengthening, resistance bands, modified tai chi, modified yoga).
The active control intervention (ST) accounts for potential effects of social engagement and physical activity.
Participants in the ST group wore HR monitors and were asked to keep their HR below 100 beats per minute.
Exercise trainers helped participants adjust exercise intensity to reduce HR as necessary.
Like the AEx group, trainers supervised all exercise sessions during Weeks 1-6 and gradually reduced supervised sessions to 1 per week based on perceived ability to be safe and independent and in consultation with the participant's study partner and study staff.

Analysis
We performed analysis using R (ver.
3.2.5).
For the present analysis, we included individuals who completed both Baseline and Week 26 testing and had completed relevant measures (ST n = 32, AEx n = 33).
Change scores between Baseline and Week 26 were calculated for all measures and ANOVA was used to test differences based on Treatment Arm.
We additionally tested age and participant gender as possible confounding variables.
Analyses were conducted with α = 0.05 to protect against Type I error.
To explore possible cognitive associations with functional decline, we correlated change in memory and executive function with change in our functional measures.
Given the preponderance of evidence supporting a positive association with cognition and function, we performed these as 1-tailed correlations, expecting greater cognitive gains to be associated with improved functional independence.

RESULTS
Results for primary outcomes have been reported previously.
The intervention groups did not differ statistically by age, sex, educational attainment, or baseline dementia severity as measured by CDR Sum of Boxes (p>0.13).
Table
Study partners who rated participants on DAD and RUD Lite were all blood or legal relatives.
Seventy-eight percent were spouses or partners, 17% percent were adult children, 1.2% were grandchildren, and 3.8% were siblings or siblings-in-law.
We investigated intervention-related differences in functional independence (DAD) and informal care (RUD Lite) as a whole and their sub-categories (Table
There was a significant difference in DAD between the AEx group and the ST group, with the AEx showing stable functional independence compared to a 4% drop for individuals in the ST group (F=4.2,
p=0.04).
Only IADL independence differed between treatment groups (F =8.3, p=0.006), with individuals in the AEx group increasing 1% compared to an 8% loss in the ST group over 26 weeks.
The AEx group also demonstrated sustained ability to independently perform ADL (F =7.2, p=0.009) compared to the ST group, which declined 6% over 26 weeks.
Independence in planning or initiation of ADL was not different between groups.
Informal care time was not different between the AEx and ST groups.
Treatment arm was not associated with informal care time (RUD Lite) as a whole, or its BADL, IADL, or supervising time components.
However, change in time of informal care was inversely associated with change in functional independence over 26 weeks (r = -0.39,
95%CI [-0.58 -0.17], p=0.001).
The correlation analysis to assess the association between change in cognitive performance over 26 weeks with change in functional independence showed that DAD total functional independence was associated with change in memory (r = 0.26, 95% CI [0.06 ∞], p=0.017) but not executive function (r = 0.18 95% CI [-0.03 ∞], p=0.07).
This association appeared to be primarily driven by an association between memory change and change in IADL independence (r = 0.28 95% CI [0.08 ∞], p=0.01), and the change in the performance subcategory of the DAD (r = 0.30 95% CI [0.1 ∞], p=0.007).
Change in executive function was associated with change in the performance sub-category of the DAD (r = 0.23 95% CI [0.03 ∞], p=0.03).

DISCUSSION
The purpose of this secondary analysis was to explore if aerobic exercise effects functional independence in the earliest stages of AD.
Though amnestic impairment is the hallmark cognitive deficit associated with AD, associated declines in independence are perhaps more feared.
Dependency on others for IADL is a primary factor influencing health-related quality of life
Further, informal care costs alone for PWD are expected to nearly double over the next 25 years.
Therefore, it is imperative that the health care community identifies effective strategies for supporting independent function as long as possible.
We had previously established that 26 weeks of aerobic exercise maintained functional independence compared to stretching and toning exercises.
In the present analysis, we identified that aerobic exercise preferentially supports performance of instrumental activities of daily living such as preparing meals, housework, making telephone calls, or staying safely at home.
Specifically, it was the performance of these IADLs that was sustained in the aerobic exercise group, rather than the planning or initiation of them.
However, we found no evidence to suggest that sustained or improved performance of IADLs resulted in less time needed for caregiving.
It is possible that these two seemingly inconsistent results reflect a reality in which the caregivers of our participants still needed to provide verbal cues and assistance with planning and initiating of IADL, but that performance required less support or redirection after the aerobic exercise intervention.
Despite not reaching statistical significance, caregiver IADL time was nearly 5 hours less per month in the AEx group compared to the ST group, which may represent a meaningful reduction for some.
It is plausible that basic activities of daily living like toileting, dressing, and eating, did not benefit in our trial because most individuals were still performing these activities with a high degree of independence.
Loss of independence in BADL typically comes with greater cognitive impairment after IADL impairment.
Our inclusion criteria limited dementia severity to very mild or mild impairment (CRD 0.5 or 1) who are unlikely to be experiencing significant dependence for more basic activities.
This may also partially explain why no differences were seen in reported caregiving time.
Caregivers of PWD are known to engage in more hours of care than caregivers of people without dementia.
In fact, caregivers of PWD provide more than 20 hours per month of support for BADL and IADL beyond the commitment of other caregivers.
We chose the Disability Assessment for Dementia (DAD) to index functional independence that predicts time to institutionalization.
However, it has been shown to be valid, reliable and without gender bias,
Individuals with mild to moderate AD typically decline approximately 1 percentage point per month on this scale, which was consistent with the results of the ST group.
Practical test of IADL such as the Everyday Cognition Battery
Our results extend prior findings suggesting that exercise promotes function in older adults with dementia.
The Finnish Alzheimer's Disease Exercise Trial (FINALEX) recently demonstrated that home-dwelling older adults with AD experienced slower functional decline over 1 year when engaged in group or home-based exercise.
A separate study (UMDEX) demonstrated that 7 months of high intensity functional exercise was associated with benefit for functional independence but only in people with non-Alzheimer's dementia living in residential care facilities.
cause executive function is a good predictor of required assistance
Further, aerobic exercise appears to preferentially benefit executive functions.
0]
It is unclear why we saw this association.
Perhaps caregivers who perceived memory decline that was objectively measured on our cognitive battery, also perceived their loved ones to be progressing and needing more assistance.
Caregiver perception of memory loss appears to be closely tied to their distress.
t may also be that memory decline better reflected AD progression and concomitant dependence.
At least one prior report has linked memory change to IADL decline.
is secondary analysis has limitations that must be acknowledged.
The sample size is small and homogenous, white and well-educated.
The exercise programs were limited in scope and provided no task-specific training that may benefit individuals with dementia.
Our varied population of caregivers including spouses, children, grandchildren and siblings may affect caregiver time comparability.
However, this variety of caregiver profiles may better real world shared caregiving responsibilities many families encounter.

CONCLUSIONS
This analysis of a 26-week randomized controlled, community-based exercise trial demonstrates that aerobic exercise sustains IADL independence in individuals in the earliest stages of AD.
IADL performance was not associated with sustained or improved executive function, but rather memory change.
As recently noted, physical therapists are uniquely qualified to support exercise instruction in neurologic clinical populations.
Given that exercise is a potentially cost-effective therapy for cognitive impairment,



Table 1
Participant Demographics.Mean (standard deviation) in years (y) of age, education, and arbitrary units of the Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR).
Number (percentage) of females in each treatment arm.