Clinical diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease: recommendations of the International Working Group
In 2018, the US National Institute on Aging and the Alzheimer's Association proposed a purely biological definition of Alzheimer's disease that relies on biomarkers.
Although the intended use of this framework was for research purposes, it has engendered debate and challenges regarding its use in everyday clinical practice.
For instance, cognitively unimpaired individuals can have biomarker evidence of both amyloid β and tau pathology but will often not develop clinical manifestations in their lifetime.
Furthermore, a positive Alzheimer's disease pattern of biomarkers can be observed in other brain diseases in which Alzheimer's disease pathology is present as a comorbidity.
In this Personal View, the International Working Group presents what we consider to be the current limitations of biomarkers in the diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease and, on the basis of this evidence, we propose recommendations for how biomarkers should and should not be used for diagnosing Alzheimer's disease in a clinical setting.
We recommend that Alzheimer's disease diagnosis be restricted to people who have positive biomarkers together with specific Alzheimer's disease phenotypes, whereas biomarker-positive cognitively unimpaired individuals should be considered only at-risk for progression to Alzheimer's disease.

Introduction
In 2018, the US National Institute on Aging (NIA) and the Alzheimer's Association (AA) proposed the amyloid β, tau, neurodegeneration (ATN) research framework for the definition and diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease (for a glossary of terms, see panel 1).
Increased accessibility to biomarkers, and the potential for blood biomarkers to provide information about the underlying disease processes in the future, necessitate consideration of the limitations of biomarkers in the diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease, and recommendations about how these biomarkers should and should not be used in a clinical setting.

Limitations of a purely biological definition of Alzheimer's disease
The 2016 NIA-AA and IWG consensus meeting and 2018 NIA-AA criteria
3 years after introduction of the NIA-AA criteria, a reevaluation of a diagnostic approach based only on biological markers is warranted, for both conceptual and evidence-based practical reasons.

Risk of confusion between the presence of Alzheimer's brain lesions and Alzheimer's disease
Based on ATN status, Alzheimer's disease could be considered as a purely biological condition, dissociated from a clinical component or individual status.
By dissociating Alzheimer's disease from a clinical phenotype, the disease instead equates to Alzheimer's disease neuropathological changes, whereas in 2012, neuropathologists stated that "There is consensus to disentangle the clinicopathologic[al] term 'Alzheimer's disease' from [Alzheimer's disease] neuropathologic [al] change".
As a consequence, the term Alzheimer's disease includes a continuum that ranges from cognitively unimpaired individuals to people with severe dementia.

Low predictive accuracy
A major limitation of a purely biological definition of Alzheimer's disease is its low predictive accuracy.
Several studies (panel 2) indicate that the presence of both tau and amyloid β positivity is insufficient to definitively predict the occurrence of symptoms (mild cognitive impairment or dementia) in individuals without clinical impairment.

Presence of other pathologies
Another challenge with using a biomarker-only diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease is that the in-vivo presence of biomarkers of Alzheimer's disease lesions could certify Alzheimer's disease as the primary diagnosis, because such lesions are commonly found in people who have other neurodegenerative diseases, most often dementia with Lewy bodies.
Patients who have evidence of other brain pathology in addition to Alzheimer's disease lesions should not be considered as having a primary diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease.
Dementia with Lewy bodies exemplars of copathologies create potential confusion for individuals receiving a biomarker-based diagnosis in such circumstances.
For example, physicians would know about the pathology of dementia with Lewy bodies because of clinical signs (eg, hallucination, Parkinson syndrome) or indirect biomarkers (eg, DaTscan denervation) and a diagnosis of dementia with Lewy bodies would be clear according to these data (ie, clinical data and DaTscan).
However, the Alzheimer's disease biomarkers will come back positive, which creates confusion: what is the final diagnosis-Alzheimer's disease or dementia with Lewy bodies?
According to NIA-AA 2018 1 it is Alzheimer's disease, yet according to McKeith 2017 and colleagues,
Does the patient have both diseases and should both diagnoses be given to the patient?
Could the patient be included in a disease-modifying trial designed for Alzheimer's disease, or Lewy body dementia, or both?
This example shows the confusion of using a pure biomarker diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease in the absence of a pathology biomarker for other proteinopathies.
Conversely, even when Alzheimer's disease has been defined neuropathologically as the primary diagnosis, it can be associated with other pathologies.
Pure Alzheimer's disease pathology is the exception rather than the rule (found in 3-30% of neuropathological series of people with dementia of the Alzheimer type, depending on age
Alzheimer's disease in its so-called pure form is a model that is unlikely to apply to most cases of Alzheimer's disease, especially those in people with late-life dementia, in whom multiple proteinopathies are increasingly common.
Both the clinical trajectory and phenotypes of Alzheimer's disease can be affected by copathologies, including α-synucleinopathy, vascular pathology, non-Alzheimer's disease tauopathies (particularly argyrophilic grain disease and cortical ageing-related tau astrogliopathy), and TAR DNA-binding protein 43 (TDP-43) pathology (especially limbic-predominant agerelated TDP-43 encephalopathy [LATE] neuropathological changes): 50-60% of Alzheimer's-type dementia (dementia defined clinically as Alzheimer's disease) is estimated to be attributable to these copathologies.
3]

Uncertainty about the pathogenesis model of Alzheimer's disease
The biological model that supports the ATN classification opens up the possibility for research into the biological changes before the onset of symptoms, which is necessary to develop drugs to treat the earliest disease stages.
Advocates for a biological definition of Alzheimer's disease often refer to the cancer model, in which a long asymptomatic phase of the disease can exist, and all affected individuals, located anywhere along this disease continuum, will benefit from the same therapeutic approach even at a preclinical stage.
owever, the follow-up of cognitively unimpaired biomarker-positive individuals suggests that the majority of these individuals do not progress over time (panel 2).
Currently, it is not clear whether Alzheimer's disease fits better with the long and asymptomatic prostate cancer continuum model, or with an at-risk model, in which asymptomatic amyloid-positive and tau-positive people would be at-risk (analogous to the precancerous condition) and in which people with the clinical phenotype would be in the disease state (analogous to the cancer state).
Defining the disease by its pathological lesions only, and not by a clinical phenotype, risks creating diagnostic confusion, particularly regarding healthy oldest old people (ie, aged over 85 years) for whom memory complaints and low amounts of Alzheimer's disease pathology are almost constant.
Publications in the field of dementia that propose that the disease is a myth
In summary, amyloid β and tau biomarkers are not sufficient to confidently predict progression to prodromal Alzheimer's disease or Alzheimer's disease dementia, or to define a person's position on the Alzheimer's disease continuum, without clinical input.
The relationship between the coexistence of tau and amyloid β pathology on the one hand, and the development of cognitive decline and neurodegeneration on the other hand, remain uncertain at an individual level.
Besides the dominant amyloid cascade model, additional models of pathogenesis in Alzheimer's disease include those highlighting the roles of endosomal recycling deficiency,

Difficulty in classifying cognitively unimpaired biomarker-positive individuals
The challenge to a purely biological definition of Alzheimer's disease is mostly centred on the preclinical stage of the disease-ie, in conditions for which, by definition, cognitive testing does not support the presence of an Alzheimer's disease phenotype.
In symptomatic patients, the identification of the specific clinical phenotype (interfering or not with independence in everyday activities) is a major step in diagnosis, because it expresses the brain dysfunction that the biomarkers are signalling.
Cognitively unimpaired individuals with biomarker positivity will not invariably experience subsequent cognitive decline; the best current estimates of lifetime dementia risk range from 5% to 42%.
cause of the uncertainty about their progression over time (panel 2), we authors recommend that asymptomatic individuals who are biomarker positive should be classified as at-risk for progression, with a distinction between two different subgroups of individuals for clinical and research purposes.
The first subgroup is likely to remain stable over long periods and includes people who might never develop symptoms.
These people might compensate for the presence of an ongoing neurodegenerative process and manage to maintain normal functioning for many years, or some individuals might have no abnormal neurodegeneration despite having Alzheimer's disease brain lesions.
The second subgroup of people will progress, including individuals who show signs of accelerated neurodegeneration and whose compensatory mechanisms have been overwhelmed.
This group will probably progress to prodromal Alzheimer's disease and Alzheimer's disease dementia in the future.
For research purposes, these subgroups should be separated, to identify protective factors and to develop algorithms to predict progression.
The risk of progression depends on several modulating factors for which the magnitude and interactions have yet to be determined (panel 3).
These factors are either risk markers or risk factors, and can be related to several mechanisms: brain resilience (eg, cognitive reserve) and resistance;
For instance, is a person aged 60 years who is an APOE ε4 carrier, with a negative tau PET scan and an amyloid PET scan just below the threshold for being classed as amyloid positive, at less risk than a person aged 85 years who is amyloid-positive and taupositive with cerebrovascular lesions on MRI?
We anticipate the emergence of individualised predictions adjusted for age and risk factors, and the ability to rank the risk, as occurs with cardiovascular risk factors.
Such modelling is in its early stages, but is exemplified by age-adjusted polygenic hazard scores.
However, given the existing state of knowledge, disclosing individual patient-level risk would be premature and is to be avoided: current individualised prediction models do not work sufficiently well in cognitively unimpaired people compared with people who are in the prodromal stage of Alzheimer's disease.
Besides conceptual issues, there are several practical aspects that could limit the use of biomarkers for the purely biologically based diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease, which include thresholds, generalisation, metric performance, and accessibility.

Biomarker thresholds
A biological diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease that is linked to positive biomarkers brings the need to define with certainty thresholds of positivity: any modification of these thresholds would substantially affect both the diagnosis and the stages of the disease.
The clear-cut separation between negative and positive patients in relation to a given biomarker is somewhat artificial and differs between sites and studies.
Factors contributing to this uncertainty include the specifics of the biomarker used and the threshold determination.
Most of all, this binary threshold does not reflect the reality of amyloid β and tau pathology, which is continuous and present at a minimal extent in almost all people older than 70 years,
Neuropathology criteria for Alzheimer's disease provide no cutoff for establishing Alzheimer's disease diagnosis, but only define low, intermediate, or high levels of Alzheimer's disease neuropathological change.
r amyloid β biomarkers, the use of binary thresholds of amyloid PET standard uptake value ratio has long restricted the measure of amyloid β deposition to intermediate and high amounts.
The use of different amyloid PET tracers is also a known cause of variability in measurements, although the centiloid quantification approach helps to diminish its effect.
tudies using the centiloid scale or longitudinal amyloid PET have opened up the possibility of identifying earlier stages of amyloid accumulation.
In CSF, a positive amyloid measure despite a negative amyloid PET or the use of novel biomarkers (eg, CSF Aβ 34/42 ratio 67 ) might also prove to be reliable biomarkers of early amyloid deposition.
r tau biomarkers, there is also a strong discrepancy between neuropathological identification (in post-mortem studies, the presence of tau Braak stages I-II is almost universal after age 70 years)17,19 and in-vivo measures of tau aggregates on PET (36% of individuals are tau positive after the age of 70 years23).
The current in-vivo detection of tau positivity using
In the near future, in-vivo tau measurements might detect very early tau deposits (ie, tau Braak stages I-II), with second generation tau PET tracers or by detection of other phosphorylated species of tau such as phosphorylated tau 217 in the CSF or the plasma.
clinical practice, such an extension to earlier thresholds in amyloid or tau biomarkers might lengthen the duration of the asymptomatic stages and decrease the lifetime probability of clinical progression.
Biomarker thresholds also depend on their intended use (eg, to identify the first signs of amyloid β pathology, or to predict the occurrence of clinical symptoms) and no consensus on the context of use (eg, in asymptomatic vs symptomatic individuals; in people who complain about subjective cognitive decline vs non-complainers) is currently available.
aluating cognitive changes and determining the Alzheimer's disease stages and state (ie, objective cognitive impairment: mild cognitive impairment or dementia) also raise threshold issues.
The emergence of lower thresholds in cognitive testing, to define objective subtle cognitive changes, further extends the clinical stages of neurodegenerative diseases, before the occurrence of mild cognitive impairment.
However, this increased sensitivity in the detection of cognitive decline comes at the expense of a reduced specificity, and numerous other causes than neurodegeneration or Alzheimer's disease can be responsible for the observed changes, such as metabolic disorders, psychiatric disorders, or sleep apnoea.

Generalisability and accessibility in clinical practice
Considering general medical practice and standard of care, the six currently available Cochrane reviews on the use of CSF or amyloid PET biomarkers have consistently led to the same conclusion: that the routine use of these biomarkers in clinical practice cannot be recommended.
4]
As underscored by the Cochrane reviews, the prognostic value of a diagnosis based on biomarkers remains limited, first because there is a high variability of decline rate among individuals with biomarker-positive Alzheimer's disease,
The Cochrane reviews further point out the "the heterogeneity in the conduct and interpretation of the biomarkers and the lack of defined thresholds for determination of test positivity".
he choice of lower or higher biomarker thresholds corresponds to earlier or later pathological burden and can change the duration of the asymptomatic stages and decrease the lifetime probability of clinical progression.
Finally, the high financial cost of PET examinations and the invasiveness of CSF measurements limit their interest to and applicability in clinical practice, especially in low-income countries.
As shown in panel 2, the effect of biomarker positivity on clinical progression remains weak to moderate and was established using selected volunteers from research cohorts.
The generalisation of these cohort findings to clinical practice also faces several obstacles.
For example, the risk of attrition bias from these data is strong, especially in the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative, in which many individuals are lost to follow-up;
An increasing number of people now seek consultation in memory clinics complaining of subjective memory problems or cognitive decline despite scoring normally on formal cognitive testing.
Subjective cognitive decline might be a risk factor of clinical progression,
Subjective cognitive decline can result from many factors besides ageing, including anxiety, depression, fatigue, sleep disorders, attention deficits, and drug side-effects.
Among individuals who were cognitively unimpaired on objective cognitive testing, there was no difference in frequency of CSF Alzheimer's disease profiles between people with and people without subjective cognitive decline.
The heterogeneity of the subjective cognitive decline population is important; for example, prediction of subjective cognitive decline can be strong if it is reported by an informant, is associated with subtle cognitive changes (not normal cognition), and there are no comorbid psychiatric symptoms, but otherwise prediction can be very low and unspecific
Other individuals do not report cognitive problems and might be just worried about future cognitive decline because of their family history, results from commercial direct-toconsumer genetic testing, or APOE status, or might simply be concerned about preserving their memory and general cognitive abilities.
Such individuals are seeking to understand their risk and their future, represent up to 20-30% of new patients in some specialty memory clinics,
With such patients, reliance on a biomarker-only diagnosis would require dependable evidence of a connection between the positivity of biomarkers and an extremely high probability of subsequent expression of clinical symptoms.
Experience with the Sokrates study
This issue also applies for patients who undergo an investigation for other medical conditions in which Alzheimer's disease biomarkers are included in the absence of clinical context, and are positive.
erall, evidence for the use of biomarkers in clinical practice remains highly disputed and suffers from a dearth of evidence-based data to recommend biomarker assessments for cognitively unimpaired individuals.

Ethical concerns
Informing cognitively unimpaired individuals that they have an irreversible disease on the basis of biomarkers is ethically challenging, given that the clinical trajectory towards prodromal Alzheimer's disease or Alzheimer's disease dementia is uncertain, and that there is no way to prevent the development of symptoms in the absence of modifiable risk factors or specific therapies.
Disclosing biomarker results and the related risk profile to patients should be seen as different from disclosure of disease diagnosis.
Within the lay community, Alzheimer's disease is among the most feared diseases, given its outcomes including profound disability and loss of personal dignity.
For physicians, Alzheimer's disease equates with Alzheimer's disease neuropathological changes, whereas for patients, Alzheimer's disease equates with dementia, dependency, and death.
This deep difference in use and understanding of the term can adversely affect the therapeutic alliance.
In the future, being said to be at-risk for progression, instead of in the preclinical stage of Alzheimer's disease, might help in discussions with patients of the risk-benefit balance regarding a putative treatment and its side-effects.

IWG recommendations for clinical diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease
On the basis of the evidence included in this Personal View, the IWG proposes the following recommendations:

1.
The diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease is clinical-biological.
It requires the presence of both a specific clinical phenotype of Alzheimer's disease (phenotype positive) and biomarker evidence of Alzheimer's disease pathology (amyloidpositive and tau positive).

2.
Specific clinical phenotype commonly associated with Alzheimer's disease pathology (common Alzheimer's disease phenotypes) are: the amnestic syndrome of the hippocampal type
Other phenotypes, including the behavioural variant or dysexecutive variant,
These phenotypes might or might not interfere with independence in everyday activities.

3.
In people who have these common phenotypes, amyloid and tau biomarker positivity establishes an Alzheimer's disease diagnosis (table
The positivity of both amyloid and tau biomarkers is required because an amnestic phenotype with only amyloid positivity is not specific to Alzheimer's disease and is seen in other neurodegenerative diseases with amyloid copathology (including LATE and dementia with Lewy bodies
However, an isolated amnestic syndrome of the hippocampal type with only tau biomarker positivity can occur in primary age-related tauopathy
Finally, uncommon phenotypes with positive Alzheimer's disease biomarkers should not be a-priori classified as an established Alzheimer's disease (table

4.
Recommended biomarker measures for amyloid β pathology are low CSF Aβ42, increased CSF Aβ40-Aβ42 ratio (which is, if possible, preferred to low CSF Aβ42 103 ) or high tracer retention in amyloid PET.
For tau pathology, we recommend high CSF phosphorylated tau (not total tau because of low specificity 104 ) or increased ligand retention in tau PET.
Recommendation of amyloid PET and tau PET for use in clinical practice is conditional on regulatory approval and reimbursement by payers in different countries.

5.

Conclusion of diagnosis requires clinician expertise in the assessment of both
clinical and biomarker results.
The different situations encountered in clinical practice are summarised in table 2. If the results of cognitive testing, or biomarkers, or both, are close to the cutoff points, it would be useful to complete the work-up with another investigation (eg, repeated measure of pathophysiological biomarkers, clinical follow-up, or use of neurodegeneration biomarkers such as

6.
CSF investigation is prioritised because it provides simultaneous information on the two types of biomarkers (amyloid β and tau) and is less expensive than amyloid PET, tau PET, or both.
If lumbar puncture is contraindicated, PET investigations are an alternative.

7.
In clinical practice, plasma biomarkers for amyloid β and tau pathology are not currently recommended.
Although promising, plasma biomarkers require further standardisation and validation before they can be broadly regarded as secure evidence of Alzheimer's disease pathology (amyloid-positive and tau-positive).
71,105

8.
In clinical practice, the investigation of pathophysiological biomarkers in cognitively unimpaired individuals is not recommended, given the current inability to predict reliable clinical trajectories of people who are asymptomatic with biomarker positive status (amyloid-positive and tau-positive).
In the future, if therapies or prevention programmes show substantial efficacy in delaying onset of disease, that will probably change the need for biomarker investigations in these individuals, although the problem of the prediction of clinical trajectories in cognitively unimpaired biomarker-positive individuals will still remain.

9.
If a biomarker investigation is done in a cognitively unimpaired individual (eg, because of the will to know, referral by brain health services or an expert centre referral to a disease-modifier trial that requires biomarker investigations, as part of a cohort study, or in diagnostic workup for other conditions), a risk stratification of biomarkers is proposed (panel 4).
Stratification would distinguish an absolute risk group (ie, carriers of autosomal dominant monogenic mutations for Alzheimer's disease), 106 a high-risk group,
]
Validation studies on large cohorts with long periods of follow-up are needed.
The challenge for the future is to define the risk of further progression reliably and predictably.
Such individuals should be counselled before Alzheimer's disease biomarker investigation about the potential implications of the test results, and should be able to decide whether or not to have the result disclosed to them.
If a person decides to receive the results and the results are positive, they should be counselled that they are at risk for subsequent clinical progression to prodromal Alzheimer's disease or Alzheimer's disease dementia, but are not clinically diagnosed as having Alzheimer's disease.

10.
Subjective memory complaints and subjective cognitive decline, if isolated and not supported by objective cognitive impairment, are not specific enough to be considered part of the Alzheimer's disease phenotype.
In cognitively unimpaired individuals, self-reported complaints and complaints reported by an informant should be clearly distinguished, because informant complaints indicate that these individuals are at increased risk of progression 110 and merit a closer follow-up with regular clinical and neuropsychological evaluations.

11.
Alzheimer's disease can be associated with other brain pathologies, including αsynucleinopathy,
3]
In both situations, pathophysiological Alzheimer's disease biomarkers can be positive.
This biomarker positivity is particularly ambiguous in the case of behavioural or dysexecutive variants, corticobasal syndrome, and semantic or non-fluent variants of primary progressive aphasia, in which the presence of positive Alzheimer's disease biomarkers can be considered either as Alzheimer's disease copathology or atypical forms of Alzheimer's disease
In all of these situations, it is recommended that the physician relies on the phenotype and follow-up to determine the final diagnosis (ie, whether Alzheimer's disease is the primary pathology or a copathology; table
In some complex cases, only post-mortem evaluation will provide definitive information.

12.
Physicians are recommended to evaluate the added-value of biomarker investigation for each symptomatic patient objectively, according to the clinical situation (age, risk of comorbidity, complexity of the phenotype), the life context, the wishes of the patient to know the most likely diagnosis, the possibility of participation in a disease-modifying trial, and the appreciation of how this information will change the management of the patient.
Biomarker investigations can also be limited by the availability, cost, and health-care payment coverage of biomarkers across countries, centres, and clinical situations.

13.
If pathophysiological biomarkers are not available, patients should have a clinical syndromic diagnosis-eg, amnestic Alzheimer's disease phenotype or logo-penic variant primary progressive aphasia (ie, phenotype positive with unknown amyloid β and tau status), and staging (mild cognitive impairment or dementia) can still be applied.
In these situations, attention should be given to ruling out non-degenerative causes.
If a positive neurodegeneration biomarker (eg,

Conclusion
Although the definition of Alzheimer's disease based exclusively on biological markers has gained substantial traction in research settings, emerging studies suggest that the biomarker definition is not ready for application in clinical settings and for diagnosis of individuals without cognitive impairment.
Current evidence about the natural history of people who are asymptomatic at risk with positive biological markers is insufficient to predict subsequent cognitive decline and dementia.
In light of these findings, we provide recommendations for diagnosis and disclosure in the clinical setting that avoid labelling Alzheimer's disease in individuals who are biomarker positive and cognitively unimpaired and who are at risk for progression to prodromal Alzheimer's disease or Alzheimer's disease dementia.
We recommend that the diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease in the clinical setting remains tied to the clinical phenotypic presentation.
There are several crucial requirements for using biomarkers to predict progression to clinical stages of Alzheimer's disease.
The first requirement is the relationship between pathological burden, biomarker thresholds, and the respective effect and weight of modulating factors in relation to future risk of clinical progression.
The second concerns the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease itself.
Data suggest that Alzheimer's disease can result not only from tau and amyloid β pathologies but from synergy and interactions among these pathologies that lead to the highest stages of protein accumulation (tau Braak 5 or 6), and the highest rates of cognitive decline.
Investigating such synergies and understanding protective factors in people who are asymptomatic with biomarkers of Alzheimer's disease pathology offers opportunities both to define the disease better and to prevent it in the future.

Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.

Panel 1: Glossary of terms
Alzheimer's dementia Refers to the phase of Alzheimer's disease in which cognitive symptoms are sufficiently severe to interfere with social functioning and instrumental activities of daily living.

Alzheimer's disease
A clinical-biological entity defined by a specific clinical phenotype associated with in-vivo evidence of Alzheimer's pathology.

Alzheimer's pathology
Can be assessed and defined in vivo by biomarkers of amyloid β pathology (low CSF Aβ42 or increased CSF Aβ40-Aβ42 ratio; increased tracer retention in amyloid PET) and biomarkers of tau pathology (increased phosphorylated tau in CSF; increased tracer retention in tau PET).

Asymptomatic at risk
Cognitively unimpaired individuals who have in-vivo evidence of Alzheimer's disease pathology.
Some individuals can remain stable over a long period of time, whereas others will progress.

Biological diagnosis
A diagnosis based on only biomarker evidence.

Clinical-biological diagnosis
A diagnosis based on both clinical and biomarker findings.

Common Alzheimer's disease phenotype
The phenotypes in which Alzheimer's disease pathology is the most common underlying primary pathology.
These phenotypes include amnestic Alzheimer's disease, logopenic variant primary progressive aphasia, and posterior cortical atrophy.

Copathology
Pathological changes found in patients who have a different primary pathology.

Neurodegenerative disease of Alzheimer type
A proposed diagnosis for people whose pathophysiological biomarkers are either not present or not assessed and common Alzheimer's disease phenotypes are observed together with neurodegeneration biomarkers (eg,

Prevention of Alzheimer's disease
Prevention of Alzheimer's disease is a major challenge.
The discovery of pathophysiological biomarkers makes it possible to distinguish between primary prevention, based on interventions before the presence of positive Alzheimer's disease biomarkers, and secondary prevention, based on interventions when positive biomarkers are present.

Prodromal Alzheimer's disease
The early symptomatic and predementia phase of Alzheimer's disease.

Uncommon Alzheimer's disease phenotypes
The phenotypes in which Alzheimer's disease pathology is less commonly the underlying primary pathology (the most common underlying primary pathology includes frontotemporal lobar degeneration-tau, frontotemporal lobar degeneration-transactive response DNA-binding protein).
These phenotypes include behavioural or dysexecutive variants, corticobasal syndrome, and the non-fluent and semantic variants of primary progressive aphasia.
even more so in individuals with subjective cognitive decline. 24

•
Longitudinal tau PET studies showed no or only minimal acceleration of tau tracer uptake in the following 1 or 2 years in cognitively unimpaired older people who were amyloid-positive (median age 80 years) versus amyloidnegative (median age 66 years).
|| § A substantial proportion of people remain cognitively stable for some years, limiting any prediction of when or whether such progression will take place in a given individual.
¶ In this study, there was no significant difference at baseline in degree of tau PET tracer retention between the amyloid-positive converters and non-converters, indicating that baseline tau deposition was not a strong predictor of clinical progression.
|| In apparent contradiction of the widely accepted disease model in which the accumulation of brain amyloid β lesions triggers the fast spreading of tau lesions outside the medial temporal lobes.
39 For references see appendix pp 5-6.

Panel 4:
Proposed stratification of risk of asymptomatic people according to biomarker results

People with absolute risk
Carriers of autosomal dominant mutations (APP, PSEN1, PSEN2, or trisomy 21) 106

People with high risk
Cognitively unimpaired individuals with:
• CSF or PET that is amyloid-positive and tau positive



•••
Polygenic risk factors beyond APOE • Family history of Alzheimer's disease • Memory complaint or subjective cognitive decline • Magnitude of brain lesions, inferred from pathophysiological biomarker results especially if searched with PET • Presence of markers of neurodegeneration (ie, isolated hippocampal atrophy on MRI, 18 F-fluorodeoxyglucose-PET hypometabolism, or elevated CSF neurofilament light chain) • Copathology Factors that could decrease the risk of progression to Alzheimer's disease • Protective genes, such as the presence of the APOE ε2 allele, the APOE ε3 Christchurch mutation, or the A673T APP Icelandic mutation • Higher cognitive reserve Factors that need further confirmation • Pattern of neuroinflammation • Functional brain marker of cognitive reserve (eg, connectivity on functional MRI) Lifestyle factors (eg, physical activity, sleep, social activity) Psychiatric diseases (eg, depression)



•
51yloid negative; tau positive51For further details, see IWG recommendations for clinical diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease.
Disease and Related Disorders Association (now the Alzheimer's Association) Work Group.
IWG=International Working Group criteria.
IWG-AA=International Working Group and Alzheimer's Association joint criteria.
NIA-AA=US National Institute on Aging and Alzheimer's Association joint criteria.
NINCDS=US National Institute of Neurological and Communicative Disorders and Stroke criteria.
* Cognitively unimpaired individuals are considered at-risk for Alzheimer's Disease.