The Area Deprivation Index: A novel tool for harmonizable risk assessment in Alzheimer's disease research
Residence in a disadvantaged neighborhood associates with adverse health exposures and outcomes, and may increase risk for cognitive impairment and dementia.
Utilization of a publicly available, geocoded disadvantage metric could facilitate efficient integration of social determinants of health into models of cognitive aging.
Methods: Using the validated Area Deprivation Index and two cognitive aging cohorts, we quantified Census block-level poverty, education, housing, and employment characteristics for the neighborhoods of 2119 older adults.
We assessed relationships between neighborhood disadvantage and cognitive performance in domains sensitive to age-related change.
Results: Participants in the most disadvantaged neighborhoods (n = 156) were younger, more often female, and less often college-educated or white than those in less disadvantaged neighborhoods (n = 1963).
Disadvantaged neighborhood residence
associated with poorer performance on tests of executive function, verbal learning, and memory.
Discussion: This geospatial metric of neighborhood disadvantage may be valuable for exploring socially rooted risk mechanisms, and prioritizing high-risk communities for research recruitment and intervention.

K E Y W O R D S
cognition, cognitive aging, dementia, disparities, neighborhood disadvantage, social determinants

INTRODUCTION
Alzheimer's disease and related dementias (ADRD) disproportionately impact economically disadvantaged, rural, and ethnoracial minority communities.
At a population level, these communities experience disproportionately high exposure to adverse living, learning, and working conditions-fundamental contextual factors known as social determinants of health (SDOH).
en assessed for discrete geographic areas, neighborhood-level disadvantage encompasses SDOH including poverty, housing quality, and employment opportunities.
Neighborhood disadvantage is a modifiable, policy-actionable factor that may impact cognitive health independently of and through risk factors such as chronic stress and reduced access to educational opportunities, healthy food, and medical care.
Because it drives various and synchronous risk mechanisms, neighborhood-level disadvantage is both a fundamental cause of disparities and a priority target for efficient, far-reaching interventions.
growing body of work exposes robust ties between upstream individual-level SDOH for cognitive impairment and ADRD risk in later life
The few studies exploring neighborhood-level contextual disadvantage and cognitive risk have often relied upon resource-intensive neighborhood ratings by research staff.
The ADI is available for customized local-level mapping and free download for every neighborhood in the United States through the National Institutes of Health (NIH)-funded Neighborhood Atlas.
Given the openness and availability of these neighborhood data, the ADI shows excellent potential as a harmonizable exposure assessment tool that facilitates SDOH modeling.
In a first step to evaluating the usability of this new tool in ADRD research, we assessed associations between block group-level neighborhood disadvantage and cognitive function across several specific domains in a community-based cognitive aging cohort.

METHODS

Data sources and sample
Participants (N = 2119) were drawn from the Wisconsin Registry for Alzheimer's Prevention (WRAP) study (n = 1501)
Parental history of dementia due to AD is validated through the review of parental medical or autopsy records,
The majority of participants are recruited through community outreach and word-ofmouth.
WRAP and ADRC participants undergo study evaluations on an annual or biennial basis, including neuropsychological testing, clinical measurements, and comprehensive health history.
is study was approved by the institutional review board of the University of Wisconsin, with participant informed consent obtained and documented prior to all study procedures.

ADI construction and linkage
We used standard techniques to geocode all subjects according to their most recently reported address.
The census block group (henceforth referred to as "neighborhood" as per previous research) of each geocode was linked to its ADI state decile score.
The ADI is a factor-based index that uses 17 U.S. Census-based poverty, education, housing quality, and employment indicators to characterize and rank the socioeconomic contextual disadvantage of a particular neighborhood.

Analyses
Cognitive outcomes were examined by neighborhood disadvantage state decile, with a binary variable for the ADI comparing the 20% most disadvantaged neighborhoods (Deciles 9 and 10) to those in the 80% least disadvantaged neighborhoods (Deciles 1 to 8).
This binary categorization is consistent with previous studies showing that negative health outcomes primarily affect those in the highest deciles of disadvantage [5].
Multivariable linear regression was performed using SAS 9.4, to evaluate the association between living within disadvantaged neighborhood deciles and cognitive outcomes of interest, with adjustment for self-reported age at visit, sex, race, college education (presence or absence of bachelor's degree attainment), parental history of dementia, and cohort (WRAP/ADRC).

RESULTS

Sample characteristics
Participants living in the 20% most disadvantaged neighborhoods tended to be younger, more often female, and less often college educated or white compared to those residing within other neighborhoods.
Parental history of dementia did not differ by neighborhood disadvantage (Table

Cognition
Residing within the 20% most disadvantaged neighborhoods, as compared to less disadvantaged neighborhoods, associated with fewer No association with processing speed was observed (β = 0.83; 95% CI -0.64 to 2.30).
These relationships can be seen in Figure

DISCUSSION
These early cross-sectional data suggest that neighborhood disadvantage associates with poorer cognitive function across multiple domains in middle-aged and older adults.
The results are consistent with and expand a small body of work examining objective area-level deprivation and global function in European cohorts
The mechanisms of health disparities are multi-factorial, but social determinants of health including neighborhood disadvantage plausibly root and underpin many of those pathways.
The present study is a first step in investigating the ADI as a neighborhood-level contextual SDOH that can predict cognitive health and risk.
As a metric, the ADI is both inherently generalizable and practically applicable, disseminated freely online through the Neighborhood Atlas.
Although it is employed across the nation in health delivery, policy, and outcomes research, this is the first time the ADI has been employed within ADRDfocused research.
This work suggests that integration of the ADI into ADRD research recruitment and data protocols can improve our ability to explore and understand the interactions between modifiable social and biological processes, and can inform the design of targeted, tailored interventions that reduce cognitive health and ADRD disparities.


Characteristics overall, and stratified by those residing within the least disadvantaged 80% of neighborhoods versus within the most disadvantaged 20% of neighborhoods by ADI a