Associations of event-related brain potentials and Alzheimer’s disease severity: A longitudinal study
Background: So far, no cost-efficient, widely-used biomarkers have been established to facilitate the objectivization of Alzheimer's disease (AD) diagnosis and monitoring.
Research suggests that event-related potentials (ERPs) reflect neurodegenerative processes in AD and might qualify as neurophysiological AD markers.
Objectives: First, to examine which ERP component correlates the most with AD severity, as measured by the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE).
Then, to analyze the temporal change of this component as AD progresses.
Methods: Sixty-three subjects (31 with possible, 32 with probable AD diagnosis) were recruited as part of the cohort study Prospective Dementia Registry Austria (PRODEM).
For a maximum of 18 months patients revisited every 6 months for follow-up assessments.
ERPs were elicited using an auditory oddball paradigm.
P300 and N200 latency was determined with regard to target as well as difference wave ERPs, whereas P50 amplitude was measured from standard stimuli waveforms.
Results: P300 latency exhibited the strongest association with AD severity (e.g., r = -0.512,
p < 0.01 at Pz for target stimuli in probable AD subjects).
Further, there were significant Pearson correlations for N200 latency (e.g., r = -0.407,
p = 0.026 at Cz for difference waves in probable AD subjects).
P50 amplitude, as measured by different detection methods and at various scalp sites, did not significantly correlate with disease severityneither in probable AD, possible AD, nor in both subgroups of patients combined.
ERP markers for the group of possible AD patients did not show any significant correlations with MMSE scores.
Post-hoc pairwise comparisons between baseline and 18-months follow-up assessment revealed significant P300 latency differences (e.g., p < 0.001 at Cz for difference waves in probable AD subjects).
However, there were no significant correlations between the change rates of P300 latency and MMSE score.
Conclusions: P300 and N200 latency significantly correlated with disease severity in probable AD, whereas P50 amplitude did not.
P300 latency, which showed the highest correlation coefficients with MMSE, significantly increased over the course of the 18 months study period in probable AD patients.
The magnitude of the observed prolongation is in line with other longitudinal AD studies and substantially higher than in normal ageing, as reported in previous trials (no healthy controls were included in our study).

Introduction
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the most common form of dementia and is most prevalent in elderly populations
Already, our ageing society is confronted with an alarming increase in AD cases
Besides its devastating impact on memory and cognition, AD impairs basic bodily functions such as walking and swallowing and eventually leads to death.
The combination of its looming global epidemic status and severity makes AD a major public health concern
Due to its degenerative nature, early accurate diagnosis and effective clinical monitoring are crucial.
However, when it comes to routine clinical practice, AD assessment is most commonly done by subjective clinical interpretations at a progressed stage of the disease, i.e. when symptoms are already apparent.
So far, no cost-efficient, widely-used biomarkers have been established to facilitate the objectivization of diagnosis and disease progression assessment.
To promote the screening and monitoring of as many individuals as possible, such markers should not be dependent on costly equipment, such as magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), or positron emission tomography (PET) scanners.
Therefore, we focus on inexpensive apparatuses that are part of daily clinical practice in secondary and tertiary neurological care, namely electroencephalography (EEG) devices.
Their non-invasiveness and low noise level (as opposed to most neuroimaging techniques) add to their suitability for large-scale use in irritable patients such as those found within the spectrum of AD.
Research suggests that event-related potential (ERP) recordings reflect neurodegenerative processes in AD (for reviews, see
For instance, meta-analyses have shown that long latency ERPs are significantly prolonged for patients with mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and AD as compared to healthy controls (for N200, see
Furthermore, shortened P300 latencies were observed when comparing patients with MCI to patients with AD
Besides the more prominent N200 and P300, the P50 has received increasing attention as a putative neurophysiological biomarker and surrogate marker in recent years.
Both patients with MCI and AD show increased P50 amplitude relative to age-matched controls
Moreover, in a five-year MCI longitudinal study
Whereas various studies have examined the usefulness of ERP markers to classify between AD patients and MCI and/ or healthy control subjects, only a few studies have investigated associations between ERP markers and AD severity (e.g.,
Furthermore, only a couple of studies exist in the domain at hand today that have used a longitudinal design.
Most of these experiments examined subjects with MCI or subjective memory complaints
We therefore, first, investigate which ERP component demonstrates the strongest correlation with AD severity, as measured by the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE;
Then, we longitudinally follow this component at distinct scalp locations over time (6-, 12-, and 18-months follow-up assessments) and empirically examine its presumed change as AD progresses.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the ERP study with the highest number of AD patients longitudinally followed when considering study periods longer than 6 months.
Furthermore, our study is the first to report on correlation coefficients between AD severity and P50 amplitude.
Finally, we could not find any other prospective study that included more AD subjects (in our examination N = 63) for the computation of correlations between ERP markers and a measure of disease severity.

Methods

Subjects
Sixty-three subjects (31 with possible, 32 with probable AD diagnosis according to NINCDS-ADRDA criteria; 39 Apolipoprotein E (ApoE) ɛ4 allele carriers; 39 with anti-dementia drug treatment (acetylcholinesterase inhibitors, N-methyl D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor antagonists); 38 females; mean age 75.92 ± 8.82 standard deviation (SD); mean MMSE score 23.25 ± 3.6 SD; mean years of education 10.46 ± 2.26 SD; mean duration of illness (months) 22.89 ± 14.65 SD) were recruited prospectively at the tertiary-referral memory clinic of the Medical University of Innsbruck as part of the cohort study Prospective Dementia Registry Austria (PRODEM).
When comparing the group characteristics of probable and possible AD patients, only age showed a significant difference (p = 0.003).
Importantly, there was no significant difference in anti-dementia medication status between probable and possible AD patients (p = 0.921).
For further details, see Table
PRODEM is a longitudinal multicenter study of AD and other dementias in a routine clinical setting by the Austrian Alzheimer Society (for quantitative EEG (QEEG) results of the PRODEM study, see
Ethics committee approval was obtained and patients as well as their caregivers gave written informed consent.
Inclusion criteria encompassed: (I) diagnosis of Alzheimer-type dementia according to NINCDS-ADRDA criteria, (II) minimum age 40 years, (III) non-institutionalization and no need for 24-hour care, (IV) availability of a caregiver who agrees to provide information on the patient's condition.
Patients with comorbidities likely to preclude termination of the study were excluded.
For a maximum of 18 months assessments were repeated every 6 months, i.e., 6 months (FU1), 12 months (FU2) and 18 months (FU3) after baseline (BL).
Twenty-nine out of the 63 patients at BL returned for each of the three follow-up assessments (characteristics at BL: 14 with possible, 15 with probable AD diagnosis; 17 ApoE ɛ4 carriers; 18 with anti-dementia drug treatment; 19 females; mean age 73.52 ± 8.42; mean MMSE score 23.55 ± 3.34 SD; mean years of education 10.62 ± 2.24 SD; mean duration of illness (months) 25.69 ± 17.83 SD).

EEG recording
Participants were seated in an upright position on a comfortable chair with neck rest.
The room where recording took place was sound attenuated and controlled at pleasant ambient temperature.
Horizontal and vertical electrooculogram (EOG) electrodes were placed to detect eye movements.
The system employed was a 32-channel AlphaEEG amplifier with NeuroSpeed software (alpha trace medical systems, Dr. Grossegger & Drbal GmbH, Vienna, Austria).
EEG electrode placement (Au-plated cups; Grass F-E5GH, Grass Technologies, West Warwick, RI, USA) was in accordance with the international 10-20 system.
The electrodes were referenced to connected mastoids, the ground being positioned at FCz.
The EEG amplifier had a bandpass of 0.3 to 70 Hz (3 dB points) with a 50 Hz notch filter and a sampling rate set at 256 Hz.
Impedance levels were held below 10 kΩ.

Behavioral paradigm
The widely used two-tone oddball paradigm, a simple auditory discrimination task, was applied to elicit ERPs.
Subjects were instructed to detect infrequent (57), high-pitched (2000 Hz) target tones embedded in a stream of frequent (141), low-pitched (1000 Hz) standard tones.
The tone duration was 100 ms, with rise and fall times of 10 ms, interstimulus intervals varied between 1000 and 1500 ms.
Subjects were instructed to press a reaction time button, with the dominant hand, to target stimuli only.
All stimuli were presented binaurally via headphones.
Volume levels were individually adjusted to a comfortable, audible level for each participant.
Hearing aid devices were allowed during the experiment when necessary.

ERP preprocessing and analysis
After automatic horizontal and vertical regression-based EOG correction in the time domain
Individual sweeps to targets were visually screened for artefacts before being accepted into the average.
As a rule, sweeps to standard tones were automatically rejected if the voltage on any recording site exceeded 75 μV or fell below -75 μV.
For two subjects with high-voltage EEG the thresholds were set to ± 100μV.
The P300 is most commonly measured at Pz.
However,
Therefore, besides confirmatory analysis of Pz, we exploratively investigated correlations at Fz and Cz.
The N200 has a centro-frontal scalp distribution.
According to
Nonetheless, since there was no statistically significant electrode effect between all sites in their conducted metaanalysis, we exploratively examined the other midline positions as well.
Therefore, we used C3 as confirmatory and Cz and C4 as exploratory sites.
To isolate target components of interest target-minus-standard difference waves (difference waves) were computed by deducting the standard from the target waveforms.
Latencies and amplitudes were determined by the following procedure: P50 amplitude was measured from standard waveforms, whereas N200 and P300 latency was determined with regard to target and difference wave ERPs.
First, peaks were automatically marked within the following time windows: the N200 component was defined as the the maximum negativity between 175 and 350 ms after stimulus onset, and the P300 component was the maximum positivity between 280 and 600 ms after stimulus onset.
To ascertain the validity of the computed peaks, peak detection was visually verified and corrected wherever necessary.
For the determination of inconclusive peaks, waveforms of targets, nontargets and difference waves were compared.
P50 amplitude was computed by averaging the amplitude measurements across the 40-80 ms time window after stimulus onset adjusted for a 100 ms prestimulus baseline.

Assessment of disease severity
MMSE scores were used as measures for AD disease severity.
The MMSE items include tests of orientation, registration, recall, calculation and attention, naming, repetition, comprehension, reading, writing, and drawing.
The summed score of the individual items indicates the severity of cognitive impairment, where decreasing scores mark deterioration in memory and cognition

Statistical analysis
Statistical analyses were performed in SPSS 23.0.0.0 (IBM Corporation, Armonk, NY, USA) and MATLAB 2016a (Mathworks Inc., Natick, MA, USA).
Partial Pearson correlation coefficients were computed to examine the relationship between AD severity and MMSE scores at BL. Significant differences between correlation coefficients of AD subgroups were determined by two-sample z-tests.
To investigate potential changes of ERP marker values over time, analyses of variance (ANOVAs) for repeated measures were conducted with the within-subject factor time (BL, FU1, FU2, FU3).
Anti-dementia drug treatment (constant versus variable medication during the study period) was introduced as between-subject factor, to test if time x medication interactions were significant.
In case Mauchly's sphericity test
Paired Student's t-tests were used for comparisons of BL measurements to follow-up values.
Statistics for partial correlations were performed on data of all 63 subjects at BL, whereas longitudinal analyses were done using patients which completed all of the four time points, i.e., the BL measurement as well as all three follow-up assessments.
Comparisons between those two groups (all sessions versus not all sessions) were done using Chi-squared (χ2) tests for categorical variables and Student's t-tests for quantitative variables.
All p-values are reported in a two-tailed form.
To account for multiple comparisons (familywise error), we used Bonferroni adjustments of alpha levels (α).

Results

Correlations between ERP components and MMSE scores at baseline
Pearson correlations at BL were corrected for the covariates age and years of education, the partial correlation plot (Fig.
Sex, duration of illness, treatment with anti-dementia drugs, and ApoE status (carriers versus non-carriers of the ε4 allele) were also tested as potential covariates, but were not significant.
Correlation coefficients are reported at Pz for P300 latency, at Cz for N200 latency, and at C3 for P50 amplitude (see 'ERP preprocessing and analysis' for the underlying rationale).
Detailed results can be obtained from Table
The results of the exploratory examination of correlation coefficients at additional electrode positions (Fz and Cz for P300 latency; Fz and Pz for N200 latency; Cz and C4 for P50 amplitude) can be seen in Table
For the group as a whole, P300 latency for targets showed the strongest correlation with MMSE (r = -0.425,
p < 0.001, see Fig.
P300 latency for difference waves resulted in r = -0.334
(p = 0.009).
Difference waves showed the strongest correlation coefficient for N200 latency (r = -0.377,
p = 0.003), while corresponding target analysis resulted in r = -0.335
(p = 0.008).
All of the aforementioned results remained significant after Bonferroni adjustment of the alpha level (α = 0.05/5 = 0.01).
P50 amplitude did not correlate significantly with MMSE scores, even before Bonferroni correction (r = -0.011,
p = 0.931).
For the subgroup of probable AD patients, P300 latency for targets showed the maximal coefficient of correlation (r = -0.512,
p = 0.005), constituting the highest value over all, whereas P300 latency for difference waves resulted in r = -0.379
at p = 0.043.
N200 latency correlated at r = -0.304
(p = 0.102) for targets and at r = -0.407
(p = 0.026) for difference waves.
The result for P50 amplitude was not significant (r = 0.221, p = 0.240).
Only P300 latency correlation for targets remained significant after correction for multiple testing.
For the subgroup of possible AD patients, none of the correlations were significant, even before correction for multiple comparisons.

Longitudinal change of P300 latency
When comparing the group characteristics of patients who revisited all three follow-up assessments with the ones of patients who did not, only age showed a significant difference (p = 0.045).
There was no   significant difference between the groups of probable and possible AD subjects regarding the proportion of subjects who completed all three follow-up assessments.
For further information, see Table
In 23 out of 29 subjects, AChEI treatment was kept constant after BL (prescription was changed in two patients and dosage adjustment was carried out in four patients).
We longitudinally tracked the P300 as the component exhibiting the strongest correlation with disease severity at BL and closely investigated change rates of latency at putatively meaningful scalp locations and for the modalities target wave and difference wave.
Repeated-measures ANOVAs were used to determine whether mean values differed significantly (α = 0.05) between time points.
Significant effects were followed by post-hoc paired t-tests with strict correction of the alpha level by the Bonferroni method (maximum of three pairwise comparisons, six P300 variants; α = 0.05/18 = 0.00278).
For detailed ANOVA results, see Table
For the group of all AD patients, mean values differed significantly between time points for all P300 measures tested.
This was true for all tested variants.
Pairwise comparisons revealed significant increases between BL and FU3 for all markers.
After Bonferroni correction, the results for target waves at CZ and Pz, as well as for difference waves at Fz, Cz, and Pz remained significant.
For the subgroup of probable AD patients, latencies differed significantly between time points for all variants analyzed.
Before Bonferroni correction, all pairwise comparisons between BL and FU3 were significant.
After the Bonferroni method was applied to account for multiple comparisons, results for target waves at Cz and Pz, as well as for difference waves at Fz, Cz, and Pz remained significant.
Results of possible AD patients showed significant effects for difference waves at Cz and Pz.
However, none of these results remained significant after Bonferroni adjustments of alpha levels.
Difference wave measurements showed lower p-values at all electrode sites and for all groups (all subjects, probable AD, possible AD) than target measurements.
For a comparison between BL and FU3, corresponding difference waves are depicted in Fig.
The lowest p-values per group were always obtained at Cz for difference waves (all subjects, p < 0.001; subgroup of probable AD subjects, p < 0.001; subgroup of possible AD subjects, p = 0.0379).
On average, corresponding latencies for subjects as a whole, were 335.16 ± 41.29 ms (BL), 357.25 ± 46.71 ms (FU1), 350.78 ± 52.88 ms (FU2), and 387.29 ± 57.59 ms (FU3).
When anti-dementia drug treatment (constant versus variable antidementia medication during the study period) was additionally introduced as ANOVA between-subject factor, time x medication interactions were not significant in any instance.
To examine whether changes in P300 markers were associated with changes in disease severity as measured by MMSE, we computed Pearson correlation coefficients for differences between BL and FU3.
There was no significant relationship between any of the P300 markers and MMSE, even before Bonferroni correction, although MMSE scores changed in the expected direction (for all AD subjects: BL, 23.

Discussion
We investigated correlations between AD severity and three ERP components, namely, the P300, N200, and P50.
The strongest association with disease severity was found for the P300, which constitutes the most often analyzed ERP component in the study of cognitive processes
Although recently challenged by a meta-analysis
Probable AD subjects showed stronger correlation coefficients than possible AD patients.
However, these differences were not significant.
When comparing correlation coefficients with other AD studies demonstrating significant relationships between P300 latency and MMSE score, our results lie in between (e.g.,
(N = 31 probable AD patients);
It should be noted that no previous study has adjusted correlation for covariates (partial correlation) when investigating associations between ERPs and AD or MCI severity.
This might have led to biased estimates of effect sizes.
For the N200 component, markers for difference waves showed higher correlation coefficients than those for targets.
Exploratory examination at Pz (probable AD, r = -0.455)
resulted in even stronger correlations than at Cz (probable AD, r = -0.407).
Posterior N200 (also referred to as N2c) shows similarities with P300, as it appears for taskrelevant targets and elicits larger amplitudes for infrequent than frequent target stimuli
However,
Hence, the effect observed in our experiment might actually be attributed to P300 dynamics.
We could not find any study reporting on posterior N200 correlations with MMSE in AD, but
Surprisingly, P50 amplitude did not significantly correlate with MMSE -neither in probable AD, possible AD, nor in both subgroups of patients combined.
In an exploratory attempt, we changed the P50 amplitude computation method from averaging amplitude values across a time window
Further, we investigated alternative electrode positions (Cz, C4).
However, there was not a single significant correlation, even before Bonferroni adjustments of the alpha level.
Both,
As this is identical to our approach, methodological differences should not explain our unexpected results.
However, mean MMSE score in our study (23.55 at BL) compares well to values reported by
Therefore, P50 amplitude is thought to increase during the early stages of AD, while it reverts to relatively normal levels during the progression of the disease.
This problematic association might have attenuated the correlational effects in our study.
It is also the reason why
We could not find any P50 amplitude correlation coefficient report for AD or MCI subjects in the literature.
For a discussion on why there may appear differences between target and standard waveforms and therefore deflections in difference waves for components where this would not be expected (e.g., N1 or P2), as can be observed in our experiment, see
Briefly, physical differences between experimental stimuli can have substantial effects on early components, motor responses to targets might contaminate target ERP waves, stronger sensory gating and corresponding attenuation of early component amplitudes may arise for frequent standard stimuli as compared to infrequent target stimuli, and higher signal-to-noise ratios for more frequent standard tones might lead to smoother and therefore smaller amplitude ERPs than for target tones.
We utilized a two-tone auditory oddball task to elicit ERPs, as is common in ERP studies of AD patients (e.g.,
When comparing oddball paradigm settings across previous auditory AD ERP trials, we found a high level of heterogeneity.
In fact, we could not identify two distinct research groups that used the same settings.
Furthermore, numerous articles do not provide all the information necessary to replicate the study.
However, there was some overlap between studies, and the characteristics chosen for the present study (57 high-pitched (2000 Hz) target tones; 141 low-pitched (1000 Hz) standard tones; tone duration, 100 ms; rise and fall times, 10 ms; interstimulus intervals, 1000-1500 ms) were consistent with or in the range of settings reported by other studies.
As in the present study, a number of studies selected a frequency of 2000 Hz for target tones and 1000 Hz for standard tones
The number of frequent and infrequent stimuli varied greatly in the literature (target tones, standard tones;
Several manuscripts reported tone duration and interstimulus intervals (tone duration, interstimulus intervals;
Rise and fall times were only reported by a few studies, and were mostly consistent with the durations used by us
Given the differences between studies, and the corresponding difficulties of comparison, we would like to stress the importance of harmonization and standardization of behavioral paradigm settings in future research attempts.
Compared with other studies we found relatively low P300 latencies at BL.
This might be attributed to the fact that most patients in our experiment ranged in the mild AD domain.
However, latencies at FU3, at a more progressed stage of the disease, are well in line with previous AD findings.
Longitudinally tracking the P300 -as component with the highest correlation with disease severity -we determined which scalp location and modality (target wave, difference wave) is most sensitive to change over time.
The Cz difference wave marker showed the most significant change after 18 months as compared to BL measurement.
As suggested by
In some cases, FU2 showed higher mean value than FU3, however, differences between FU2 and FU3 were never significant.
Although P300 latency increased over time as expected, latency changes did not significantly correlate with changes in MMSE scores.
Since we had no control group in our study, an alternative explanation to the observed increments in P300 latency might therefore be, that they were caused by normal ageing.
Age-related P300 latency increase during adulthood has been reported on numerous occasions (for a metaanalysis, see
Nonetheless, our results (e.g., 40 ms change at Pz after 18 months) show a way more rapid increase when compared to physiological progression rates in elderly subjects (e.g., control groups of
Moreover, our results are well in line with P300 progression rates of previous longitudinal AD experiments
Finally,
An explanation for the lack of significant correlation might be that P300 latency is more sensitive to individual differences in AD severity than the MMSE score
In conclusion, P300 and N200 latency significantly correlated with disease severity in the group of all AD patients, as well as the subgroup of probable AD patients at BL, whereas P50 amplitude did not show significant correlations in any group.
P300 latency, which showed the strongest association with MMSE at BL, significantly increased over the course of the experiment.
Although we did not find significant correlation coefficients between the change rates of P300 latency and MMSE score, the observed latency prolongation is in line with previous reports, while being substantially stronger than in healthy controls of other AD studies.
The results of this study add to a growing body of evidence that ERPs reflect neurodegenerative processes in AD and might therefore serve as supplementary, cost-effective markers to facilitate the objectivization of AD assessment in daily clinical practice.



Fig. 1 .
Fig. 1.
Partial Pearson correlation plot (correcting for age and years of education) for MMSE values and P300 latency measurements at Pz in all Alzheimer's disease subjects.



Fig. 2 .
Fig. 2. Grand-average auditory ERP difference waves for the electrode sites Fz, Cz, and Pz during the baseline session (BL, blue line) and the third follow-up session (FU3, red line) in Alzheimer's disease patients.
Positivity is shown as upward deflection.
Time is given as difference to stimulus onset.



Table 1
Clinical characteristics of AD subjects at baseline assessment.
ApoE: Apolipoprotein, MMSE: Mini-Mental State Examination, mean values ± standard deviations.
Comparisons between the groups of probable and possible AD subjects were done using Chi-squared (χ2) tests (categorical variables) and Student's t-tests (interval variables).



Table 2
Confirmatory correlation results between ERP components and MMSE scores at baseline.



Table 3
Exploratory correlation results between ERP components and MMSE scores at baseline.



Table 4
Clinical characteristics of subjects who accomplished all three follow-up assessments versus subjects who did not.



Table 5
P300 latencies at baseline and follow-up assessments ± standard deviations measured at baseline and follow-up assessments, ANOVA and post-hoc t-test results (pairwise comparisons),GGGreenhouse-Geisser correction.
For ANOVA p-values: * significant at α = 0.05, ** significant at α = 0.00833 (6-fold Bonferroni correction).
For post-hoc t-test p-