MiR-409-5p as a Regulator of Neurite Growth Is Down Regulated in APP/PS1 Murine Model of Alzheimer’s Disease
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a heterogeneous neurodegenerative disease.
Recent studies suggest that miRNA expression changes are associated with the development of AD.
Our previous study showed that the expression level of miR-409-5p was stably downregulated in the early stage of APP/PS1 double transgenic mice model of AD.
We now report that miR-409-5p impairs neurite outgrowth, decreases neuronal viability, and accelerates the progression of Aβ 1-42 -induced pathologies.
In this study, we found that Aβ 1-42 peptide significantly decreased the expression of miR-409-5p, which was consistent with the expression profile of miR-409-5p in the APP/PS1 mice cortexes.
Plek was confirmed to be a potential regulatory target of miR-409-5p by luciferase assay and Western blotting.
Overexpression of miR-409-5p has an obvious neurotoxicity in neuronal cell viability and differentiation, whereas Plek overexpression could partially rescue neurite outgrowth from this toxicity.
Some cytoskeleton regulatory proteins have been found to be related to AD pathogenesis.
Our data show some clues that cytoskeletal reorganization may play roles in AD pathology.
The early downregulation of miR-409-5p in AD progression might be a self-protective reaction to alleviate the synaptic damage induced by Aβ, which may be used as a potential early biomarker of AD.

INTRODUCTION
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the most common cause of dementia in the elderly.
It is an irreversible neurodegenerative disorder, with the hallmarks of senile plaques, neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs), and neuronal loss
Clinical symptoms of AD include loss of recent memory, faulty judgment, personality changes, and progressive loss of reasoning power
Although it has been widely explored, the exact pathogenesis of AD remains to be elucidated.
MicroRNAs (miRs) are double-stranded RNAs that play regulatory roles in protein expression
miRs-regulated protein expression plays important roles in AD pathogenesis, and miRs have the potential to be a more sensitive approach for detection and management of AD
Cytoskeletal abnormalities and synaptic impairment are typical in amyloid β (Aβ)-induced stress
miRs have the ability to regulate cytoskeletal changes in many diseases especially cancers
Cytoskeleton plays a vital role in the maintenance of the nervous system through adulthood.
The changes of neurofilaments and microtubule-associated proteins have been linked to a variety of neurodegenerative diseases
At early stages of AD, it has been known that cytoskeleton is disrupted in neurons.
Tau protein is hyperphosphorylated in AD, which results in tangle formation and abnormal microtubule assembly
Besides tau, many other proteins involved in the regulation of cytoskeleton might be related to AD pathogenesis
Our previous studies also showed that miRNAs that regulated neurite outgrowth were also involved in Aβ-induced neuronal impairment
The whole transcriptome sequencing showed that some cytoskeletonrelated proteins were upregulated in cortexes of APPswe/PS1 E9 double transgenic mice (APP/PS1 mice) when compared with age-matched control mice (NCBI GEO database: GSE87550), including RAS-like family 12 (Rasl12), pleckstrin (Plek), and syndecan binding protein 2 (Sdcbp2).
Plek could induce cytoskeletal reorganization via a rac-dependent pathway
Syndecan family members, in concert with Sdcbp2 (Syndecan Binding Protein 2, Syntenin2), may mediate apoE-dependent neurite outgrowth by interacting with actin filament
In this study, we investigate the role of miR-409-5p in neurite outgrowth regulation by targeting Plek, which may contribute to the synaptic failure and cognitive dysfunction in AD.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Reagents
Rabbit polyclonal antibodies against Plek (12506-1-AP) and SDCBP2 (10407-1-AP) were from ProteinTech Company.
Rabbit polyclonal antibody against α-tubulin (#2144) was from Cell Signaling Technologies.
Mouse monoclonal antibody against β-tubulin III (T8575), the secondary goat anti-rabbit IgG antibody (A9169), and Aβ 1-42 (03111) were from Sigma.
The mimic or inhibitors of miR-409-5p were synthesized by RiboBio Company.

Plasmid Construction
The 3 UTR fragments of mouse Plek and Sdcbp2 were amplified by PCR from a mouse cDNA library.
PCR amplicon was cloned into psiCHECK2 vector between XhoI and NotI sites using a ClonExpress R II One Step Cloning Kit (Vazyme).
For luciferase activity assay, we introduced mutations on each miR-409-5p miR binding site by overlap PCR.
Mouse Plek cDNA was amplified by PCR and cloned into PTGFP vector (a modified vector form pEGFP-C1) by XhoI and EcoRI sites.
All of the primer sequences were shown in Table
The sequences of all constructs were confirmed by DNA sequencing.

Animals
The APPswe/PS1 E9 double transgenic mice contained two mutated human genes, APP695 with Swedish mutation K595N/M596L and Presenilin1 without exon9 (PS1 E9).
The mice originally came from the Jackson Laboratory
The experimental protocol, approved by the Committee for the Ethics of Animal Experiments, Shenzhen-Peking University-The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology Medical Center (SPHMC) (protocol number 2011-004), was performed as described before

Cell Cultures and Transfection
PC12 cells, Neuro2A cells, and HEK293T cells were cultured as described before
Primary hippocampal neurons were prepared from embryonic day 18.5 embryos of C57B6 mice.
The hippocampi were dissected, minced, and trypsinized.
Neurons were seeded on Petri dishes coated by poly-D-lysine (Sigma) and cultured in neurobasal medium (Life Technologies) containing 2% B27 (Life Technologies) and 0.5 mM L-glutamine in a humidified incubator at 37 • C with 5% CO 2 .
PC12 cells, Neuro2A cells, or primary hippocampal neurons were transfected with miR-409-5p mimic or inhibitor by ViaFect Transfection Reagent (Promega) according to the manufacturer's instructions.
Aβ 1-42 Treatment
Aβ 1-42 (03111, Sigma) was dissolved with 1% ammonium hydroxide by pipette mixing, followed by diluting to 200 µM in PBS.
The diluted Aβ 1-42 was incubated at 37 • C overnight to induce aggregation before use.
The aggregated Aβ 1-42 was diluted to 4-10 µM as the final concentration with culture medium and treated to the cells.
Cell toxicity induced by Aβ 1-42 was detected in primary-cultured hippocampal neurons (Supplementary Figure

Cell Viability Assay
Five thousand hippocampal neurons were plated in each well in a 96-well plate.
Two hundred nanomolar of miR-409-5p was transfected.
Forty-eight hours after transfection, hippocampal neurons were incubated with CellTiter 96 AQueous (Promega) for 4 h to form insoluble purple formazan.
Then, the absorbance at OD 490 was measured with an ELISA plate reader (BioRad).
All experiments were repeated at least three times.

Luciferase Reporter Assay
293T cells were cotransfected with wild-type (WT) or mutated psiCHECK-Plek-3 UTR or psiCHECK-Sdcbp2-3 UTR and miR-409-5p for 24 h.
Cell lysate was harvested, and the luciferase reporter gene assay kit (Promega) was used to measure the luciferase activities.
All experiments were repeated at least three times.

RNA Extraction and Real-Time PCR
Total RNA was extracted using TRIzol Reagent (Life Technologies) according to the manufacturer's instructions.
RNA quantity was measured by NanoDrop 2000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific).
cDNA was synthesized, and quantitative PCR (qPCR) was performed as described before
cDNA was synthesized from 100 ng of total RNA by miR-specific RT primers using a Reverse Transcription System (Promega).
qPCR was subsequently performed in triplicate with a 1:4 dilution of cDNA using the 2 × SYBR green SuperMix (Bio-Rad) on a CFX96 Touch Real-Time PCR Detection System (Bio-Rad).
The expression level of miR-409-5p was normalized against that of U6.
Glyceraldehyde-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) was used as the control of Plek and Sdcbp2 mRNA quantification.
Data were collected and analyzed with the Bio-Rad software using 2 -Ct method for quantification of the relative expression levels.
The primer sequences were shown in Table
All experiments were repeated at least three times.

Western Blotting
Cells were lysed in RIPA buffer with protease inhibitor cocktail (Thermo Scientific) on ice for half an hour.
Brain lysate was harvested and subjected to SDS-PAGE as described before
Gel-separated proteins were then transferred to NC membrane followed by Western blotting with a primary antibody 1:200 at 4 • C overnight and a horseradish peroxidase-conjugated secondary antibody 1:5,000 for 2 h at room temperature.
Signals were developed with the Super Signal West Pico Chemiluminescent Substrate (Thermo Scientific).
Optical density

Primer name Sequence
was quantified by Quantity One (Bio-Rad).
ImageJ software was used to quantify the gray degree values.

Fluorescence Immunostaining
Cells were fixed for 30 min at room temperature in a 4% PFA solution and then permeabilized and blocked in PBS containing 1% BSA, 4% goat serum, and 0.4% Triton X-100 for 30 min at room temperature.
The primary antibody (anti-β-tubulin III, 1:500, Sigma, mouse monoclonal antibody) at 4 • C was used to incubate cells overnight, followed by fluorescence-conjugated secondary antibody (anti-mouse 555, 1:500, Jackson Immuno Research) for 2 h at room temperature.
Finally, cells were stained with DAPI for 5 min, then washed with PBS followed by deionized water and mounted with antifade mounting medium (Beyotime).
Images of neurons were captured by a Zeiss LSM 710 confocal microscope with a 40 × objective.
Images were analyzed with Zen 2012 (Zeiss) and ImageJ (NIH).

Quantification of Neurite Outgrowth
In the morphological study of cells, length of the longest neurite and total neurite length were measured to quantify neurite outgrowth using ImageJ software.
For each measurement, at least 100 cells were counted from randomly selected fields.
Each experiment was repeated at least three times.
The total number of tip ends was counted to represent the number of neurites from individual cells.

Computational Analysis of miR-409-5p Targets
The target genes for miR-409-5p were predicted by four databases: miRDB 1 , mi-Randa 2 , DIANA microT-CDS (v5) 3 , and targetScan 4 .
To narrow down the pool of the potential targets, the p-value threshold and the microthreshold were set to be 0.05 and 0.7, respectively.
Venn tool 5 was used to take the intersection of the four database target genes.
The biological functions and the annotation of KEGG pathways of the intersection genes were analyzed by Gene Ontology 6 and DIANA, respectively.

Statistical Analyses
Data are expressed as the mean ±SD.
Statistical comparisons were made using SPSS 20.0 software.
Unpaired t-test was used to analyze differences between two groups, ANOVA followed by post hoc analysis using Dunnett's test was used among multiple groups, and two-way ANOVA was used to analyze differences among different ages of WT and APP/PS1 mice.
P-value < 0.05 is considered statistically significant.

RESULTS
The Expression of miR-409-5p Was Significantly Decreased in Both APP/PS1 Mice and Oligomeric Aβ 1-42 -Treated Cells
In the AD mouse model, APP/PS1 double transgenic mice cortexes, we further verified the previous result that the expression level of miR-409-5p was stably downregulated in 4to 12-month-old APP/PS1 cortexes (Figure
To investigate the role of Aβ 1-42 in miR-409-5p downregulation, we treated Aβ 1-42 to differentiated PC12 cells and found that the expression level of miR-409-5p was reduced significantly after 12-h treatment (Figure
6

MiR-409-5p Reduced Neuronal Survival
The overexpression and knocking-down effect of miR-409-5p mimic and inhibitor was shown in Supplementary Figure
We transfected miR-409-5p mimic or inhibitor to cultured hippocampal neurons and found that miR-409-5p overexpression significantly reduced the cell viability.
However, its inhibitor did not have any effect (Figure
Then, we treated Aβ 1-42 to miR-409-5p-overexpressed or inhibited neurons.
It was shown that miR-409-5p mimic aggravated the damage induced by Aβ 1-42 , but the miRNA inhibitor cannot rescue from cell death (Figure
This result indicates that miR-409-5p is toxic for neuronal cells, but blocking of this miRNA is not sufficient for cell survival.

MiR-409-5p Reduced Neurite Outgrowth
In order to know the role of miR-409-5p in neuronal differentiation, we tested its expression levels along cell differentiation in two neuron-like cell lines, Neuro2A cells and PC12 cells.
Along with RA/NGF-induced cell differentiation, miR-409-5p had a slight increase but without significant difference (Supplementary Figure
Then we transfected its mimic or inhibitor to two neuron-like cell lines, Neuro2A cells (Figures
In primary cultured hippocampal neurons, there was a similar effect.
MiR-409-5p mimic can decrease both the neurite length and neurite numbers and further aggravated the Aβ 1-42 damage on neurite differentiation (Figures
Interestingly, the inhibitor of miR-409-5p can not only increase the neurite outgrowth but also partially rescue the Aβ 1-42 -induced neurite impairment (

Searching of miR-409-5p Potential Targets
To elucidate the mechanisms of miR-409-5p on regulating the neurite outgrowth and neuronal survival, we searched different databases to explore the miR-409-5p target genes (Supplementary Table
As shown in Figure
The biological functions of the intersection genes were analyzed by Gene Ontology (GO) (Figure
The GO analysis showed that target genes mainly participated in posttranscriptional regulation.
The KEGG pathway analysis indicated that target genes were enriched in actin cytoskeleton regulation, endocytosis, and ErbB signaling pathway.
To further narrow down the pool of the potential targets, among the 139 target genes, those that had more than 1.2-fold upregulated expression in APP/PS1 mice by a whole transcriptome sequencing previously performed
Finally, we got nine genes as shown in Table
As Plek and sdcbp2 were reported to be involved in the regulation of actin cytoskeleton
The 3 UTRs of Plek and Sdcbp2 were analyzed by miRanda database.
Database prediction indicated that Plek had two miR-409-5p binding sites in its 3 UTR and Sdcbp2 had one (Figure
To explore the potential role of miR-409-5p in translational regulation of target genes, we cotransfected a luciferase reporter construct containing different fragments of Plek 3 UTR or Sdcbp2 3 UTR together with miR-409-5p.
Cotransfection of miR-409-5p resulted in a decrease in luciferase activity when with the expression of Plek 3 UTR
To further narrow down the pool of the potential targets, the 139 target genes were intersected again with upregulated genes (fold changes >1.2) in APP/PS1 mice by a whole transcriptome sequencing previously done in our laboratory.
full-length fragment containing site I and Sdcbp2 3 UTR (Figures
We also generated site-directed mutations on Plek 3 UTR site I and Sdcbp2 3 UTR, and the luciferase activity inhibition disappeared.
We found that miR-409-5p significantly suppressed Plek mRNA and protein expression level in primary cultured mouse hippocampal neurons (Figures
Our results indicated that Plek might be one of the miR-409-5p target genes.
Plek Is Upregulated in AD Mice Brains and Rescues miR-409-5p-Induced Neurite Impairment
At different developmental stages of APP/PS1 transgenic mice, we examined the expression of Plek in mouse cortexes.
Interestingly, Plek level was increased only at 12-month-old mice and had no significant differences at other stages (Figure
Sdcbp2 had a little bit of increase in 6-to 12-month-old APP/PS1 mice when compared with that in age-matched WT mice, but without significant difference (Figure
In PC12 cells, overexpression of Plek cannot increase the neurite length; however, when Plek was overexpressed together with miR-409-5p, it could partially rescue the miR-409-5p-induced neurite impairment (Figures

DISCUSSION
MiRNAs are abundantly expressed in brain and play essential roles in the maintenance of neuronal functions.
During AD development, miRNA expression profile might indicate disease progress.
In our study, we found that the level of miR-409-5p was stably downregulated from the early stage in APP/PS1 mice, which is consistent with the previous miRNA expression results of Aβ-treated primary hippocampal neurons
This suggested that miR-409-5p level may be regulated by Aβ and involved in AD pathogenesis.
In our study, we found both in Aβ-treated cells and APP/PS mice, miR-409-5p was predominantly downregulated at a very early stage, indicating that it may potentially affect important biological pathways essential for proper brain function relevant to AD.
How Aβ regulates miR-409-5p at early stages of AD is still unclear.
The possible mechanisms include (1) the maturation process of miRNAs contains multiple steps, with multiple proteins  affecting miRNA processing efficiency, which offer a plethora of regulatory options at both transcriptional and posttranscriptional levels
Aβ-related signal pathways may interfere with the multiple steps involved in the production of mature miRNAs.
(2) miRNA turnover may be rapid, and Aβ may interfere with decay rate of miR-409-5p by inducing a rapid activation of miRNA-specific exoribonucleases, such as the 3 → 5 exonuclease SDN1 and the 5 → 3 exoribonuclease XRN-2 or other unknown nucleases
Integrity of the cytoskeleton is a prerequisite for function and survival of neurons.
The morphology of neuronal axons and dendrites is dependent on the dynamics of the cytoskeleton
Synapse loss and neuronal death are uneven within the AD
Our data showed that miR-409-5p is highly neurotoxic.
Overexpression of miR-409-5p inhibited the growth of neurites and reduced the cell viability of cultured neurons.
As the KEGG pathway analyzed that the targets of miR-409-5p are enriched in the regulation of actin cytoskeleton and synapse, miR-409-5p may regulate neurite growth via its target genes, including Plek.
Therefore, miR-409-5p may inhibit neurite outgrowth by targeting Plek and other cytoskeleton-related genes.
How cytoskeleton regulation may be involved in AD progression needs more study.
The early downregulation of miR-409-5p seems like a selfprotective reaction by neurons to alleviate the synaptic damage induced by Aβ.
However, although Plek is also slightly increased from 6-month-old AD mice, it is not comparable with the miR-409-5p decrease.
As Plek is an important protein in cytoskeleton reorganization, its expression change might be limited to some special subcellular locations such as dendrites and synapses.
We still need more investigation to further understand the function of Plek in AD development.
Taken together, we found that the expression level of miR-409-5p was stably downregulated in the early stage of APP/PS1 mice.
Aβ 1-42 peptide significantly decreased the expression of miR-409-5p.
The downregulation of miR-409-5p at early stages of AD may be a self-protective effect, and it may be used as an early biomarker of AD.


) and PC12 cells (Figures3E-H).
Overexpression of miR-409-5p significantly decreased the longest neurite length (Figures3B,F, white bars) and total neurite length (Figures3C,G, white bars).
Consistently, inhibition of miR-409-5p induced the increase of both the longest and total neurite length (Figures3B,C,F,G, black bars).
However, neither mimic nor inhibitor of miR-409-5p can affect the neurite branch numbers (Figures



FIGURE 1 |
FIGURE 1 | MiR-409-5p was significantly decreased in APP/PS1 mouse and oligomeric Aβ 1-42 peptide-treated cells.
(A) Relative expression levels of miR-409-5pwere quantified by RT-qPCR in cortex tissues of APP/PS1 and wild-type (WT) mice from 2 to 12 months (4-6 mice for each age).
The levels were normalized to the expression of snRNAU6.
The results were shown as the mean ± SD ( * p < 0.05, n = 3).
Two-way ANOVA was used to analyze differences.
(B) PC12 cells had differentiated for 48 h.
The diluted Aβ 1-42 was incubated at 37 • C overnight to induce aggregation, then 4 µM oligomeric Aβ 1-42 per well in differentiation medium of PC12 cells.
Relative expression level of miR-409-5p was examined by RT-qPCR at different time points.
The results were shown as the mean ± SD ( * * p < 0.01, * * * p < 0.001).
The experiment was repeated independently for three times.
ANOVA followed by post hoc analysis using Dunnett's test was used to analyze differences.



FIGURE 2 |
FIGURE 2 | MiR-409-5p and oligomeric Aβ 1-42 peptide significantly decreased neuronal viability.
(A) Mouse primary cultured hippocampal neurons were transfected with miR-409-5p mimic or inhibitor before culturing.
Three days later, the MTS/PMS assay was performed to evaluate the cell viability.
(B) Mouse primary cultured hippocampal neurons were transfected with miR-409-5p mimic or inhibitor.
Forty-eight hours later, the cells were treated with 10 µM oligomeric Aβ 1-42 for another 24 h.
MTS/PMS assay was performed to evaluate the cell viability.
The results were shown as the mean ± SD ( * p < 0.05, * * p < 0.01).
The experiment was repeated independently for three times.
Unpaired t-test was used to analyze differences.



FIGURE 3 |
FIGURE 3 | MiR-409-5p slightly aggravated the insult of Aβ 1-42 on neurite growth and branching in neuronal-like cell lines.
Neuro2A (A-D) or PC12 (E-H) cells were transfected with PEGFP-C2 (0.5 µg) and miR-409-5p mimic (100 nM) or inhibitor (100 nM).
After 3 days, cells were fixed and immunostained with anti-β-tubulin III antibody.
The longest neurite length, total neurite length, and branch numbers were quantified of by ImageJ software.
The results were shown as the mean ± SD ( * * p < 0.01).
The experiment was repeated independently for three times.
Red, β-tubulin III; Green, GFP; Yellow, merged.
Unpaired t-test was used to analyze differences.



FIGURE 5 |
FIGURE 5 | The potential targets of miR-409-5p.
(A) The target genes of miR-409-5p were hunted by four prediction databases: miRDB, miRanda, DIANA, and TargetScan.
There are 139 target genes intersected in more than two databases by Venn tool.
(B,C) Then the biological functions of the intersection genes were analyzed by Gene Ontology, and the KEGG pathways were predicted by DIANA (Table3).
To further narrow down the pool of the potential targets, the 139 target genes were intersected again with upregulated genes (fold changes >1.2) in APP/PS1 mice by a whole transcriptome sequencing previously done in our laboratory.



FIGURE 6 |
FIGURE 6 | Plek and Sdcbp2 might be the targets of miR-409-5p.
(A) The wild-type (WT) and mutated plek or Sdcbp2 binding sites with miR-409-5p.
(B) Relative Renilla/luciferase luminescence of a psiCHECK2 vector construct harboring Plek or mutant Plek cotransfected with miR-409-5p in the HEK 293T cells, with empty psiCHECK2 vector as control.
(C) Relative Renilla/luciferase luminescence of a psiCHECK2 vector construct harboring Sdcbp2 or mutant Sdcbp2 cotransfected with miR-409-5p in the HEK 293T cells, with empty psiCHECK2 vector as control.
The results were shown as the mean ± SD ( * p < 0.05, * * p < 0.01).
The experiment was repeated independently for at least three times.
(D,E) MiR-409-5p mimic (100 nM) or inhibitor (100 nM) was transfected into Neuro-2a cells.
After 24 h, plek and sdcbp2 mRNA levels were assessed by RT-qPCR.
(F,G) Western blot analysis of Plek and SDCBP2 protein level in primary cortical neurons transfected with miR-409-5p mimic (100 nM) or inhibitor (100 nM) for 72 h.
ImageJ software was used to quantify the gray degree values of Plek and SDCBP2.
All results were shown as the mean ± SD ( * p < 0.05).
The experiment was repeated independently for three times.
Unpaired t-test was used to analyze differences.



FIGURE 7 |
FIGURE 7 | Expression levels of Plek and Sdcbp2 in APP/PS1 cortex.
(A,B) The relative expression levels of plek and sdcbp2 were examined by RT-qPCR analysis in 4-to 12-month-old APP/PS1 and WT mice cortices (4-6 mice for each age).
Two-way ANOVA was used to analyze differences.
* p < 0.05.



TABLE 1 |
Sequences of synthesized miR mimics/inhibitors or siRNA.



TABLE 2 |
Sequence of the primers used for real-time PCR.



TABLE 3 |
Nine genes potential target genes.