Alzheimer's disease drug development pipeline: 2020
Introduction: Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a growing public health concern affecting millions of patients worldwide and costing billions of dollars annually.
We review the pipeline of drugs and biologics in clinical trials for the treatment of AD.
We use the Common Alzheimer's and Related Dementias Research Ontology (CADRO) to classify treatment targets and mechanisms of action.
We review our annual pipeline reports for the past 5 years to provide longitudinal insight into clinical trials and drug development for AD.
Methods: We reviewed ClinicalTrials.gov
as of February 27, 2020, and identified all trials of pharmacologic agents currently being developed for treatment of AD as represented on this widely used U.S. Food and Drug Administration registry.
Results: There are 121 agents in clinical trials for the treatment of AD.
Twenty-nine agents are in 36 Phase 3 trials, 65 agents are in 73 Phase 2 trials, and 27 agents are in 27 Phase 1 trials.
Twelve agents in trials target cognitive enhancement and 12 are intended to treat neuropsychiatric and behavioral symptoms.
There are 97 agents in disease modification trials.
Compared to the 2019 pipeline, there is an increase in the number of disease-modifying agents targeting pathways other than amyloid or tau.
Discussion: The 2020 pipeline has innovations in clinical trials and treatment targets that provide hope for greater success in AD drug development programs.
Review of clinical trials over the past 5 years show that there is progressive emphasis on nonamyloid targets, including candidate treatments for inflammation, synapse and neuronal protection, vascular factors, neurogenesis, and epigenetic interventions.
There has been a marked growth in repurposed agents in the pipeline.
preventing, delaying the onset, slowing the progression, and improving the symptoms of AD are urgently needed.
This annual review describes the pipeline of drugs in development for AD; discusses innovations in drug development; and provides an update on new targets, drugs, and biomarkers represented in current clinical trials.
We call attention to notable recent advances in the field.
This is the 5th year of the pipeline review, presenting an opportunity to describe changes in AD drug development from a longitudinal perspective.
4]
The CADRO identifies the following potential targets for AD from early-stage to late-stage clinical drug development: amyloid, tau, apolipoprotein E (apoE)/lipids/lipoprotein receptors, neurotransmitter receptors, neurogenesis, inflammation, oxidative stress, cell death, proteostasis/proteinopathies, metabolism/bioenergetics, vasculature, growth factors/hormones, synaptic plasticity/neuroprotection, epigenetics, and "others."
While this classification was not conceived primarily as a means of capturing drug mechanisms, the CADRO systematizes the processes of AD that are the current drug targets relevant to AD and provides a framework for classifying treatment mechanisms.
We reclassified the drug mechanisms from previous reviews using the CADRO approach.
Some agents have more than one mechanism of action and, in these cases, we noted both mechanisms and depended on the available literature to identify a dominant mechanism.
Infection and immunity were not included in the original CADRO system and we included any agents targeting infection or immunity with inflammation for the purpose of this review.
We kept the terminology of "symptomatic" treatments for agents whose purpose was cognitive enhancement or control of neuropsychiatric symptoms without claiming to impact the biological causes of cell death in AD, and we used "disease-modifying" for treatments intended to change the biology of AD and produce neuroprotection (often through a variety of intermediate mechanisms such as effects or amyloid or tau).
is now recognized to have preclinical, prodromal, and dementia phases,

METHODS
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) website ClinicalTrials.gov is the source of information for this review.
The "Common
Rule" governing ClinicalTrials.gov
requires registration on this site of all trials from sponsors with an investigational new drug (IND)   or investigational new device (IDE) being assessed in the United States.
Compliance with the required trial registration is high among trial sponsors.
3]
website, and our review is not an exhaustive listing of every clinical trial or every drug in trials for the treatment of AD.
The United States has more clinical

HIGHLIGHTS
• In 2020, there are 121 unique therapies in clinical trials for Alzheimer's disease (AD) as registered on clinicaltrials.gov.
• The largest number of drugs in the AD pipeline are putative disease-modifying agents targeting disease onset or progression.
• There is a growing number of repurposed agents (approved from non-AD indication) in the pipeline; repurposed agents now comprise 43% of the pipeline.
• The total number of participants required for currently recruiting trials is 31,314.

RESEARCH IN CONTEXT
1. Systematic review: We reviewed all drugs currently in clinical trials for Alzheimer's disease (AD) listed in the federal government database, ClinicalTrials.gov.
This pipeline report is based on trials present on ClinicalTrials.gov
as of February 27, 2020; the tables and text of the review apply to the information available at that time.
On average, clinical trial results are published in peer-reviewed literature 25 months after completion of the trial,
We include and not yet recruiting.
We did not include trials listed as completed, suspended, unknown, or withdrawn.
Information on these trials and reasons for their current status are often not publicly revealed.
We do not include terminated trials in the analyses; we comment on them if the information is publicly available but is not yet reflected on ClinicalTrials.gov.
We do not include trials of non-pharmacologic therapeutic approaches such as cognitive therapies, caregiver interventions, supplements, and medical foods.
We do not include trials of biomarkers; we note whether biomarkers were used in the trials discussed.
We include stem cell therapies among the interventions reviewed (they are not integrated into Figure
We used the search terms "Alzheimer's" as the condition/disease and "interventional studies" as the study type, and included trials in include healthy participants and some trials list "healthy" as the condition/disease rather than listing both "Alzheimer's" and "healthy."
These trials may have escaped capture in our search.
Drug targets and mechanisms of action (MOA) are important aspects of this review.
MOA of listed agents was determined from the information on ClinicalTrials.gov
or from a comprehensive literature search.
In a few cases, the mechanism is undisclosed and could not be identified in the literature; we note these agents as having an "unknown" or "undisclosed" MOA.
We grouped the mechanisms into symptomatic agents or disease-modifying therapies (DMTs).
We divided the symptomatic agents into those that are putative cognitive enhancing agents or those that address neuropsychiatric and behavioral symptoms.
DMTs were divided into small molecules or biologics, including immunotherapies.
DMTs were further categorized using the CADRO system.
The distinction between symptomatic and diseasemodifying agents can be arbitrary, and some agents may have both properties.
For purposes of this review, we chose what appears to be the principal MOA.

RESULTS

Overview
As of February 27, 2020, there were 121 agents in 136 trials of AD therapies.
Figure
Twelve (9.9%) agents in trials target cognitive enhancement and 12 (9.9%)
are intended to treat neuropsychiatric and behavioral symptoms.
There are 97 (80.2%) agents that intend to achieve disease modification; 16 (16.5%) of these have amyloid and 11 (11.3%) have tau as the primary target or as one of several effects seen in non-clinical or previous clinical studies.
Six of the anti-amyloid agents are small molecules and ten are monoclonal antibodies or biological therapies.
Anti-tau agents include four small molecules and seven biologics.

Phase 3
In Phase 3 there are 29 agents in 36 trials (Figures
17.6%), metabolism and bioenergetics (n = 2; 11.8%), vasculature (n = 2; 5.9%), and synaptic plasticity/neuroprotection (n = 4; 23.5%).
Of the drugs with amyloid targets, there were five immunotherapies and one anti-aggregation agent.
Figure
8]
In Phase

Phase 2
Phase 2 has a larger number of therapies with more diverse mechanisms that are being assessed compared to the Phase 3 repertoire of agents.
There are 65 agents in 73 trials (Figure
There are 15 small molecules with synaptic plasticity/neuroprotection as one of the mechanisms (27.3% of DMTs).
Four of the biologics and seven of the small molecules have inflammation/infection/immunity as their mechanism (20% of DMTs).
Among other CADRO mechanisms represented in Phase 2, there were two agents targeting proteostasis/proteinopathies, six agents with metabolism and bioenergetic targets, four agents addressing vascular factors, one hormonal agent, and two epigenetic agents.
Of the drugs with amyloid targets, there were four immunotherapies, two anti-aggregation agents, one alphasecretase modulator, and one involving amyloid clearance.
Figure
Twenty-three (42%) of the

Phase 1
Phase 1 has 27 agents in 27 trials (Figure
Phase 1 trials have an average duration of 116 weeks (recruitment and treatment period) and include a mean number of 43 participants in each trial.

Trial sponsors
Across all trials, 46% are sponsored by the biopharma industry, 39% by academic medical centers (with funding from NIH, industry, and/or other entities), and 15% by others.
Abbreviations: AAV, adeno-associated virus; Aβ, amyloid beta; ADDF, Alzheimer's Drug Discovery Foundation; ApoE, apolipoprotein E; CADRO, Common Alzheimer's Disease and Related Disorders Research Ontology; CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; CSF-1R, colony-stimulating factor 1 receptor; DMT, disease-modifying therapy; GABA, gamma-aminobutyric acid; hTERT, human telomerase reverse transcriptase; NIA, National Institute on Aging; RIPK1, receptor-interacting serine/threonine-protein kinase 1; SGLT2, sodium glucose co-transporter 2; SIGLEC-3, sialic acid-binding Ig-like lectin 3; SNRI, serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor; SSRI, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor; TREM2, triggering receptor expressed on myeloid cells 2. Note: Twenty-seven agents in 27 Phase 1 clinical trials currently ongoing as of February 27, 2020 according to ClinicalTrials.gov.
Note: Bolded terms represent new agents into the 2020 Phase 1 pipeline since 2019.
academic medical centers (with funding from NIH, industry, and/or other entities), and 6 trials (11%) are by other entities.
Figure

Trial locations
Clinical trials require many sites to participate in trials to recruit a sufficient number of participants in a short enough period of time to make  the trial feasible.
Figure

Clinical trial recruitment
When considering the total number of sites involved in Phase 3 DMT trials, the total number of participants to be recruited, and the average number of months allowed for recruitment, the calculated average productivity of sites is 0.19 participants/site/month.
In trials of symptomatic agents in Phase 3, the calculated average productivity of sites is 0.25 participants/site/month.
Some types of trials are more difficult to enroll: Phase 3 prevention trials involving asymptomatic at-risk individuals treated with disease-modifying agents recruit at a rate of 0.26 participants/site/month; prodromal/mild AD trials recruit at a rate of 0.16 participants/site/month; and mild-to-moderate AD dementia trials have a rate of 0.29 participants/site/month.
The total number of participants required for all currently recruiting trials is 31,314 participants.

Trial completion date
Thirty-six trials are listed as "completed" on ClinicalTrials.gov
since our last report in 2019.
The actual completion date of a trial is typically much later than the anticipated completion date at trial initiation.
The mean difference between the actual completion date and the anticipated completion date was 30 weeks for completed trials in Phase 1, 32 weeks for Phase 2, and 72 weeks for Phase 3, respectively.

Biomarkers
Table

Trial entry criteria and primary outcomes
The initiation of prevention trials in preclinical patients and treatment trials of patients with very early symptoms of AD has led to new trial population definitions and novel outcome measures (Table
Entry criteria and outcomes must be appropriate to identify the population of interest.
As shown in Table

Longitudinal observations
Figure
Amyloid and tau mechanisms are further divided into small molecule therapies and monoclonal antibodies.
There is a trend for increasing diversification of the pipeline with a greater number of tau-targeted, anti-inflammatory, synaptic and neuroprotective, metabolic, neurogenesis, and epigenetic agents over the 5 years of observation.

DISCUSSION
The U.S. FDA approved 53 new novel therapies in 2019, including 48 new molecular entities and 3 therapies and 2 vaccines representing biological products.
Twelve agents for neurological disorders were among the 48 approved therapies.
There were three sleep disorder treatments; three drugs for psychiatric conditions; two anti-migraine therapies; two drugs for childhood neuromuscular disorders; and one treatment each for partial onset seizures, Parkinson's disease with excessive "off" episodes, and relapsing multiple sclerosis.
The two neuromuscular disorder therapies and the agent for relapsing multiple sclerosis can be regarded as DMTs.
The approved diagnostic tests included 18-F fluorodopa PET for the diagnosis of parkinsonian disorders.
There were no treatments approved in the United States for AD and no DMTs for any primary neurodegenerative disorder.
GV-971 (Oligomannate) became the first drug approved for treatment of AD since 2003.
3]
The agent had a successful Phase 1B trial demonstrating a dose-and time-dependency for Aß reduction with a beneficial impact on some clinical measures after 12 months of treatment.
o large Phase 3 clinical trials were initiated to confirm the clinical and biological effects.
A planned futility analysis concluded that continuing the trials was futile and both were stopped.
Further analyses that included participants exposed for longer periods of time at higher antibody doses indicated that aducanumab reduced brain amyloid and decreased the rate of decline on the CDR-sb, the pre-specified primary outcome.
On the basis of these analyses, the sponsor has initiated discussions with the FDA regarding marketing approval for aducanumab.
N2401, a monoclonal antibody targeting prefibrillar amyloid,
This agent has now entered Phase 3.
Crenezumab, a monoclonal antibody targeting oligomers, had a Phase 2 trial suggesting efficacy in participants with mild AD;
Crenezumab is being assessed in a prevention trial involving a Colombian kindred with autosomal dominant AD.
Verubecestat trials of mild-to-moderate AD and prodromal AD were discontinued for futility.
Atabecestat was stopped for hepatotoxicity.
Umibecestat (CNP520) was stopped when it was found to cause accelerated cognitive decline.
Elenbecestat trials were suspended for an unfavorable harm/benefit ratio.
Analyses of data from the verubecestat trial in prodromal AD showed increased cognitive decline and greater atrophy on volumetric MRI in the active treatment group.
trospective analyses of atabecestat also demonstrated increased cognitive impairment compared to the placebo group.
While it is possible that less complete BACE inhibition or use of BACE inhibitors earlier in the course of the AD continuum might define a niche for these agents, the cumulative evidence of cognitive toxicity makes it difficult to design development programs that ensure participant safety.
A 1-year, double-blind, placebo-controlled Phase 2 trial of edonerpic maleate (T-817MA)-an agent that in animal models protected against amyloid-induced neurotoxicity, promoted neurite outgrowth, and preserved hippocampal synapses in tau transgenic mice-had no clinical effect in participants with mild to moderate AD.
A Phase 2 trial of T-817MA has been initiated to evaluate the drug's effect on CSF-tau in patients with MCI due to AD or mild AD.
Intepirdine and idalopirdine are 5-HT6 inhibitors that failed to establish efficacy in recent trials and development of these agents was stopped.
In both cases, dosing issues remained unresolved by the trials.
Masuperdine (SUVN-502), another 5-HT6 inhibitor, completed a Phase 2 clinical trial in 2019 and was shown not to be efficacious for cognition in patients receiving donepezil and memantine.
Xanamem an 11-ß-hyrodroxysteroid receptor inhibitor whose development program was based on the adverse effects of steroids on hippocampal function and the evidence of steroid dysregulation in AD
The negative outcome was similar to that observed with an earlier drug in this class, ABT-854.
fections and inflammation are targeted by several drugs in the current pipeline.
COR388 antagonized gingipain produced by P. gingivalis and blocked Aβ 1-42 production, reduced neuroinflammation, and rescued neurons in the hippocampus of mice.
Substantial evidence links herpes virus infection to AD and valacyclovir targets this relationship.
GV-971 and rifaxamin may reduce brain inflammation through effects on the microbiome.
These trials are based on theories that infections or inflammation induced in other ways are central to causing or exacerbating AD.
The outcomes of the trials will help inform these underlying concepts.
Treatments for neuropsychiatric symptoms of AD had successes in 2019/2020.
The Harmony trial of pimavanserin for dementia-related psychosis (DRP) was discontinued early on the basis of a robust drugplacebo difference in patient relapse after withdrawal from drug or placebo in a relapse prevention trial.
This trial was unique in including five types of dementia with psychosis-AD, Parkinson's disease dementia, dementia with Lewy bodies, frontotemporal dementia, vascular dementia-and using a randomized withdrawal design to demonstrate drug efficacy.
There are several ongoing trials of agitation in AD.
A recently reported trial of nabilone (a partial agonist of cannabinoid receptors 1 and 2) showed reduced agitation and improvement on the MMSE but poorer cognition on the Severe Impairment Battery and sedation in association with active treatment compared to placebo.
A fixed dose and a flexible dose study of brexpiprazole for agitation in AD demonstrated that in both studies the 2 mg dose produced a significant reduction in agitation while the 1 mg dose did not.
A confirmatory trial is in progress.
Two trials of dextromethorphan/quinidine that had a positive Phase 2 trial
The selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) citalopram has previously shown to reduce agitation in AD but also prolonged the QT inter-
val.
An ongoing study will assess the effects of the S(+)-enantiomer escitalopram using an identical study design.
somnia in AD, a major challenge for patients and caregivers, was
shown to respond to treatment with suvorexant, a dual orexin antagonist, in a randomized clinical trial.
The trial demonstrated that participants receiving active therapy had increased time asleep and decreased wakefulness after sleep onset (WASO).
The package insert has been modified to include the efficacy findings and the side effects observed in the AD trial.
Proof-of-concept (POC) trials are essential as a means of generating data to inform go/no go decisions for larger trials.
Rasagiline, an agent approved for the treatment of motor disturbances in Parkinson's disease, was assessed in a POC trial using fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG)
PET as the primary outcome.
The pre-specified primary outcome was met, with less decline of metabolism in the group receiving active treatment.
Another monoamine oxidase inhibitor-ladostigil-that has neuroprotective effects in cell preparations and animal models was found not to delay the progression from MCI to AD dementia when given in low doses for 3 years.
purposed agents are increasingly included in the AD drug development pipeline.
7]
Figure
This reflects the recognition that the amnestic dementia phenotype is a phenocopy without corresponding AD-continuum pathology in 20% to 30% of patients.
Demonstration of the presence of AD pathology creates the appropriate population for assessment for agents that require AD-related biological targets for their mechanism of action.
Basket trials can improve efficiency by including more than one disorder that has a characteristic biomarker or endophenotype.
TPI-287 was assessed in a basket trial comprised of patients with tau pathology including AD, PSP, and corticobasal degeneration.
The trial of pimavanserin used a basket trial strategy with five types of dementia.
Basket trials can facilitate recruitment by having less narrow inclusion criteria, provide insight into the responsiveness of different conditions to the intervention, and facilitate understanding of the biology of the diseases involved in the studies.
e World Health Organization registry indicates that there are 170



2 .
Interpretation: There are 121 agents in clinical trials for the treatment for AD.
Ninety-seven of these drugs are disease-modifying agents intended to change the underlying biology of AD.
Twelve of the drugs are putative cognitive enhancing agents, and 12 are being developed for the treatment of neuropsychiatric symptoms.
Over the past 5 years, there has been an increase in the number of disease-modification treatment candidates, greater diversification of the targets for drugs in the pipeline, more repurposed agents, and greater integration of biomarkers into development programs.
3. Future directions: Progress is occurring in new drug development for AD with potential new treatments for cognitive decline, insomnia, and psychosis.
Trial methodology is being advanced, improved biomarkers to report on drug effects are emerging, and novel outcomes and designs reflect innovations that are assisting in development of new treatments for AD.
trials than any other nation; ClinicalTrials.gov
includes the majority of agents currently in clinical trials for AD globally.
Phase 1 trials are often conducted outside the United States and may not be captured on clinicaltrials.gov.
Comparison to the World Health Organization registry suggests that clinicaltrials.gov
includes 90% of worldwide Phase 3 trials; 86% of global Phase 2 trials; 43% of Phase 1 trials.



F I G U R E 1
Agents in clinical trials for treatment of Alzheimer's disease in 2020 (from ClinicalTrials.gov
as of February 27, 2020.
The inner ring shows Phase 3 agents; the middle ring is comprised of Phase 2 agents; the outer ring presents Phase 1 compounds; agents in green areas are biologics; agents in purple are disease-modifying small molecules; agents in orange areas are symptomatic agents addressing cognitive enhancement or behavioral and neuropsychiatric symptoms; the shape of the icon shows the population of the trial; the icon color shows the class of target for the agent.
Agents underlined are new to the pipeline since 2019 (Figure by Mike de la Flor) all trials of all agents in Phase 1, 2, and 3; if trials are presented as Phase 1/2 or Phase 2/3 in the ClinicalTrials.gov
database we use that terminology in the review.
Our trial database tracks trial title; trial number in ClinicalTrials.gov;
beginning date; projected end date; primary completion date; actual end date if completed or terminated; calculated trial duration; duration of treatment exposure; number of subjects planned for enrollment; number of arms of the study (usually a placebo arm and one or more treatment arms with different doses); whether a biomarker was described; whether the agent was repurposed; subject characteristics (inclusion and exclusion criteria); trial location; assessment tools used for outcome measures; and sponsorship (a biopharmaceutical company, National Institutes of Health [NIH], academic medical center, "other" entity such as a consortium, a philanthropic organization or other federal agencies, or a combination of these sponsors).
We used the ClinicalTrials.gov
labeling and included trials that were recruiting, active but not recruiting (eg, trials that have completed recruiting and are continuing with the exposure portion of the trial), enrolling by invitation (eg, open label extension trials),



F I G U R E 2
Mechanisms of action of agents in Phase 3 of the Alzheimer's disease drug development pipeline (ClinicalTrials.gov
accessed February 27, 2020) (Figure by Mike de la Flor) Phase 1, Phase 1/2, Phase 2, Phase 2/3, and Phase 3. Most Phase 1 trials


Abbreviations: ADCS, Alzheimer's disease cooperative study; ATRI, Alzheimer's Therapeutic Research Institute; BACE, beta-site amyloid precursor protein cleaving enzyme; CADRO, Common Alzheimer's Disease and Related Disorders Research Ontology; DMT, disease-modifying therapy; EPA, eicosapentaenoic acid; GABA, gamma-aminobutyric acid; NIA, National Institute on Aging; SSRI, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor; SV2A, synaptic vesicle protein 2A Note: Twenty-nine agents in 36 Phase 3 clinical trials currently ongoing as of February 27, 2020 according to ClinicalTrials.gov.
Note: Bolded terms represent new agents into the 2020 Phase 3 pipeline since 2019.
Note: The following agents have been identified as terminated per company press releases and have been removed from the current pipeline although they are still listed as ongoing on ClinicalTrials.gov:
CNP520/umibecestat (NCT03131453), E2609/elenbecestat (NCT02956486, NCT03036280).
a Phase 2/3 trials.
b CNP520 (umibecestat) has been removed from the GENERATION 1 trial.
c DIAN-TU trial has been completed and failed to meet its clinical outcomes for both gantenerumab and solanezumab.
Secondary analyses are pending.



F I G U R E 3
Mechanisms of action of agents in Phase 2 of the Alzheimer's disease drug development pipeline (ClinicalTrials.gov
accessed February 27, 2020)(Figure by Mike de la Flor) Of these, there are ten symptomatic agents: six cognitive enhancers and four agents targeting behavioral symptoms.
There are 55 potential DMTs in Phase 2 trials; 14 biologics and 41 small molecules.
Four of the small molecules and four of the biologics have amyloid reduction as one of the mechanisms observed in non-clinical studies (14.5% of DMTs).
One small molecule and five biologics in Phase 2 target tau-related processes as one of their mechanisms (10.9% of DMTs).



Phase 2
DMT candidates are repurposed agents approved for use in another indication.
There are 14 new agents in the Phase 2 pipeline compared to 2019.
Two of the Phase 2 trials were prevention trials; 37 trials involved patients with MCI/prodromal or prodromal-to-mild AD; 32 were trials for mild-to-moderate AD; one trial was for patients with severe AD; and one trial included patients with mild-to-severe AD.
Phase 2 trials are shorter in duration and smaller in terms of participant number than Phase 3 trials.
Phase 2 trials had a mean duration of 192 weeks, average treatment period of 43 weeks and included an average of 131 subjects in each trial.
Phase 2 trials of DMTs had a mean duration of 201 weeks, average treatment period of 45 weeks, and included an average of 137 subjects in each trial.


There are two cognitive enhancers being assessed in Phase 1 and no agents addressing neuropsychiatric symptoms.
There are 18 DMT small molecules and 7 DMT biologics being assessed in Phase 1.
One of the small molecules and one of the biologics have amyloid as a primary target or one among several targets.
Tau is targeted by two small molecules and two biologics in Phase 1 studies.
Other CADRO mechanisms represented in Phase 1 include targeting inflammation/infection/immunity (n = 6), metabolism/bioenergetics (n = 3), growth factors/hormones (n = 2), epigenetics (n = 3), neurogenesis (n = 1), vasculature (n = 1), synaptic plasticity/neuroprotection (n = 1), and combination of metabolism/bioenergetics and vasculature (n = 2) as the primary or one of a combination of effects.
There are two stem cell therapy trials in Phase 1 (Table



F I G U R E 4 F I G U R E 5
Trial sponsor for repurposed versus non-repurposed agents in the Alzheimer's disease pipeline (ClinicalTrials.gov
accessed February 27, 2020) (Figure by Mike de la Flor) Location of sites for Phase 2 and Phase 3 trials in the Alzheimer's disease drug development pipeline (ClinicalTrials.gov
accessed February 27, 2020) (Figure by Mike de la Flor)



Phase 2 and 2 (
Phase 3 AD clinical trials of DMTs as described in the federal website; not all trial descriptions in ClinicalTrials.gov
note if biomarkers are included in the trial.
AD biomarkers served as secondary outcome measures in 14 Phase 3 trials of DMTs and 27 Phase 2 trials of DMTs.
The most common biomarkers used were cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) amyloid, CSF tau, volumetric magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), and amyloid positron emission tomography (PET).
Tau imaging is increasingly involved in AD drug development programs and was included as a secondary outcome in three (14%) Phase 3 and four (7%) Phase 2 trials of DMTs.
Of the 21 Phase 3 DMT trials, 5 (24%) used amyloid PET as an entry criterion, 10%) used CSF-amyloid, and 4 (19%) used either amyloid PET or CSFamyloid.
Nine (15%) of 61 Phase 2 DMT trials used amyloid PET as an entry criterion, nine (15%) used CSF-amyloid, and nine (15%) used either amyloid PET or CSF-amyloid.
Ten (47%) DMT trials in Phase 3 and 34 (55%) in Phase 2 did not require biomarker confirmation of AD for trial entry.


the population (eg, prodromal AD/mild AD dementia) have slightly different Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) criteria for entry into the study, creating slightly different cohorts and possibly different disease trajectories.
The Clinical Dementia Rating-sum of boxes (CDR-sb) is the most widely used outcome for trials of prodromal or prodromal/mild disease, but some trials have dual outcomes traditionally used in AD dementia trials.
There is substantial heterogeneity among the instruments used as primary outcomes in prevention trials although the elements of the tools overlap.


for improvement of cognition in patients with mild-to-moderate AD dementia not treated with cholinesterase inhibitors or memantine based on a Phase 3 clinical trial that demonstrated a significant drugplacebo difference on the Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale-Cognitive Subscale (ADAS-cog) and a trend toward a difference on the Clinician Interview-Based Impression of Change with caregiver input (CIBIC-plus).
These outcomes satisfied the requirements of the National Medical Products Administration (NMPA; Chinese equivalent of the FDA) for approval as an AD therapy.
Non-clinical studies suggest that GV-971 has an effect on the dysbiosis of the gut microbiome to decrease secreted amino acids (phenylalanine and isoleucine) that stimulate proliferation of peripheral pro-inflammatory


3 trials, 28 in Phase 2 trials, and 10 in Phase 1 trials.
The difficulty of generating intellectual property protection for repurposed agents makes them less attractive as development candidates for biopharmaceutical companies and, because of their lower costs, more attractive to academic drug developers.
Biopharmaceutical companies are sponsors of 44% of Phase 3 repurposing trials and 6% of Phase 2 repurposing trials; this compares to their sponsorship of 95% of non-repurposed Phase 3 and 80% of non-repurposed Phase 2 trials (Figure 4).
Repurposed agents represent a larger fraction of the AD drug development compared to 5 years ago: there were 32 repurposed agents in 2016 (33% of the pipeline) compared to 52 repurposed agents in 2020 (43% of the pipeline).



F I G U R E 7
Percent of Phase 2 and 3 disease-modifying therapy trials requiring amyloid evidence (positron emission tomography, cerebrospinal fluid or either) at entry: 2016-2020 (ClinicalTrials.gov
accessed February 27, 2020) (Figure by Mike de la Flor) Similarly, substantiation of disease-modifying effects is expected to rely on a combination of clinical trial design, clinical outcome measures, and biomarkers of AD, especially markers of neurodegeneration. 9
Figure 8 shows the 5-year trend in use of biomarkers as outcomes in trials of disease modifying agents.
The number of trials of DMTs not using biomarkers for diagnostic confirmation, demonstration of target engagement, and support of disease modification is surprisingly high.


drugs in development for AD worldwide, contrasting with 6833 for malignant neoplasms and 433 for diabetes.
These disparities reflect the less well defined target biology, limited availability of biomarkers, longer trial durations, greater expense, and higher risk of failure of AD drug development programs.
In summary, there are fewer agents in the AD pipeline in 2020 than in 2019 (121 vs 134).
There are 29 agents in Phase 3 (compared to 29 in 2019), 65 agents in Phase 2 (compared to 75 in 2019), and 27 in Phase 1 (compared to 30 in 2019).
All BACE inhibitors-prominent in the 2019 pipeline-have been discontinued for futility or toxicity.
F I G U R E 8 Phase 2 and Phase 3 disease-modifying therapy trials using Alzheimer's disease biomarkers as outcome measures: 2016-2020 (ClinicalTrials.gov
accessed February 27, 2020) (Figure by Mike de la Flor) Several agents have shown robust reductions of amyloid using amyloid PET and new trials will provide insight into the relationship of antiamyloid and clinical effects.
Biomarkers provide increasing data linking the MOA of the candidate agent to the biology of AD and promise to inform drug development decisions.
The 5-year perspective captured in this pipeline review shows that over this period there have been trends for increased pipeline target diversity, greater reliance on repurposed agents, engagement of participants in more mild stages of the continuum of AD with a corresponding change of trial entry criteria and outcome measures, and increasing use of biomarkers to define trial populations.



Agent CADROmechanism class Mechanism of action Therapeutic purpose Status(CT.gov ID) Sponsor Start date Estimated end date
Agents in Phase 3 of Alzheimer's disease drug development (ClinicalTrials.govaccessedFebruary
27, 2020)



Agent CADROmechanism class Mechanism of action Therapeutic purpose Status(CT.gov ID) Sponsor Start date Estimated end date



Agent CADROmechanism class Mechanism of action Therapeutic purpose Status(CT.gov ID) Sponsor Start date Estimated end date



Table 5
Agents in Phase 2 of Alzheimer's disease drug development (ClinicalTrials.gov
accessed February 27, 2020) Agents in Phase 1 of Alzheimer's disease drug development (ClinicalTrials.gov
accessed February 27, 2020)


Stem cell therapy in clinical trials for Alzheimer's disease (ClinicalTrials.govaccessed
February 27, 2020) Trial sponsor for each phase of Alzheimer's disease drug development (ClinicalTrials.govaccessedFebruary
27, 2020)


Trial entry criteria and primary outcome measures for Phase 2/3 and 3 disease-modifying therapies trials (ClinicalTrials.govaccessedFebruary
27, 2020)