Paraoxonase-1 and -3 Protein Expression in the Brain of the Tg2576 Mouse Model of Alzheimer’s Disease
Background: Brain oxidative lipid damage and inflammation are common in neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer's disease (AD).
Paraoxonase-1 and -3 (PON1 and PON3) protein expression was demonstrated in tissue with no PON1 or PON3 gene expression.
In the present study, we examine differences in PON1 and PON3 protein expression in the brain of a mouse model of AD.
Methods: we used peroxidase-and fluorescence-based immunohistochemistry in five brain regions (olfactory bulb, forebrain, posterior midbrain, hindbrain and cerebellum) of transgenic (Tg2576) mice with the Swedish mutation (KM670/671NL) responsible for a familial form of AD and corresponding wild-type mice.
Results: We found intense PON1 and PON3-positive staining in star-shaped cells surrounding Aβ plaques in all the studied Tg2576 mouse-brain regions.
Although we could not colocalize PON1 and PON3 with astrocytes (star-shaped cells in the brain), we found some PON3 colocalization with microglia.
Conclusions: These results suggest that (1) PON1 and PON3 cross the blood-brain barrier in discoidal high-density lipoproteins (HDLs) and are transferred to specific brain-cell types; and (2) PON1 and PON3 play an important role in preventing oxidative stress and lipid peroxidation in particular brain-cell types (likely to be glial cells) in AD pathology and potentially in other neurodegenerative diseases as well.

Introduction
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the most frequent form of dementia in the elderly, contributing to 60-70% of all dementia cases
It is characterized by the progressive mental deterioration of functions at several cognitive domains, while neuropathological signs gradually build up in several cortical regions of the brain
One of the most prominent and first-appearing neuropathological signs of AD is the presence of amyloid-β (Aβ) plaques.
These senile plaques consist of a central core of amyloid-β-insoluble 39-42 residue peptide fragments, surrounded by astrocytes, microglia, and nearby neurons.
Aβ in its oligomeric form is toxic and induces oxidative stress, while Aβ aggregates complexed with the redox metal ion copper (Cu) maintain their ability to increase hydroxyl radical formation
There are currently several AD mouse models based on human, genetic, and early-onset forms of AD.
The Swedish Tg2576 transgenic mouse is one of the most used AD mouse models.
This mouse overexpresses a mutant form of human APP (isoform 695), in addition to containing the Swedish mutation (KM670/671NL), leading to an increase in Aβ 1-40 and 1-42 fragments, and the formation of Aβ plaques in the brain
In addition to the high-level expression of the mutant Aβ peptide, Tg2576 mice show a behavioral phenotype characterized by spatial-memory deficits at 9 months of life and beyond, and an increase in microglial density and the number of Aβ plaques in the frontal-, temporal-, and entorhinal-cortex, and hippocampus brain regions.
Aged Tg2576 mice also show brain-oxidative lipid damage surrounding Aβ deposits
The paraoxonase (PON) family of enzymes comprises three members, paraoxonase-1 (PON1), -2 (PON2), and -3 (PON3).
In humans, PON1 and PON3 are expressed in the liver and at lower levels in the kidneys, and their protein products are mainly found in circulating high-density lipoproteins (HDLs)
PON3 protein expression was also demonstrated in the mitochondria of selected tissue types
HDLs could act as delivery carriers of PON1 (and likely PON3) from the liver to tissue where its activity is needed on the basis of reports of PON1 transfer to membranes
All PONs are polymorphic enzymes, with certain polymorphisms affecting their activity or protein expression (reviewed in
The physiological roles of these enzymes are still uncertain, although it is accepted that they are lactonases with broad substrate specificity
The three PONs are potent antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, and anti-apoptotic enzymes.
PON1 and PON3 also participate in HDLmediated cholesterol efflux from macrophages in a mechanism that involves the ATP-binding cassette transporter A-I (ABCA1) receptor, contributing to an important atheroprotective role
Alterations in circulating plasma PON1 levels are reported in a variety of oxidative stress-related diseases.
These include cardiovascular disease, chronic renal failure, HIV infection, metabolic syndrome, chronic liver impairment, and AD
Substantial evidence indicates that oxidative stress is involved in the pathogenesis and progression of AD
In monomeric form, Aβ peptides have antioxidant activity; however, when Aβ peptides form aggregates, they exhibit pro-oxidant activity, thus promoting oxidative stress
In AD, lipid peroxidation seems to be a major contributor to oxidative stress damage due to the brain's high oxygen consumption and the high content of polyunsaturated fatty acids
The presence of oxidative stress products was shown in brain regions with AD histopathologic alterations
Interestingly, brain antioxidant enzyme activity significantly increases in areas of lipid peroxidation, suggesting a compensatory response to increased oxidative stress
Although there is no PON1 or PON3 gene expression in the brain
Thus, PON1 and PON3 could play an important role in modulating brain oxidative stress during AD progression.
The aim of the present study was to examine differences in PON1 and PON3 protein expression in the brain of a mouse model of AD.
Our hypothesis was that PON1 and PON3 are somehow transferred from circulation to the brain whenever their antioxidant activities are needed, explaining their presence in brain areas with no PON1 or PON3 gene expression
Thus, during AD progression, the protein presence of PON1 and PON3 increases in brain regions with high oxidative stress, which was demonstrated to coincide with the increased presence of Aβ plaques.
We found very intense expression of PON1 and PON3 exclusively surrounding Aβ plaques and in star-shaped cells located around those areas.

Materials and Methods

Animals
Male transgenic (Tg2576) mice with the Swedish mutation (KM670/671NL), responsible for a familial form of AD, were obtained from Taconic Europe (Lille Skensved, Denmark; strain name: B6;SJL-Tg(APPSWE)2576Kha). Corresponding wild-type (WT) mice were generated by crossing parental APPSwe heterozygous male mice (Taconic Europe) with C57BL6/SJL female mice (Charles River, Barcelona, Spain).
For the proposed experiments, mice were genotyped by PCR using DNA extracted from mouse tail at 2 months of age, and separated according to their gender and genotype.
Mice were maintained in an animal room with standard conditions: a light/dark cycle of 12:12 h, a temperature of 22 ± 2 • C, and a relative humidity of 50 ± 10%.
All mice had food (standard chow diet, Panlab, Barcelona) and drinking water available ad libitum.
The experimental protocol was approved by the Animal Care and Use Committee of the Universitat Rovira i Virgili (Tarragona, Spain).
At 18 months of age, 2 Tg2576 and 2 WT mice were sacrificed.
After being anesthetized (10 mg/kg xylazine and 100 mg/kg ketamine, i.p.), mice received intracardiac perfusions containing 0.9% NaCl, followed by 4% paraformaldehyde (PFH).
Brains were carefully removed, placed in 4% PFH at 4 • C for 2 h, sectioned in coronal sections by adult-mousebrain slicer matrix BSMAS001-1 (Zivic instruments, Pittsburgh, PA, USA) and the following regions were separated: olfactory bulb, forebrain, posterior midbrain, hindbrain, and cerebellum.
These brain regions were then dehydrated and embedded in paraffin, and 2 cm thickness coronal brain sections were obtained for all histological analyses.

Antibodies
Polyclonal rabbit anti-mouse PON1 and PON3 antibodies were obtained as previously described
These antibodies were generated against peptides specific to each PON protein and tested for specificity to each PON protein by our laboratory
The other used antibodies were commercially obtained as detailed below.

Peroxidase-Based Immunostaining
Brain sections from each region were deparaffinized and rehydrated using standard protocols.
The buffer used throughout the immunostaining protocol was 20 mM Gly, 100 mM PBS pH 7.4.
Rehydrated sections were rinsed in 0.1% Triton X-100 (Sigma-Aldrich, Barcelona, Spain) in Gly-PBS buffer, and incubated in H 2 O 2 for 10 min to inactivate endogenous peroxidases.
Then, sections were blocked for 30 min in 2% bovine serum albumin (BSA, Sigma-Aldrich) in 0.1% Triton X-100, Gly-PBS buffer.
Blocking buffer was carefully removed by tapping the slide on a filter paper prior to the addition of the primary antibodies.
Anti-PON1 or anti-PON3 antibodies, diluted 1:300 v/v in 1% BSA, 0.1% Triton X-100, Gly-PBS buffer, were applied over tissue sections and incubated in a humid chamber overnight at 4 • C. Following a 10 min wash with 0.1% Triton X-100, Gly-PBS buffer, sections were incubated for 1 h with a biotinylated anti-rabbit antibody (Vector Laboratories, Barcelona, Spain), diluted 1:200 v/v in 1% BSA, 0.1% Triton X-100, Gly-PBS buffer.
We used the immunoenzymatic antigen-detection system Vectastain ABC kit followed by the DAB Peroxidase (HRP) Substrate kit (both from Vector Laboratories), yielding an insoluble brown product in areas with antigen-antibody recognition.
These two kits were used according to the manufacturer's instructions.
Sections were counterstained with hematoxylin for 30 s, dehydrated using standard procedures, and preserved using DPX resin as mounting media (Sigma-Aldrich).
Slides were visualized using an upright widefield microscope (Eclipse 600, Nikon, Barcelona, Spain).
Pictures were obtained using the AnalySIS image software system (Soft Imaging System, Munster, Germany).
Negativecontrol slides were stained following the same protocol, but omitting incubation with primary antibodies.

Fluorescence-Based Immunostaining
After removing paraffin and rehydrating sections using standard protocols, brain slides were rinsed in 0.1% Triton X-100, Gly-PBS buffer (the same Gly-PBS buffer as that detailed above).
Slides were then blocked for 30 min in blocking buffer (2% BSA in 0.1% Triton X-100, Gly-PBS buffer).
After removing the blocking buffer by tapping on a filter paper, slides were incubated overnight at 4 • C in a humid chamber with either 1/300 rabbit polyclonal anti-PON1 or 1/300 rabbit monoclonal anti-PON3 primary antibodies, and 1/160 mouse monoclonal anti-glial fibrillary acidic protein GFAP (Calbiochem, Darmstadt, Germany), 1/200 mouse monoclonal antineuronal nuclei NeuN (Millipore, Temecula, CA, USA), 1/100 rat monoclonal anti-neuroectodermal stem-cell marker nestin (Millipore), 1/300 goat polyclonal anti-ionized calcium-binding adapter molecule 1 Iba1 (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA, USA), and/or 1/500 mouse monoclonal anti-beta amyloid (A8354, Sigma-Aldrich).
After two 10 min washes with 0.1% Triton X-100, Gly-PBS buffer, slides were incubated for 3 h at room temperature in a humid chamber with either 1/500 antirabbit fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC)-conjugated (AlexaFluor 488, Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) or 1/400 anti-mouse tetramethyl rhodamine isothiocyanate (TRITC)-conjugated (AlexaFluor 568, Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) secondary antibodies, and 1/400 antigoat Cy5-conjugated (Santa Cruz Biotechnology).
Primary and secondary antibodies were diluted in 1% BSA, Gly-PBS buffer.
The final wash was applied, and sections were mounted with the addition of an antifade reagent (SlowFade Gold Antifade Reagent, Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA), and stored until observation in a laser-scanning confocal microscope (Nikon NIS-Elements Eclipse TE2000E, Nikon Corp, Tokyo, Japan).
Images were adjusted for brightness and contrast using Adobe Photoshop (Adobe Systems, San Jose, CA, USA).
Negative-control slides were stained following the same protocol, but omitting incubation with primary antibodies.
Additionally, a secondary-antibody negative control was prepared by omitting the secondary instead of the primary antibody in the incubation.

Results

PON1 and PON3 Peroxidase-Based Immunohistochemistry
PON1 and PON3 peroxidase-based immunohistochemistry resulted in moderate staining (brown) localized in brain white-matter fiber tracts, especially in the corpus callosum, and internal and external capsules in both WT and Tg2576 mice.
The presence of PON1 and PON3 in WT mice was scarce and mainly located near myelinated tracts, as already described
In the brains of Tg2576 mice, in addition to near-myelinated tracts, PON1 and PON3 staining was highly concentrated around Aβ plaques, located mainly in the hippocampus, and parietal and temporal cortices (Figure
These images also demonstrated the presence of intense PON1 and PON3 immunostaining in some morphologically compatible cells with astrocytes, oligodendrocytes, or microglial cells surrounding Aβ plaques.
Negative-control slides showed no positive (brown) staining (data not shown).
We used PON1 and PON3 fluorescence-based immunohistochemistry or immunofluorescence to ensure that we could reproduce the results obtained using peroxidasebased immunohistochemistry. Figure
For the primary-and secondary-antibody negative-control slides, we used Tg2576 mouse-brain

Fluorescence-Based Immunohistochemistry

PON1 and PON3 Immunofluorescence
We used PON1 and PON3 fluorescence-based immunohistochemistry or immunofluorescence to ensure that we could reproduce the results obtained using peroxidase-based immunohistochemistry. Figure
For the primaryand secondary-antibody negative-control slides, we used Tg2576 mouse-brain sections (Figure
The WT mouse brain showed positive staining (green) in myelinated tracts in both PON1 and PON3 immunofluorescence (Figure
In Tg2576 mice, PON1-and PON3-positive staining (green) was found surrounding Aβ plaques and in cells with a star shape in all brain sections with the presence of analyzed Aβ plaques (Figure
All sections depicted in Figure

Fluorescence-Based Immunohistochemistry

PON1 and PON3 Immunofluorescence
We used PON1 and PON3 fluorescence-based immunohistochemistry or immunofluorescence to ensure that we could reproduce the results obtained using peroxidasebased immunohistochemistry. Figure
For the primary-and secondary-antibody negative-control slides, we used Tg2576 mouse-brain sections (Figure
The WT mouse brain showed positive staining (green) in myelinated tracts in both PON1 and PON3 immunofluorescence (Figure
In Tg2576 mice, PON1-and PON3-positive staining (green) was found surrounding Aβ plaques and in cells with a star shape in all brain sections with the presence of analyzed Aβ plaques (Figure
All sections depicted in Figure

Astrocyte-Microglia-Neuron "Triad" Immunofluorescence
Triple immunofluorescence was conducted to ensure the proper labeling of Aβ plaques and their surrounding cells (astrocytes, microglia, and proliferating neurons).
Figure

Astrocyte-Microglia-Neuron "Triad" Immunofluorescence
Triple immunofluorescence was conducted to ensure the proper labeling of Aβ plaques and their surrounding cells (astrocytes, microglia, and proliferating neurons).
Figure
Figure
GFAP-positive staining in Figure
GFAP-positive staining i sembled PON1-and PON3-positive staining in Figure

PON1 and Astrocyte-Microglia-Neuron "Triad" Double Immunofluorescen
We carried out double immunofluorescences targeting PON1 and ind cell markers to determine if there was PON1 colocalization with any of

PON1 and Astrocyte-Microglia-Neuron "Triad" Double Immunofluorescence
We carried out double immunofluorescences targeting PON1 and individual brain cell markers to determine if there was PON1 colocalization with any of the cell types found surrounding Aβ plaques.
We focused on the astrocyte-microglia-neuron "triad" and used the following specific cell markers: GFAP for astrocytes, Iba1 for activated microglia, and NeuN for neuronal nuclei.
Surprisingly, we did not see colocalization between PON1 and any of the 3 cell markers used in each double immunofluorescence (PON1 and Iba1, PON1 and GFAP, or PON1 and NeuN) (Figure
PON1 immunofluorescence showed a significant amount of nonspecific background staining in comparison with that in the obtained results in single PON1 immunofluorescence (Figure
Negative-control slides (for either PON1 primary or the secondary antibody) showed the same small sparse bright green precipitates depicted in Figure

PON3 and Astrocyte-Microglia-Neuron "Triad" Double Immunofluorescence
When targeting PON3 and individual components of the astrocyte-microglia-neuron "triad", we only found some colocalization with microglia (Figure
PON3 colocalized with certain areas of the microglia's cytoplasm.
We did not see colocalization with markers of astrocytes or neurons (Figure
As seen with PON1, double PON3 immunofluorescence also showed a significant degree of nonspecific staining.
As reported above, the negative-control slides (for either the PON3 primary or secondary antibody) showed similar results to those of Figure
croglia, and NeuN for neuronal nuclei.
Surprisingly, we did not see colocalization be-tween PON1 and any of the 3 cell markers used in each double immunofluorescence (PON1 and Iba1, PON1 and GFAP, or PON1 and NeuN) (Figure
PON1 immunofluorescence showed a significant amount of nonspecific background staining in comparison with that in the obtained results in single PON1 immunofluorescence (Figure
Negative-control slides (for either PON1 primary or the secondary antibody) showed the same small sparse bright green precipitates depicted in Figure

PON3 and Astrocyte-Microglia-Neuron "Triad" Double Immunofluorescence
When targeting PON3 and individual components of the astrocyte-microglia-neuron "triad", we only found some colocalization with microglia (Figure
PON3 colocalized with certain areas of the microglia's cytoplasm.
We did not see colocalization with markers of astrocytes or neurons (Figure
As seen with PON1, double PON3 immunofluorescence also showed a significant degree of nonspecific staining.
As reported above, the negative-control slides (for either the PON3 primary or secondary antibody) showed similar results to those of Figure

Discussion
In the present study, the possibility of a differential expression of PON1 and PON3 in the brains of healthy mice and mice with AD pathology was evaluated.
Although our results were not conclusive, there was strong evidence of PON1 and PON3 expression

Discussion
In the present study, the possibility of a differential expression of PON1 and PON3 in the brains of healthy mice and mice with AD pathology was evaluated.
Although our results were not conclusive, there was strong evidence of PON1 and PON3 expression surrounding Aβ plaques, and intense positive staining in star-shaped cells that resembled glial cells in areas with an abundance of Aβ plaques.
This is the first report describing PON1 and PON3 protein localization in these cells and regions in mouse AD pathology compared with healthy mice.
Although there is no documented PON1 or PON3 gene expression in any the mouse-or human-brain regions
In the same year, another group demonstrated for the first time the presence of PON1 activity in human cerebrospinal fluid
Altogether, this strongly supports the transfer of PON1 and PON3 from blood circulation to the central nervous system.
Indeed, in vitro studies showed that small HDL particles are transcytosed across the blood-brain barrier via scavenger receptor class B, type I (SR-B1)-mediated uptake
We hypothesize that PON1 and PON3, embedded in discoidal HDLs, would cross the blood-brain barrier and be transferred to these AD pathological brain areas and cells via an unknown mechanism
Astrocytes are star-shaped glial cells that have an important role in the synthesis of cholesterol and lipoprotein components, and the assembly of lipoproteins in the brain.
Astrocytes also participate in cholesterol efflux to lipoproteins, regulated by ATP-binding cassette transporters A-I (ABCA-1) and G-I (ABCG-1).
As plasma HDL-bound PON1 and PON3 participate in cholesterol efflux from macrophages to HDL, the suggested presence of PON1 and PON3 in brain astrocytes does not seem coincidental, and could suggest a role of PON1 and PON3 in astrocyte cholesterol efflux that is highly dysregulated by AD pathology.
In fact, the dysregulation of brain-cholesterol homeostasis is associated with neurodegeneration
However, we were not able to observe the presence of PON1 and PON3 colocalizing with astrocytes.
In this regard, and considering the presence of PON1 and PON3 in the myelinated fibers of brain tissue
In active demyelinating lesions, oligodendrocytes show a high expression of certain enzymes involved in the antioxidant defense mechanism
In fact, Aβ deposits in the human brain are in close proximity to damaged oligodendrocytes
Oligodendrocytes are highly susceptible to oxidative stress due to their elevated consumption of oxygen and ATP during myelin synthesis, which exposes them to oxidative damage
Thus, exogenous PON1 and PON3 could be delivered to oligodendrocytes to prevent an imbalance in oxidative stress in oligodendrocytes.
Microglia are brain-resident macrophages that interact with all central-nervous-system components, and have an important role in brain development, homeostasis, and disease
Although mainly produced by astrocytes, microglia can also synthesize apolipoprotein E (ApoE), which plays a major role in brain cholesterol transport
They also express ABCA-1 and participate in cholesterol efflux to ApoEcontaining HDL-like particles
In patients with AD, higher numbers of reactive microglia are detected surrounding and phagocytosing Aβ plaques, compared with those in healthy subjects
This neuroprotective "microglial barrier" regulates amyloid compaction and the reduction in neurotoxic fibrils to surrounding neural structures.
The dysregulation of lipid metabolism in AD results in the accumulation of cholesterol and decreased Aβ phagocytosis in microglia, leading to the accumulation of Aβ plaques
Our findings of PON3 colocalization in the microglia of mice with AD pathology may indicate the promotion of cholesterol efflux, as speculated in astrocytic PON1 and PON3.
The inflammatory response observed in AD and other neurodegenerative diseases leads to the production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) by activated glial cells (astrocytes, oligodendrocytes, and microglia), contributing to increased levels of oxidative stress reported in neurodegenerative diseases
Thus, the suggested localization of PON1 and PON3 in astrocytes or oligodendrocytes, and the observed colocalization of PON3 in microglia indicate a potential antioxidant role of PON1 and PON3 in decreasing levels of ROS and/or preventing lipid peroxidation in these cell types in AD pathology.

Conclusions
This is a descriptive study that shows for the first time the presence of PON1 and PON3 in Aβ plaques and in star-shaped cells surrounding these Aβ plaques in mice.
These results are preliminary, but reinforce the hypothesis that HDLs act as delivery carriers of PON1 and PON3 from the liver to areas of high levels of oxidative stress and inflammation, and suggest that PON1 and PON3 have a yet-to-explore role in astrocytes, microglia, oligodendrocytes, and the AD pathology, which opens a new line of research on the potential role played by PON family members in this and other neurodegenerative diseases.



12 Figure 1 .
Figure 1.
Paraoxonase-1 (PON1) and -3 (PON3) peroxidase-based immunohistochemistry in parietal cortex of the posterior midbrain region of aged Tg2576 mice.
(A) PON1 immunohistochemistry, 200× magnification; (B) PON1 immunohistochemistry, 400× magnification.
(C) PON3 immunohistochemistry, 200× magnification.
(D) PON3 immunohistochemistry, 400× magnification.
Arrows indicate Aβ plaques.



3. 2 .
Fluorescence-Based Immunohistochemistry 3.2.1.
PON1 and PON3 Immunofluorescence



Figure 1 .
Figure 1.
Paraoxonase-1 (PON1) and -3 (PON3) peroxidase-based immunohistochemistry in parietal cortex of the posterior midbrain region of aged Tg2576 mice.
(A) PON1 immunohistochemistry, 200× magnification; (B) PON1 immunohistochemistry, 400× magnification.
(C) PON3 immunohistochemistry, 200× magnification.
(D) PON3 immunohistochemistry, 400× magnification.
Arrows indicate Aβ plaques.



Figure 1 .
Figure 1.
Paraoxonase-1 (PON1) and -3 (PON3) peroxidase-based immunohistochemistry in parie-tal cortex of the posterior midbrain region of aged Tg2576 mice.
(A) PON1 immunohistochemistry, 200× magnification; (B) PON1 immunohistochemistry, 400× magnification.
(C) PON3 immunohistochemistry, 200× magnification.
(D) PON3 immunohistochemistry, 400× magnification.
Arrows indicate Aβ plaques.



Antioxidants 2021 ,
10, x FOR PEER REVIEW 6 of 12



Figure 2 .
Figure 2. PON1 and PON3 immunofluorescence in parietal cortex of posterior midbrain region.
All panels are at 200× magnification.
(A) PON1 immunofluorescence omitting primary antibody in Tg2576 mice.
(B) PON1 immunofluorescence omitting secondary antibody in Tg2576 mice.
(C) PON1 immunofluorescence in WT mice.
(D) PON3 immunofluorescence in WT mice.
(E) PON1 immunofluorescence in Tg2576 mice.
(F) PON3 immunofluorescence in Tg2576 mice.



Figure 2 .
Figure 2. PON1 and PON3 immunofluorescence in parietal cortex of posterior midbrain region.
All panels are at 200× magnification.
(A) PON1 immunofluorescence omitting primary antibody in Tg2576 mice.
(B) PON1 immunofluorescence omitting secondary antibody in Tg2576 mice.
(C) PON1 immunofluorescence in WT mice.
(D) PON3 immunofluorescence in WT mice.
(E) PON1 immunofluorescence in Tg2576 mice.
(F) PON3 immunofluorescence in Tg2576 mice.


resembled PON1and PON3-positive staining in Figure 2E,F.
Tg2576 mice.
(B) PON1 immunofluorescence omitting secondary antibody in Tg257 PON1 immunofluorescence in WT mice.
(D) PON3 immunofluorescence in WT mic immunofluorescence in Tg2576 mice.
(F) PON3 immunofluorescence in Tg2576 mic 3.2.2.
Astrocyte-Microglia-Neuron "Triad" Immunofluorescence



Figure 3 .
Figure 3. Triple immunofluorescence in parietal cortex of posterior midbrain section mice.
(A) Astrocyte (GFAP, green)-microglia (Iba1, red)-Aβ deposition (blue) immu cence, obtained using different lasers and merged.
(B) Astrocyte (GFAP, green)-neu purple)-Aβ deposition (red) immunofluorescence obtained using different lasers an panels are at 400× magnification.



Figure 3 .
Figure 3. Triple immunofluorescence in parietal cortex of posterior midbrain section of Tg2576 mice.
(A) Astrocyte (GFAP, green)-microglia (Iba1, red)-Aβ deposition (blue) immunofluorescence, obtained using different lasers and merged.
(B) Astrocyte (GFAP, green)-neuron (Nestin, purple)-Aβ deposition (red) immunofluorescence obtained using different lasers and merged.
All panels are at 400× magnification.



Figure 4 .
Figure 4. Double immunofluorescence of PON1 and brain cell markers for (A) microglia (Iba1), (B) astrocytes (GFAP), and (C) neurons (NeuN) in sections from Tg2576 mouse-brain temporal cortex; 1000× magnification.
Negative-control slides showed no positive (green) staining (data not shown).



Figure 4 . 12 Figure 5 .
Figure 4. Double immunofluorescence of PON1 and brain cell markers for (A) microglia (Iba1), (B) astrocytes (GFAP), and (C) neurons (NeuN) in sections from Tg2576 mouse-brain temporal cortex; 1000× magnification.
Negative-control slides showed no positive (green) staining (data not shown).
Antioxidants 2021, 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW 8 of 12



Figure 5 .
Figure 5. Double immunofluorescence of PON3 and brain-cell markers for (A) microglia (Iba1), (B) astrocytes (GFAP), and (C) neurons (NeuN) in sections from Tg2576 mouse-brain temporal cortex; 1000× magnification.
Negative-control slides showed no positive (green) staining (data not shown).