The Role of Amyloid-Beta and Tau in the Early Pathogenesis of Alzheimer’s Disease
The abnormal accumulation of amyloid-b (Ab) and neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs) containing phosphorylated tau proteins are the main histopathological feature of Alzheimer's disease (AD).
Synaptic damage and loss are earlier events than amyloid plaques and NFTs in AD progress and best correlate with cognitive deficits in AD patients.
Soluble oligomeric Ab initiates the progression of AD and tau mediates the subsequent synaptic impairments at an early stage of AD.
In this review we discuss how Ab or/and tau causes synaptic dysfunction.
Ab oligomers gather at synapses and give rise to synaptic death in a variety of ways such as regulating receptors and receptor tyrosine kinases, unbalancing calcium homeostasis, and activating caspases and calcineurin.
A large amount of hyperphosphorylated tau exists in the synapse of the AD brain.
Ab-triggered synaptic deficits are dependent on tau.
Soluble, hyperphosphorylated tau is much more correlated to cognitive decline in AD patients.
Tau-targeted therapies have received more attention because the treatments targeting Ab failed in AD.
Here, we also review the therapy strategies used to intervene in the very early stages of AD.
Soluble hyperphosphorylated tau forms a complex with cell surface receptors, scaffold proteins, or intracellular signaling molecules to damage synaptic function.
Therefore, therapeutic strategies targeting synaptic tau at the early stage of AD may ameliorating pathology in AD.
This review aims to provide an update on the role of oligomeric Ab and soluble hyperphosphorylated tau in the early pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease and to develop a new treatment strategy based on this.

Background
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is characterized by two hallmark pathological lesions in the brain: the extracellular amyloid plaques deposition of amyloid-b (Ab) peptides and intracellular neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs) composed of hyperphosphorylated tau
The internal relations between these two hallmarks and the cognitive dysfunction occurred in AD patients remain elusive
Accumulation of toxic Ab is proposed as one of the important early events in AD, but unsuccessful clinical trials based on Ab-targeting drugs have triggered researchers to investigate new therapeutic strategies targeting alternative disease mechanisms
Ab oligomers but not amyloid plaques target the postsynaptic compartment of excitatory synapses with high affinity, changing the structure and function of synapses
More and more research indicates that the pathology of tau correlates with cognitive defects in AD
However, soluble forms of tau oligomers but not NFTs appear to be an important factor inducing neuronal dysfunction and cognitive impairment
Memory deficits highly correlate with synaptic decline in the hippocampus of AD patient's brains
Synaptic loss is the first indicator of AD progression, even in the earliest of stage, called mild cognitive impairment (MCI), and has the strongest biological correlation with cognitive deficits found in AD patients
Mislocalization of tau to dendrites, which is an early event in AD pathogenesis prior to tau aggregation, is a neuropathological feature of AD brains
Synaptic tau correlates with the onset of cognitive decline in AD
This review aims to provide an update on what is currently known about the role of Ab and tau in the early pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease.

Oligomeric Ab and Synaptic Dysfunction
Long-term potentiation (LTP) and long-term depression (LTD), which are forms of activity-dependent synaptic plasticity, and the formation of dendritic spines are considered to underlie learning and memory
LTP increases in synaptic strength depend on activating NMDA receptors by recurring synaptic activity.
In contrast, LTD reduces synaptic activity through phosphorylation of AMPA receptors
Synaptic loss can be induced by oligomeric forms of Ab
The senile plaques were considered to be the major pathogenic substance in AD, but clinical investigations did not reveal a strong association between extracellular amyloid plaque and cognitive defects
During AD progress, Ab oligomers begin to be enriched at synapses, which is earlier than the formation of amyloid plaques or accumulation of phosphorylated tau at synapses
Extracellular Ab accumulates around the postsynaptic compartment more abundantly than at presynaptic terminals
Accumulated research results indicate that Ab causes synaptic death, LTD and LTP via modulating excitatory receptors and receptor tyrosine kinases, unbalancing calcium homeostasis, and activating caspases and calcineurin.
Ab binds to AMPA receptors and causes their internalization, leading to increased LTD.
Ab binds to 7a-nicotinic acetylcholine receptors, leading to an internalization of NMDA receptors and LTD
Oligomeric Ab stimulates NMDA receptors to upregulate calcium and redox reactions, leading to synaptic dysfunction and neuronal loss
Calcineurin, activated by Ab elevated calcium, dephosphorylates actin filaments to cause dendritic spine loss.
Calcineurin activation can also reduce NMDA receptor expression on the surface and lead to greater AMPA receptor internalization.
Soluble Ab dephosphorylates AMPA receptors and increases receptor internalization.
Oligomeric Ab also binds with tyrosine kinases to modulate NMDA receptor trafficking and reduce LTP
Oligomeric Ab can impair LTP while increasing LTD in a concentration-dependent manner.
Low levels of oligomeric Ab facilitate LTP, but high levels of Ab impair it
The increased NMDA activity stimulated by oligomeric Ab can lead to increased tau accumulation.
Increased phosphorylated tau associates with, and further amplifies, the dendritic spine loss
Age-dependent accumulations of Ab and tau and their interactions at synapses largely impair synaptic activity via altering LTP and LTD levels

Tau and Synaptic Deficits
Tau normally exists in synapses of both healthy and AD brains, while there is a greater level of hyperphosphorylated tau present in the AD synapse
Soluble, hyperphosphorylated tau is much more closely related to synaptic dysfunction and cognitive decline in AD patients compared to Ab and aggregated tangles of tau
In vivo experiments showed the role of tau in synaptic plasticity.
Reduction or depletion of tau blocked the induction of LTD but not LTP.
Replacement of endogenous tau with human tau restored LTD.
These data support the essential role of tau in a NMDAR-dependent LTD in the hippocampus
Tau's role in LTD depends on its phosphorylation at serine 396, which internalizes the AMPA receptor
Reducing the phosphorylation of tau by inhibiting tau kinases rescues tau-dependent LTP deficits and alleviates synaptic loss in tau transgenic mice
Ab may need tau to impair LTP, since tau-null mice showed no impairment in LTP when Ab was applied
Synaptic deficits induced by Ab were closely related with tau, since reducing endogenous tau levels in Ab-forming AD mouse models prevented dysfunctions
In contrast, e933084-2
overexpression of human tau in amyloidosis mouse models increased synaptic loss and memory impairment
Transgenic mice with human P301S or P301L mutant tau had impaired LTP in the hippocampus
Mice expressing human V337M mutant tau had reduced excitatory synaptic transmission, associated with decreased synaptic glutamate receptors levels in both the ventral striatum and the insular cortex
In cortical neurons, expression of human P301L mutant tau resulted in mushroom spine loss

Mitochondria and Synaptic Degeneration
Mitochondria serves as energy supplier for synaptic functions such as synaptic transmission, synaptic outgrowth, and synaptic vesicle formation
Ab or phosphorylated tau triggers damage and transportation of mitochondria to synaptic terminals, which may provide low levels of ATP to synapses, leading to synaptic degeneration
Mitochondrial dysfunction occurs early in AD progression
Synapse loss is an early event of AD, which is attributed to soluble Ab, phosphorylated tau, and increased free radicals generated by mitochondria at synapses
More abnormal mitochondria are found in synapses of AD brains compared to healthy brains

Synaptic Proteins and Synaptic Function
Extensive studies on synaptic proteins in a large number of healthy controls and AD patients reveal that postsynaptic and presynaptic proteins are important for synaptic function and may be related to cognitive impairments in AD
Synaptophysin, a presynaptic protein, was decreased by around 25% in MCI patients, which can occur before Ab plaque formation.
Loss of synaptophysin correlates with cognitive decline and is also a marker for disease progression in AD patients
The postsynaptic density-95 (PSD-95) protein is the most abundant scaffold proteins inside the postsynaptic density (PSD), a densely packed multi-protein structure for synaptic formation and function at the distal tip of dendritic spine heads
PSD-95 is crucial for trafficking and anchoring of synaptic glutamate receptors
It is predicted that tau, Fyn, PSD-95, and NMDARs form a protein complex at the synapse
Loss of PSD-95 results in decrease of synapses containing glutamate receptors and impairments in AMPAR and NMDAR transmissions
It has been reported that the expression of PSD-95 is aberrant in several human disorders, including AD

Other Factors Related to Ab and Tau in AD Infection
The "inflammation hypothesis"
Several microbes, such as human herpesviruses, spirochetes, Chlamydia pneumoniae, and Borrelia burgdorferi, have been proposed as triggers of AD
Infections may induce the generation of Ab in the brain
The antiviral property of Ab could protect the brain from infection

Oxidative Stress
Oxidative stress (OS) plays a critical role in AD pathogenesis
Oxidative stress promotes both tau hyperphosphorylation and Ab deposition and then the loss of synapses and neurons

Prions of Ab and Tau
Prions are defined as host-encoded proteins that adopt alternative conformations and are self-propagating
Both Ab and tau are found to have prion features in AD
Tau prions has been shown to spread throughout the brain along known neuroanatomical pathways over the course of AD

The Gut Microbiota
Activated proinflammatory cytokines by the altering of gut microbiota increase intestinal permeability and lead to insulin resistance that is associated with AD
Ab oligomers translocating from the gut to the brain contribute to the onset of AD and neuroinflammation
Eubacterium rectale, Porphyromonas gingivalis, and Lactobacillus rhamnosus are important in the origination of AD

Astroglia
Astrocytes are key components of the neurovascular unit (NVU)
In pathological situations, astrocytes turn into reactive astrocytes undergoing a series of morphological and functional alterations.
Reactive astrocytes are typically found in the region with high Ab or tau pathology in postmortem AD brains
Reactive astrocytes release cytokines, inflammatory factors, and reactive oxygen species (ROS), thus contributing to neuroinflammatory changes in AD

TREM2
Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) identified the gene triggering receptor expressed on myeloid cells 2 (TREM2) that e933084-3
are associated with a high risk of AD
TREM2, a microglia surface receptor, is especially highly expressed in microglial cells
The R47H and D87N TREM2 mutation confer significant risk of AD in humans
Soluble TREM2 levels are related to levels of total tau and phospho-tau in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), but not to Ab1-42 levels in AD brains

Synapse-Based Therapy in Alzheimer's Disease
Synaptic deficiency is an early sign of AD pathogenesis and is closely correlated with the cognitive decline in AD.
Oligomeric Ab or soluble hyperphosphorylated tau interacts with cell surface receptors, scaffold proteins, or intracellular signaling molecules to destroy synaptic structure and function.
Therefore, therapeutic strategies targeting synaptopathy at the early stage of AD may ameliorate pathology in AD
To date, no effective intervention alleviating Ab load has been developed, although oligomeric Ab is the main factor involved in the synaptotoxicity in AD.
It is more important to find Ab species-specific interventions [100].
For example, Ab*56 identified in the brains and CSF of people with normal cognitive function triggers a specific intracellular response to hyperphosphorylated tau through CaMKIIa but not GSK-3b or Cdk5.
Ab*56 or its downstream signaling cascades may be promising targets for early-stage AD interventions
Moreover, because APP processing is regulated by neuronal activity, enhancing synaptic function, which prevents synaptic dysfunction and reduces Ab production, could have a dual beneficial effect in reversing AD progression
Since tau is more closely associated with cognitive decline than Ab in the AD brain, great efforts have been made to explore tau-focused therapeutic interventions
Antibody-mediated [103-106] or anti-sense oligonucleotide (ASO)-mediated tau reduction [107] successfully reduced synaptic dysfunction and cognitive deficits in AD animal models.
Drugs which aim at new molecular targets related to dendritic and postsynaptic tau need more exploration.
Since the synaptotoxicity of Ab is mediated by receptor complexes, multiple strategies have been developed to target these cell surface proteins and their downstream signaling pathways.
Extracellular regulation of the activity of these receptors makes them more accessible targets for AD treatment.

Conclusions
Synaptic defects closely associated with cognitive decline are considered the early events in AD pathogenesis.
Based on a large number of studies, soluble Ab oligomers appear to be the primary cause of synaptic dysfunction, and synaptic tau seems to be the indispensable mediator in the process (Figure
Ab oligomers affect LTP, LTD, and synaptic death by acting on receptors, unbalancing calcium homeostasis, and activating caspases and calcineurin.
Soluble hyperphosphorylated tau impairs synaptic function by interacting with scaffold proteins, cell surface receptors, or intracellular signaling molecules.
Ab or phosphorylated tau also triggers synaptic degeneration via damaging and transportation of mitochondria.
However, further investigations are still needed to answer key questions: 1) Why have therapeutic strategies targeting Ab all failed if Ab oligomers are the initiator of AD's early pathology?
2) Why is synaptic tau required in the synaptotoxicity attributed to Ab?
In the future, a combination therapy targeting synaptic tau and Ab together may be a potential therapeutic approach for AD patients at the very early stage.

Declaration of Figure Authenticity
All figures submitted have been created by the authors, who confirm that the images are original with no duplication and have not been previously published in whole or in part.



Figure 1 .
Figure 1.
Feedback mechanisms of synaptic Aband tau in the progress of Alzheimer's disease.
Soluble oligomeric Ab is the primary cause of synaptic dysfunction, whereas synaptic tau is the mediator in the progress.
They locate in the synapse and work with receptors, synaptic proteins, and mitochondria to cause synaptic dysfunction, and ultimately lead to cognitive deficits.During the pathogenesis of AD, this is the early event, which occurs long before the formation of neurofibrillary tangles and senile plaques.


mechanisms of synaptic Ab and tau in the progress of Alzheimer's disease.
Soluble oligomeric Ab is the primary cause of synaptic dysfunction, whereas synaptic tau is the mediator in the progress.
They locate in the synapse and work with receptors, synaptic proteins, and mitochondria to cause synaptic dysfunction, and ultimately lead to cognitive deficits.
During the pathogenesis of AD, this is the early event, which occurs long before the formation of neurofibrillary tangles and senile plaques.