Role of liraglutide in Alzheimer's disease pathology
Background: The described relationship between Alzheimer's disease (AD) and type 2 diabetes (T2D) and the fact that AD has no succesful treatment has led to the study of antidiabetic drugs that may limit or slow down AD pathology.
Main body: Although T2D treatment has evident limitations, options are increasing including glucagon-like peptide 1 analogs.
Among these, liraglutide (LRGT) is commonly used by T2D patients to improve β cell function and suppress glucagon to restore normoglycaemia.
Interestingly, LRGT also counterbalances altered brain metabolism and has anti-inflammatory properties.
Previous studies have reported its capacity to reduce AD pathology, including amyloid production and deposition, tau hyperphosphorylation, or neuronal and synaptic loss in animal models of AD, accompanied by cognitive improvement.
Given the beneficial effects of LRGT at central level, studies in patients have been carried out, showing modest beneficial effects.
At present, the ELAD trial (Evaluating Liraglutide in Alzheimer's Disease NCT01843075) is an ongoing phase IIb study in patients with mild AD.
In this minireview, we resume the outcomes of LRGT treatment in preclinical models of AD as well as the available results in patients up to date.
The effects of LRGT on animal models show significant benefits in AD pathology and cognitive impairment.
While studies in patients are limited, ongoing clinical trials will probably provide more definitive conclusions on the role of LRGT in AD patients.

Background
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the most common cause of dementia.
Type 2 diabetes (T2D) may increase the risk to suffer AD over two-fold
However, it remains unclear whether T2D and AD are parallel phenomena or synergistic diseases linked by vicious pathological cycles
In this sense, findings in patients relating T2D to AD classical pathology are inconsistent
However, T2D increases the risk to develop AD, even after adjusting for vascular risk factors
This situation and the fact that AD has no successful treatment supports the study of antidiabetic drugs that may reduce or slow down AD pathology.
Liraglutide (LRGT) is a glucagon-like peptide 1(GLP-1) analog that has been widely assessed in animal models of AD.
Initial studies with patients have shown modest beneficial effects and it is currently under evaluation in the ELAD trial (Evaluating Liraglutide in Alzheimer's Disease NCT01843075).
We have reviewed available bibliography on the potential mechanisms through which LRGT may benefit AD.
An overall improvement of brain metabolic alterations, amyloid (Aβ) and tau pathologies, inflammation, and neuronal damage are observed in animal models, supporting further studies in patients.

Main text

Preclinical studies
Glucagon-like peptide 1 (GLP-1) is implicated in the control of glycemia and metabolic homeostasis, both in the periphery and the central nervous system
Due to the importance of GLP-1 signaling on cognitive function
Previous studies have shown some controversial outcomes in AD models.
Whereas brain weight
Similarly, LRGT also increases insulin receptor levels in a primate model of AD
LRGT ameliorates insulin resistance in the hippocampus by reducing phosphorylated insulin receptor levels
Interestingly, insulin degrading enzyme, that is reduced in AD preclinical models and a feasible underlying mechanism for AD and T2D
Autopsy cohort studies have revealed a limited role of T2D on classical AD neuropathological features (amyloid (Aβ) plaques and tau tangles)
However, studies in animals show an overall improvement after different administration protocols
Whereas some studies have reported no effects on amyloid pathology
LRGT also decreases Aβ aggregates
Moreover, positive effects have also been observed when LRGT is administered before Aβ plaques deposit
In addition, LRGT limits tau hyperphosphorylation by modulating the activity of ERK and JNK in 3xTgAD
Likewise, LRGT reduces hippocampal tau phosphorylation by modulating Akt and GSK-3β
Likewise, LRGT neuroprotection is mediated by a reduction of neurofilament phosphorylation in 3xTgAD animals
LRGT also improves synaptic plasticity
NMDA synapse-associated proteins are restored by LRGT in the hippocampus from hyperhomocysteinemic rats
Additionally, LRGT not only attenuates neural loss and degeneration, but it also increases neurogenesis in the cortex
Inflammation is also a major feature in AD and previous studies show that LRGT reduces microgliosis and astrocytosis in the cortex
Besides, LRGT limits pro-inflammatory cytokines, including TNF-α, IL-1ß, or IL-10
In line with these observations, LRGT also decreases brain oxidative stress, by reducing glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase activity, the formation of cortical carbonyl groups, nitrite and 8hydroxy-2′-deoxyguanosine in 3xTgAD mice
Similarly, oxidative phosphorylation of cortical astrocytes is reduced in 5xFAD mice
The positive effects of LRGT on AD-like pathology support the beneficial role of LRGT on learning and memory in most of the studies.
In this sense, spatial working memory improves after LRGT treatment
In line with these observations, contextual fear conditioning

Studies in AD patients
The above described outcomes in preclinical models of AD have set the basis to futher assess LRGT in patients.
Whereas other antidiabetic drugs, including GLP-1 analogs or dipeptidyl peptidase 4 inhibitors, have been part of preceding or ongoing clinical trials, studies with LRGT specifically are still limited.
Previous metaanalysis has shown a pro-cognitive class effect of antidiabetic agents in AD/mild cognitive impairment, although the actual beneficial effects with LRGT are limited
LRGT administration to individuals with subjective cognitive complaints, at risk for AD, improves intrinsic connectivity within brain areas.
While this did not translate into cognitive differences between study groups after 12 weeks of treatment
Gejl et al.
NCT0146 9351) have also reported that treatment with LRGT to AD patients for 6 months prevents cerebral metabolic rate of glucose consumption decline, as an indicator of cognitive impairment, synaptic dysfunction, and disease evolution.
Whereas Aβ load or cognition do not seem to be affected, the authors state the study was underpowered.
Another study with pre-or early diabetes patients has recently shown that LRGT improves short-term memory and memory composite in treated patients
The ELAD trial is presently ongoing and the main objectives include evaluation of glucose metabolic consumption in cortical regions and cognition, MRI changes, microglial activation, and amyloid or tau changes

Conclusions
Preclinical studies show beneficial effects of LRGT on AD pathological features and cognition.
While the studies in patients have only shown moderate positive effects, the ongoing ELAD trial may provide relevant insights on the actual role of LRGT at central level and open new venues of treatment for AD patients.



Fig. 1
Fig. 1 Schematic effects of liraglutide in the brain with AD pathology