Complex noradrenergic dysfunction in Alzheimer’s disease: Low norepinephrine input is not always to blame
The locus coeruleus-noradrenergic (LC-NA) system supplies the cerebral cortex with norepinephrine, a key modulator of cognition.
Neurodegeneration of the LC is an early hallmark of Alzheimer's disease (AD).
In this article, we analyze current literature to understand whether NA degeneration in AD simply leads to a loss of norepinephrine input to the cortex.
With reported adaptive changes in the LC-NA system at the anatomical, cellular, and molecular levels in AD, existing evidence support a seemingly sustained level of extracellular NE in the cortex, at least at early stages of the long course of AD.
We postulate that loss of the integrity of the NA system, rather than mere loss of NE input, is a key contributor to AD pathogenesis.
A thorough understanding of NA dysfunction in AD has a large impact on both our comprehension and treatment of this devastating disease.

Introduction to the noradrenergic system and its degeneration in

Alzheimer's disease
The brain noradrenergic (NA) system plays a critical role in supporting interactions with and responses to environmental stimuli, and serves as a major contributor to normal cognitive activities in the cortex including attention, perception, and memory retrieval
The majority of NA neurons are located in the locus coeruleus (LC) and, with widespread efferent projections, these neurons supply norepinephrine (NE) to the cortex, hippocampus, striatum, basal forebrain, preoptic area, and hypothalamus
NE is a catecholamine that is synthesized from the amino acid tyrosine through sequential reactions catalyzed by tyrosine hydroxylase, DOPA decarboxylase and dopamine β hydroxylase (DβH).
NE released from presynaptic terminals binds to different subtypes of adrenergic receptors to elicit a variety of physiological and pharmacological responses
Extracellular NE can be enzymatically degraded by enzymes such as catechol-O-

Compensatory mechanisms to counteract NA neuron loss occur during the long and progressive course of AD
Pathological changes in the LC, including tau accumulation in the neurons of LC, can occur as early as childhood or adolescence
As AD progresses, degeneration of the LC neurons happens
This, however, is not a rapid occurrence.
Rather, the degeneration seems to be a gradual process, and there is evidence that compensatory mechanisms occur in an effort to counteract this change and maintain homeostasis.
First, at an anatomical level, NA degeneration in AD is accompanied by increased sprouting of the remaining LC neurons to different brain regions, including the prefrontal cortex
NA sympathetic sprouting in the hippocampus has also been observed in late-onset AD subjects
Secondly, changes in the enzymes responsible for NE generation have been reported in AD.
Both tyrosine hydroxylase, which is the enzyme responsible for the rate limiting step in NE synthesis,
Further, DβH levels are higher in middle and late stages of AD than in early stages
Elevated levels of these enzymes can lead to an increase in production of NE.
Thirdly, decreased levels of NET have been found in AD patients using both autoradiograph
As mentioned earlier, NE re-uptake is mediated by NET, a Na/K pump that returns NE to the presynaptic terminal and acts as a major determinant of the synaptic NE level.
A decrease in the level of this transporter leaves more NE in the synapse.
Taken together, enhancement in neuronal sprouting and NE production and reduction in NE reuptake could compensate LC neuronal loss to maintain the NE levels in AD.
It is also possible that these mechanisms may overcompensate for the neuronal loss, especially at the early stages of the disease, leading to increased NE levels, as seen in some AD patients
As AD continues to progress and LC degeneration becomes increasingly profound, these compensatory mechanisms may no longer be sufficient to counteract the neuronal loss.
As a result, a decrease in the tissue levels of NE can be seen.

Is there really a loss of norepinephrine input in AD?
Given the well-documented loss of LC neurons, it is often assumed that there is a loss of norepinephrine input to the cerebral cortex in AD.
Is this really the case?
As discussed above, AD is a long and progressive process, during which degeneration of LC neurons degeneration occurs gradually along with compensation events.
When remaining LC neurons cannot sufficiently compensate the overall neuronal loss, a decrease in the tissue levels of NE is observed in the temporal lobe of advanced AD patients compared to healthy controls
Others have seen similar results, with 12-50% decreases seen in the gyrus frontalis, putamen, frontal and temporal cortex, hypothalamus, caudate nucleus, hippocampus, and gyrus cingula
Finally, the NE metabolite MHPG was found to be decreased in the temporal cortex of older AD patients (>70 years) compared to controls, but not in younger AD patients (<70 years)
However, does a 12-66% decrease in the tissue levels of NE necessarily cause a change in the extracellular levels of NE, i.e.
NE input, in the cerebral cortex?
Direct measurement of the extracellular levels of NE in vivo in LC-lesioned animals suggest that this may not be not the case.
In one study, the noradrenergic specific toxin N-(2chloroethyl)-N-e thyl-2-bromobenzylamine (DSP-4) treatment led to a 75% drop in noradrenergic content.
However, in microdialysis experiments, the extracellular NE levels of the DSP-4 treated rats were almost 2x greater than sham controls
In other studies, 50%
It is important to note that the varied levels of noradrenergic depletion can be due to inconsistencies in the methods of drug treatment such as drug doses, numbers of injections and treatment time.
Nevertheless, these well-controlled studies suggest a clear disconnect between the tissue and the extracellular levels of NE.
Several lines of evidence from AD patients support that the extracellular levels of NE are likely maintained despite a decrease in the tissue levels of NE.
First, in fresh cortical samples obtained during neurosurgery from AD patients who have an average 68% reduction in cortical NE levels, as measured by HPLC following tissue homogenization, the extracellular release of endogenous NE is not different from that in cortical samples of control subjects
Additionally, NE reuptake in these AD samples is reduced to 47% of the control level.
This unchanged release and reduced reuptake of NE would lead to sustained extracellular NE in the cerebral cortex of AD patients.
Secondly, when measured in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) of living AD patients, the levels of NE are unchanged or often increased compared to age-matched control subjects
Furthermore, the increase in CSF NE has been shown to correlate with the severity of AD
Additionally, the NE metabolite MHPG has been reported to negatively correlate with cognitive function in AD
Even in healthy subjects, NE levels have been reported to increase with age, and are associated with poorer cognitive performance
This evidence suggests that although important for cognitive functions, a higher level of NE could be detrimental.
This is consistent with studies that have shown cognitive impairment in response to stress, under which conditions NE release is elevated
Exposure to uncontrollable stressors has been shown to cause rapid impairment of working memory in monkeys and rodents
Stress exposure in humans is also found to weaken working memory performance
Furthermore, blockade of α 1 AR by antagonists, such as prazosin and urapidil, has been shown to protect cognitive functions from the detrimental effects of stress exposure
While the majority of studies have found an increase in CSF NE levels in AD patients, one study did find reduced NE levels in the CSF of AD patients with moderate cognitive decline as compared to controls
As Martignoni noted in his publication, all of his AD patients and controls were hospitalized, while only the most severe AD patients were hospitalized in some of the other published studies.
It is possible that institutionalization itself or other sickness that caused hospitalization in these patients could have affected the study.
Another study found decreased NE levels in ventricular CSF of postmortem AD patients
In addition to the direct measures of NE levels in CSF, studies with adrenergic antagonists point to NE levels remaining high enough in AD to exert effects through adrenergic receptors.
Treatment with prazosin
These results indicate that NE acting on the α 1 AR or βAR is contributing to the agitation and aggressive behaviors seen in the AD patients.
In addition, α 2 AR responsiveness to a yohimbine blockade is enhanced in AD, as indicated by a higher increase in CSF NE levels by yohimbine treatment in AD patients compared to that in control subjects
These results suggest a higher level of α 2 AR activation by the endogenous NE in AD.
Taken together, existing literature points to 12%-65% reduction in the tissue levels of NE in most AD cases, and yet, the extracellular levels of NE (i.e.
NE input to the cortex) in these AD patients may very likely maintain at a level close to the normal condition.
Thus, although NA degeneration occurs frequently, there may actually be a sustained NA tone in AD.

NE effects through the adrenergic receptors on cognition in the context of AD
NE elicits its effects through activating the adrenergic receptors, which are members of the G-protein coupled receptor (GPCR) superfamily.
The α 1 subfamily of adrenergic receptors (α 1A , α 1B and α 1D ) signals through the G q signaling pathway and, upon activation, increase both IP3 and calcium levels
The βARs (β1, β2 and β3) mainly signal though the Gs protein and increase cAMP generation upon activation
The α 2 ARs (α 2A , α 2B and α 2C ) signal though the G i/o signaling pathway, and activation of these receptors inhibits cAMP production and calcium influx
The α 2 receptors also serve as auto-receptors on presynaptic NA terminals where they inhibit NE release.
All three receptor subfamilies play important roles in normal cognitive function, which has been reviewed extensively
Here we primarily focus on the effects of activation or inhibition of these receptors on cognitive functions in AD animal models or human patients.
In the non-disease state, inhibition of the β 1 and β 2 ARs with propranolol, which blocks the β 1 and β 2 ARs with equal affinity
One might therefore assume that activating these receptors in AD patients would lead to positive outcomes.
However, for the most part, blockade of the βARs seems to be cognitively beneficial, as demonstrated in AD animal models.
This may be related to the role of βAR in Aβ generation.
Activation of β 2 AR promotes Aβ production through enhancing γ secretase activity
Thus, a β 2 antagonist, ICI 118,551, reduces Aβ plaque load in AD mouse models, whereas β 2 agonists increase the Aβ plaque load
Additionally, treatment of Tg2576 mice with a β 1 antagonist, nebivolol, reduces Aβ generation
Consistently, in both Tg2576 AD model mice and a mouse model of age-related cognitive decline (SAMP8), treatment with a non-subtype selective β blocker, propranolol, leads to an improvement in cognitive function
However, in a 3xTg mouse model, ICI 118,551 actually increased Aβ levels and impaired cognitive function
This discrepancy has yet to be fully addressed, though may be related to the different models used.
In addition to β 2 AR, a number of other G protein-coupled receptors have been linked to AD by altering APP processing, and this topic is reviewed well elsewhere
An α 2 AR agonist, clonidine, increases Aβ plaque load, whereas an α 2 AR antagonist, idazoxan, decreases it and rescues the cognitive deficit observed in APP/PS1 transgenic mice
Although activation of the α 1 ARs has been shown to improve spatial learning, fear learning, and working memory and attention in WT animals
In AD patients, α 1 AR activation is thought to contribute to the observed agitation symptom
Taken together, the above evidence suggest dysfunction of adrenergic receptors in regulating cognitive functions under the pathological conditions of AD.
This is not totally surprising given the substantial alterations in neuroanatamy including the primary and compensatory changes in the NA system in AD.
At the molecular and cellular levels, aberant receptor densities

Conclusions and perspectives
Pathological changes to the NA system occur early in AD.
However, the underlying mechanisms driving these changes and their contributions to AD pathogenesis remain to be determined.
Nonetheless, existing evidence tends to paint a more complex picture of NA dysfunction in AD than a simple, straight-forward loss of NE input to the cerebral cortex.
Despite the well-documented loss of NE producing NA neurons, the extracellular levels of NE, especially at the early stages of disease, are likely unchanged or even increased due to a number of compensatory mechanisms.
Moreover, the endogenous NE target, adrenergic receptors, are dysregulated at multiple levels in AD so that activation of these receptors seem to elicit a number of deteriorating effects rather than promoting cognition.
Overall, the integrity of the NA system appears to be very integral in maintaining a balance that allows for the proper operation of a variety of physiological processes that are dysregulated in AD.
Alterations at the anatomical, cellular, and molecular levels of NA components in AD support that loss of the integrity of the NA system, not merely loss of the NE input, is a key contributor to AD development.

Abbreviations:

AR


chloroethyl)-N-ethyl-2-bromobenzylamine