A precision medicine framework using artificial intelligence for the identification and confirmation of genomic biomarkers of response to an Alzheimer's disease therapy: Analysis of the blarcamesine (ANAVEX2‐73) Phase 2a clinical study
The search for drugs to treat Alzheimer's disease (AD) has failed to yield effective therapies.
Here we report the first genome-wide search for biomarkers associated with therapeutic response in AD.
Blarcamesine (ANAVEX2-73), a selective sigma-1 receptor (SIGMAR1) agonist, was studied in a 57-week Phase 2a trial (NCT02244541).
The study was extended for a further 208 weeks (NCT02756858) after meeting its primary safety endpoint.
: Safety, clinical features, pharmacokinetic, and efficacy, measured by changes in the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) and the Alzheimer's Disease Cooperative Study-Activities of Daily Living scale (ADCS-ADL), were recorded.
Whole exome and transcriptome sequences were obtained for 21 patients.
The relationship between all available patient data and efficacy outcome measures was analyzed with unsupervised formal concept analysis (FCA), integrated in the Knowledge Extraction and Management (KEM) environment.
Results: Biomarkers with a significant impact on clinical outcomes were identified at week 57: mean plasma concentration of blarcamesine (slope MMSE:P < .041),
genomic variants SIGMAR1 p.Gln2Pro (ΔMMSE:P < .039;
ΔADCS-ADL:P < .063)
and COMT p.Leu146fs (ΔMMSE:P < .039;
ΔADCS-ADL:P < .063),
and baseline MMSE score (slope MMSE:P < .015).

INTRODUCTION
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a progressive neurodegenerative disorder characterized by loss of memory and other cognitive functions, leading to interference in daily life activities.
At present, no pharmacological treatment has been shown to alter progression of the disease
Heterogeneity of the AD patient population
Sigma-1 receptor (SIGMAR1), a modulator of calcium homeostasis and mitochondrial function,
Activation of SIGMAR1 also leads to increase in autophagic flux in human cells and in vivo.
arcamesine (ANAVEX2-73), an agonist of the SIGMAR1, has been shown by positron emission tomography (PET) scan to directly bind its target
The clinical potential of blarcamesine in AD was initially assessed in mouse models of AD,
This study, ANAVEX2-73-002 (Figure
Patients enrolled in the two studies were characterized at baseline and at each visit, including collection of data on clinical descriptors, physical examination, pharmacokinetics, and Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) and Alzheimer's Disease Cooperative Study-Activities of Daily Living scale (ADCS-ADL) as efficacy measures (Figure
Patient tumors are routinely characterized in oncology studies by sequencing of their genomic material to identify and rank genomic biomarkers of disease and therapeutic response.
Genetic polymorphisms and changes in expression levels in somatic cells are associated with variations in treatment response in oncology, modulating therapeutic response in patient populations.
In this study, whole exome sequencing (WES) and gene expression (RNAseq) were analyzed at 103 to 135 weeks in the 21 patients continuing in the ANAVEX2-73-003 study (Figure
The integration of genomic data from these samples with longitudinal clinical and other patient data, including efficacy outcome measures and derived measures of progression, led to the identification and ranking of patient selection markers (Figures
Small sample sizes, for which the number of patient observations is orders of magnitude smaller than the number of attributes, is an analytical challenge
Formal concept analysis (FCA) is less affected by population size than other statistical analysis platforms.
In this study, FCA, integrated in Knowledge Extraction and Management (KEM) software (v.3.6.2),
was used to identify and rank phenotypic and genotypic biomarkers.
No link was assumed in these analyses of biomarkers and therapeutic responses, enabling a hypothesis free, data-driven, tabulation of all relational effects between potential biomarkers and therapeutic responses in patients with AD.

METHODS

Study design
The Due to the favorable safety and tolerability profile of ANAVEX2-73-002 (Supplementary Table
The baseline for these analyses is defined as week 0 (Figure

Subjects
A total of 32 subjects with mild-to-moderate AD, between 50

Study endpoints

Safety endpoints
Safety was evaluated by assessment of incidence and severity of AEs (Table

Efficacy outcomes
Exploratory clinical efficacy in this study was defined as change from baseline of each patient's cognitive (MMSE) and functional ability (ADCS-ADL) scores.
MMSE
The range of this scale is from 0 to 30, with a higher score indicating higher cognitive function.
The ADCS-ADL
The scale is from 0 to 78, with a higher score indicating greater function.
The ADCS-ADL has been shown to have good test-retest reliability.
The MMSE and the ADCS-ADL were assessed during pre-specified clinical site visits across Age, mean ± SD 68.9 ± 9.84 67.9

Pharmacokinetics
A pharmacokinetics analysis was performed during Part A only.
Blood samples were drawn at 12 and 11 time points after the first oral or IV administration during the first and second periods of Part A, respectively.
Pharmacokinetic parameters included in the analysis consisted of maximum plasma drug concentration (C max ), time to maximum plasma concentration during a dosing interval (t max ), area under the curve from the time of dosing to the last measurable concentration (AUC 0-t ), mean elimination half-life (t ½), and the total body clearance for extravascular administration divided by the fraction of dose absorbed (CL/F).
Figure
Steady-state plasma levels of blarcamesine (ANAVEX2-73) and its metabolite ANAVEX19-144 were measured in Part B in blood samples collected at prespecified time points (weeks 17, 31, 41, and 53).
Mean concentration values in ng/mL were averaged for each patient.
Figure
The relationship between dose and plasma concentration of blarcamesine (ANAVEX2-73) was determined in a Phase 1 study,
The dose-dependent increase of plasma concentration of blarcamesine (ANAVEX2-73) and metabolite has also been confirmed in the present study, as shown in Fig.

DNA and RNA extraction and sequencing
The protocol was amended to allow collection of blood samples in the ANAVEX2-73-003 extension study.
The 21 patients who were still enrolled in the study at the time of protocol amendment accepted blood sample collection.
Blood samples were collected at the next scheduled visit, between weeks 103 and 135.
These samples were sequenced for DNA (WES) and RNA expression levels (RNASeq).
Standard quality control (Q-Score) as specified by the manufacturer Illumina
We identified 408,551 DNA variants within the cohort.
Of these, 39,974 high-or moderate-impact variants
RNA expression values were normalized as transcripts per kilobase million.
An additive genetic model was used in the association study.
When using a binary descriptor for genomic variants, the presence of one copy of the allele was considered sufficient to define the descriptor.
For example, apolipoprotein E gene (APOE) genotype 4 (APOE 4/-) was considered "TRUE" if at least one copy of 4 was present.

Focused gene subset
We selected 243 genes from the 27,155 mapped sequences in the NGS analysis (Fig.
102 genes were selected from their association with neurodegenerative diseases (Fig.
A total of 113 genes of the cytochrome P450s gene family and 10 genes from the methyltransferase gene family were also added (S2b).
Finally, 20 genes were selected as part of a SIGMAR1's functional interactome (Fig.

Data analysis
Data analysis with the association rule-based FCA platform on week 57 identified and ranked candidates for patient selection biomarkers for therapeutic response.
Confirmation of this week 57 draft biomarker list was shown in linear mixed effect (LME) models and unadjusted mean averages after 148 weeks.
Figure
Figure

Association rules and the KEM R platform
The KEM R v 3.6.2
analytical platform systematically extracted relations between all variables collected.
These relations are developed from Galois lattices theory, or FCA.
KEM identifies groups of objects with shared properties
Association rules have been developed to detect patterns and relationships in large heterogeneous databases.
A was introduced by Agrawal and Srikant.
FCA has been successfully applied in different domains, including: drug discovery,
FCA association rules may reflect a causal relationship between two variables.
However, the presence of a statistically significant association is neither necessary nor sufficient to indicate the presence of such causal relationships.
Quality measures described below calibrate the value of these association rules.
An association rule is a relationship such as X→Y, with X being the antecedent (or a combination of antecedents) and Y the consequent (or combination of consequents) of the rule, that allows inferring X as a consequence of Y.
For a dataset of N subjects, n X , n Y , and n XY , respectively are the numbers of subjects satisfying:
• the antecedent(s) X of a rule,
• the consequent(s) Y, and
• both parts of the rule.
The n xy subjects matching any association rule can be identified with this platform.
Six quality measures describe and rank association rules:

Support, confidence, and lift
Support is the number of subjects for which the association has been observed:
Confidence is the percentage of the characterized subjects verifying the rule:
Lift (relative probability) is the ratio of observed support to that expected if X and Y were independent.
N represents the total number of subjects.
It measures the performance of a rule to identify a subgroup from a larger population:
See Methods S1 in supporting information for details of measures of significance, size effect, and discretization.

Linear mixed effect models
The routine application of LME modeling for continuous primary endpoints in longitudinal clinical trials and specifically to analyze the outcome of AD clinical studies is reflected in several publications.
E models were developed with the R statistical software lme4 package.
Clinical outcomes of the LME models were changes in MMSE and ADCS-ADL continuous scores compared to baseline.
The same baseline (week 0) was used as defined in Section 2.1.
Details of the LME models are given in Methods S2 in supporting information.

RESULTS

Exploratory therapeutic response analysis: Response to blarcamesine (ANAVEX2-73) at week 57
Higher concentrations also increased the probability of improved ADCS-ADL scores (P = .03;
Fig.
Lower MMSE baseline scores (<20) increased the relative probability (lift) of worse MMSE outcome by 1.5-fold, while higher MMSE baseline scores (≥20) increased the relative probability of improved MMSE by 1.62-fold, both at week 57.

Genomic markers
As we focused on relations displaying a 100% confidence and true for both a change in MMSE and a change in ADCS-ADL, two DNA variants were identified, SIGMAR1 p.Gln2Pro (rs1800866) and COMT p.Leu146fs (rs113895332/rs61143203; were confirmed by an independent group using a real-time PCR (rtPCR) assay.
Blinded samples showed a 100% concordance between the rtPCR data and the reported WES data (data not shown).
The structural impact of SIGMAR1 p.Gln2Pro was also modeled in Fig.
No multiple testing was applied to the top filtered rules.

Effect size at week 57
Daily treatment with ANAVEX2-73 for 57 weeks for the entire Phase 2a cohort showed effect sizes of 0.57 and 0.18 for change in MMSE and change in ADCS-ADL, respectively, compared to standard of care (
Additional significant variables in this model were SIG-MAR1 p.Gln2Pro, COMT p.Leu146fs, and APOE4 4 status interactions with time.

Confirmation at 148 weeks: Unadjusted values
Unadjusted measures corroborated these results.
Patients with biomarkers of improved therapeutic response at week 57 had improved therapeutic response in ADCS-ADL at 148 weeks compared to those without these biomarkers or reference populations receiving standard of care (Figure
Two patients showed exceptional therapeutic response during the longitudinal study (148-week period).
Both subjects had SIGMAR1 wild type, high mean concentration of blarcamesine (ANAVEX2-73) in plasma and baseline MMSE ≥ 20 (Fig. Summary of mean change in MMSE and mean change in ADCS-ADL scores at week 57 since baseline, Cohen's d effect size calculation compared to standard of care
Mean ± SD Delta scores baseline to week 57 are presented.
a Medium Cohen's d index (≥0.5).
Large Cohen's d index (≥0.8).
provements in mood and alertness and increased independent activity.

S4 in supporting information

DISCUSSION
This study is, to the best of our knowledge, the first reported genomewide search for biomarkers associated with improved therapeutic response in AD.
This approach is different from standard classification or searches for molecular "signatures."
Analyzing pharmacological, genomic, and clinical data, including efficacy endpoints, the FCA-based KEM framework identified and ranked predictors of response by association rules that are consistent with the observed data from our two clinical studies.
The FCA platform enables an analysis of a very large combinatorial space, typically 10 9 and larger.
Application of the platform to the present study led to a selection of smaller sets, typically 2 to 3 × 10 6 , and to the identification of dozens of important association rules, linking potential biomarkers with response.
In contrast with "black box" numerical methods, the FCA approach allows the verification of each association rule for individual patients (as shown in Tables
This analytical platform enables objective and explicit rules filtering strategies to identify patient selection biomarkers of therapeutic response.
The characterization of AD at early stages has been challenged by the absence of reliable genomic markers prognostic of the onset of mild cognitive impairment (MCI).
APOE 4 genotype status alone does not have sufficient predictive power, because only about 25% of the population carries the APOE 4 genotype.
TOMM40
However, the TOMORROW study, which included 3494 patients (out of 24,136 screened) was not able to reach its primary biomarker endpoint.
ndomized clinical trials in AD have been challenged by two major hurdles:
•
Their relevance is supported because drug concentration is a more meaningful PK parameter than dose; low baseline MMSE is thought to be associated with an AD stage that has progressed beyond the reach of a number of therapeutic approaches; SIGMAR1 is the confirmed in vivo target of blarcamesine (ANAVEX2-73); and
COMT is a gene associated with memory and other neurobehavioral functions.
omarkers were identified in this article with the FCA framework, which enabled a systematic search for association rules between all parameters collected in the studies.
FCA is an overview of relationships between all variables (ie, the analysis is not supervised), allowing mining and ranking these relationships based on measures of "interestingness".
Commonly used interestingness measures include support (the number of patients verifying the relation), confidence (a probability of a property existing if a pre-condition is set), and lift (a relative probability).
Unlike statistical tests and statistical modeling, association rules analysis does not state a null hypothesis nor estimates any parameters.
Nevertheless, a measure of statistical significance of the association is calculated for each identified rule using the Fisher's exact test P-value.
This is a calculation of the likelihood that the relationship between the values of two variables, given a univariate rule X→Y, is caused by something other than chance.
A threshold on P-values in our study was set to P = .05,
that is, the probability that the selected association is due to random chance is <5%.
Because association rule methods generate rules which are dependent on each other, multiple testing P-values corrections, such as Bonferroni, are too conservative and reject true positive results.
Instead, we characterized the magnitude of the changes in outcome by calculating effect sizes using Cohen's d.
Monte Carlo simulations were considered to assess validity and reliability of results; however, they were deemed unsuitable in this analysis and are discussed in detail in the Discussion in supporting information.
The goal of FCA and association rule analysis is to explicitly generate hypotheses consistent with the data and provide a framework for ranking them.
All hypotheses generated from the data are considered without a priori hypotheses.
These hypotheses can be challenged by the existing body of evidence in the field, beyond the data contained in the trial, and are confirmed in subsequent experiments, as in any scientific discovery process.
Short of testing the relations identified in this study in an independent cohort, we did an initial confirmation of the hypotheses generated by KEM with the longitudinal assessment over 148 weeks.
LME models were derived using all 287 available observed outcome data from patients.
LME models account for missing data and provide robust results in small clinical trial studies.
e LME model analysis at week 148 showed a significant difference in therapeutic response between the two concentration arms related to adjusted mean change from baseline in ADCS-ADL (88%) and adjusted mean change from baseline MMSE (78%).
These differences are significant and quite large.
These values compare favorably with recent results obtained in other studies for data presented at CTAD 2018 for BAN2401 after 72 weeks: 59 47% in adjusted mean change from baseline in ADAS-Cog and 30% adjusted mean change in ADCOMS,
There are some limitations in this study:
• Small sample size, with 32 patients entering the study and 21 patients having available genomic data, which limited the power of the study.
• Lack of adjustment for multiple comparisons in the analyses of relations between markers and therapeutic response.
• Genomic analysis results reported for only a subset panel of 243 genes; however, an analysis of 39,974 DNA variants (Table
• Standard of care measure of change in MMSE and change in ADCS-ADL for calculating effect size were obtained from the literature at 48, 52, and 82 weeks
• RNA analysis was limited due to collection time (103 to 135 weeks) and lack of baseline transcriptome data for comparison.
Nonetheless, an exploratory analysis did find that high SIGMAR1 expression was associated with better therapeutic response (Table
• Newly identified patient selection biomarkers were longitudinally confirmed for change in ADCS-ADL, but not for change in MMSE, over 148 weeks.
This result may be due to a higher variability in MMSE scores.
The FCA platform described in this work opens the possibility of using data-driven unbiased biomarker identification early in the drug development process.
The "white box" and systematic approach of FCA is ideal for the analysis of early data, leading to the identification of patient selection biomarkers that can assist in the design of more effective subsequent clinical trials.


present study analyzes data from two consecutive clinical trials: ANAVEX2-73-002 (NCT02244541) and ANAVEX2-73-003 (NCT02756858).
ANAVEX2-73-002 was a multicenter Phase 2a clinical trial of the drug blarcamesine (ANAVEX2-73) that recruited 32 subjects with mild-to-moderate AD.
This was a two-part study: Part A was a simple randomized, open-label, two-period, cross-over, adaptive trial lasting up to 5 weeks.
Each period involved one specific administration route and two possible dose levels: in the first period, the oral dose (30 or 50 mg) was administered, and in the second period an intravenous (IV) form (3 or 5 mg) was administered, with a total of eight possible dose administration schemes in Part A (details available in Fig. S1a in supporting information).
The two periods were separated by a wash-out period of 12 days when no dose was given.
Part B, following immediately after Part A, was an open-label extension of the oral daily dose for an additional 52 weeks.
The primary endpoint of ANAVEX2-73-002 was to establish the safety and tolerability of the drug.
Secondary endpoints aimed at establishing the relationship between dosing regimen and pharmacodynamicsexploratory efficacy outcomes of cognition and function.
Cognition was assessed by the MMSE, while functional abilities were assessed by the ADCS-ADL.
Additional cognitive measures included the Cogstate Brief Battery (CBB) and functional measures of electroencephalography and event-related potential (EEG and ERP).
Part B continued an adaptive oral administration scheme.
Figure S1d in supporting information summarizes the mean oral dose administration during the ANAVEX2-73-002 study.


), and in response to requests from patients and caregivers, a 208-week open-label extension study (ANAVEX2-73-003) was added immediately after completion of ANAVEX2-73-002 Part B. ANAVEX2-73-003 enrolled the 24 subjects who completed Part B and applied similarly an adaptive daily oral administration scheme.
ANAVEX2-73-003 includes continuous evaluation of safety and efficacy as measured by the MMSE and ADCS-ADL.
At week 148 (interim time point for analyses), data on the subjects remaining in the study (n = 21) was analyzed for efficacy outcomes.


and 85 years of age, were enrolled across three sites in Australia from December 2014 through September 2015.
Their diagnoses were consistent with Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders 4th edition (DSM-IV) 24 and National Institute of Neurological and Communicative Disorders and Stroke/Alzheimer's Disease and Related Disorders Association criteria, 25 and included evaluation of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and/or computed tomography (CT) brain scans.
The demographics and baseline characteristics of the 32 participants are summarized in



F I G U R E 1
14 different time points over the ANAVEX2-73-002 (weeks 0 and 5 in Part A; weeks 17, 31, 41, 53, and 57 in Part B), and ANAVEX2-73-003 (weeks 70, 83, 96, 109, 122, 135, and 148) studies.
Changes in scores over baseline (Delta) were calculated using the difference between values at each visit and at baseline for each individual patient.
In addition, a rate of decline (Slope) was estimated for each individual patient having at least two scores recorded during the ANAVEX2-73-002 study to lower the impact of noise in MMSE and ADCS-ADL scores, with a simple linear regression analysis across all available time points between the baseline and week 57 (end of Overview of study design, data availability, and analytical methods.
(a) Summary of consecutive clinical trials ANAVEX2-73-002 involving two parts: Part A over 5 weeks and Part B over 52 weeks, and the ANAVEX2-73-003 extension study over a planned 208-week period immediately after the initial trial, with a cumulative 265 weeks.
(b) Summary of integrated data sources.
A total of 2527 features, from 1152 descriptors, were used for each subject, including 837 genomic sequences with amino acid changes, from a total of 27,155 annotated genes and 185 RNA expression profiles.
Patient descriptors are shown in gray and outcomes in pink.
(c) Classification of number of patient descriptors incorporated in the two analytical steps applied in the study: (1) Unsupervised FCA rule-based analysis of response at week 57 and (2) longitudinal confirmation using mixed effect modeling of response over 148 weeks with markers found at week 57 to model two groups of ANAVEX2-73 concentrations TA B L E 1 Baseline characteristics (N = 32 and N = 21)


total of 3,145,630 relations between all available features were explored.
Stringent filtering focused on relationships of response at week 57 (end of Part B) reduced the number of associations to only 15 linked to clinical outcomes, as measured by change from baseline (Delta) or rate of decline (Slope) MMSE or ADCS-ADL (Table2a).
Within the 15 relations identified, average blood concentration of blarcamesine (ANAVEX2-73) above 4 ng/mL in Part B increased the probability of improved MMSE outcome 1.88-fold at week 57 (Table



F I G U R E 2
Variability in the assessment of efficacy based on clinical evaluation of cognitive, behavioral, and functional changes over time with inherently noisy tests or questionnaires.
Robust links have yet to be established between clinical outcomes and reproducible neuroimaging/fluid-based biomarkers.
The uncertainty in the values measured by these endpoints adds to the uncertainty in the determination of therapeutic efficacy.
• Heterogeneity of AD, based on neurobehavioral features, inheritance (familial or sporadic) and other genetic characteristics, time course of progression, age of onset, pathological and other features, which have been discussed at length.
This observed heterogeneity is also seen in other therapeutic areas such as oncology.
In oncology, multiple small, open-label clinical trials are run in which a broad range of biomarker candidates are identified and hypotheses generated and tested iteratively, serving as foundation for the design of follow-up controlled studies.
Crizotinib is a good example of accelerated approval in oncology following an openlabel Phase 1a study, where a novel biomarker (ALK+) was first identified based on 2 of 11 patients with non-small cell lung cancer enrolled in a Phase 1 dose escalation trial. 54
The biomarker was validated through an amended Phase 2a study including 19 patients, with 10 out of 19 patients being labeled as responders, which ultimately led to a preliminary drug registration.
Subsequently, a confirmatory trial enrolled 82 ALK+ patients and showed 57% partial response and 1% Linear mixed effect (LME) models of change in Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) and Alzheimer's Disease Co-operative Study-Activities of Daily Living scale (ADCS-ADL) since baseline over 148 weeks.
To analyze the effect of high concentration on outcome over time, significant fixed effect terms linked to concentration were kept in the model.
This has the effect of "correcting" for all other parameters except concentration.
Because part of the response signal is not explained by the model (random error), this "residual" was added to the adjusted response values.
For each time point, the model generates an adjusted predicted outcome for each This adjusted outcome includes the residual mentioned above.
For each time point, a mean and standard deviation of the adjusted outcome were calculated for the 21 patients and represented as solid points and error bars linked by dotted lines.
A, LME-adjusted slopes for the high concentration (green) cohort versus low and medium concentration patient cohort (magenta) with time (in weeks) against adjusted change in MMSE.
Average adjusted values with residuals at the population level were plotted at each time point (dotted line).
B, LME-adjusted slopes for the high concentration (green) cohort versus low and medium concentration patient cohort (magenta) with time (in weeks) against adjusted change in ADCS-ADL.
Average adjusted values with residuals at the population level were plotted at each time point (dotted line) complete response.
Unbiased and unsupervised data analytics methods such as the KEM platform may be ideal tools to streamline this type of discovery process.
As such, they provide systematic iterative precision medicine tools for drug development, suitable as much to AD as to oncology.
The search for alternative druggable targets for AD is becoming a priority, and SIGMAR1 targeted by blarcamesine (ANAVEX2-73) may be an important drug target to maintain cellular homeostasis, delay or halt neurodegeneration, and/or enhance synaptic compensatory responses, as suggested by experimental studies.
This article presents an unbiased analysis of data from two clinical studies, which enabled the identification of parameters associated with improved therapeutic response.
By searching for and selecting biomarkers that are consistently associated with therapeutic response over multiple time points and multiple endpoints, a reliable identification and ranking of patient selection biomarkers for therapeutic response is possible.
The approach described in this study, without a priori hypotheses, identified, in addition to a specific variant of the SIGMAR1 gene (rs1800866) and COMT variants (rs113895332/rs61143203), blarcamesine (ANAVEX2-73) mean concentration, and baseline MMSE were included in the top 15 drivers of clinical response, from the >3 million retained subset of rules (Table



F I G U R E 3
Unadjusted values of change in Alzheimer's Disease Co-operative Study-Activities of Daily Living scale (ADCS-ADL) since baseline over 148 weeks.
A, The plot presents (unadjusted) mean trajectories of change in ADCS-ADL scores over interim 148 weeks of subgroups of ANAVEX2-73-002/003 patients depending on biomarker status (absent or present) and of patients given standard of care.
The subgroups of ANAVEX2-73-002/003 patients are represented (blue, green, orange, pink, purple, and turquoise) with plot depending on identified biomarker and baseline criteria characteristics.
B, Summary of the mean and standard deviations of different patient groups unadjusted change in ADCS-ADL scores at 14 time points (weeks 0, 5, 17, 31, 41, 53, 57, 83, 96, 109, 122, 135, and 148).
All patients in the ANAVEX2-73 study are presented along with each patient subgroup depending on inclusion criteria.
The standard of care mean changes from baseline for ADCS-ADL scores were obtained from the literature with -6.7 point change in 1 year 42 and -10.5 change in 18 months/70 wk



Findings from this study
are the basis for a new ongoing Phase 2b/3 AD study (NCT03790709), as well as for identifying patient populations likely to have better therapeutic responses to blarcamesine (ANAVEX2-73) in clinical trials for Parkinson's disease dementia (NCT03774459) and Rett syndrome (NCT03758924).



Table



Table 2b
(a) FCA association rules results for clinical outcomes at week 57.Stringent filtering excluded rules containing variables coding for the absence of DNA variants and medium RNA expression groups.Numerical filtering of rules had the following thresholds: support (n > 3), confidence (>50%), and lift (≥1.2).The filtering steps led to a subset of 4009 association rules linking clinical, genomic, and transcriptomics patient characteristics with response at multiple time points.A second filtering step focused on relationships with response at week 57 only, raising support ≥ 5, lift ≥ 1.5, and P-value (Fisher exact test or Mann-Whitney-Wilcoxon <.05), and excluding RNA expression, CYP variants, and dose/concentration from Part A. This further reduced the number of rules to 15 associations linked to clinical outcomes as measured by change since baseline, labeled Delta (with binarized discretization; see Supplementary Table3a), or slope of MMSE or ADCS-ADL at week 57.
The 15 rules are shown in decreasing order for highest confidence and highest lift



Table 3



51 3.2 Confirmation of markers of response at week 57: Interim analysis at week 148 3.2.1 Confirmation at 148 weeks: LME models


Effect size on clinical outcomes at week 57