Proteomic and biological profiling of extracellular vesicles from Alzheimer's disease human brain tissues
Introduction: Extracellular vesicles (EVs) from human Alzheimer's disease (AD) biospecimens contain amyloid beta (A) peptide and tau.
While AD EVs are known to affect brain disease pathobiology, their biochemical and molecular characterizations remain ill defined.
Methods: EVs were isolated from the cortical gray matter of 20 AD and 18 control brains.
Tau and A levels were measured by immunoassay.
Differentially expressed EV proteins were assessed by quantitative proteomics and machine learning.
Results: Levels of pS396 tau and A1-42 were significantly elevated in AD EVs.
High levels of neuron-and glia-specific factors are detected in control and AD EVs, respectively.
Machine learning identified ANXA5, VGF, GPM6A, and ACTZ in AD EV compared to controls.
They distinguished AD EVs from controls in the test sets with 88% accuracy.
Discussion: In addition to A and tau, ANXA5, VGF, GPM6A, and ACTZ are new signature proteins in AD EVs.

BACKGROUND
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the most common form of dementia affecting nearly 50 million people worldwide.
Neuropathologically, disease is characterized by amyloid plaques formed by extracellular aggregation of amyloid beta (A) peptide and intracellular accumulation of neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs).
These are formed in brain tissue by the hyperphosphorylated and misfolded microtuble-associated protein tau.
As AD progresses, A and tau aggregates spread throughout the brain in a spatiotemporal manner.
A deposition is most prominent in the frontal, anterior/posterior cingulate, lateral parietal, and lateral temporal regions.
Tau pathology, as classified by Braak and Braak, occurs in six histopathological stages.
These correspond to tauopathy stages of AD.
In stages I and II, NFTs appear in the entorhinal cortex and hippocampus, while in stage III and IV, higher densities extend beyond the entorhinal cortex and hippocampus to the neocortex.
In the final V-VI stages, pathological tau deposits are present throughout the hippocampus.
tracellular vesicles (EVs), including exosomes (50 to 150 nm), ectosomes/microvesicles (150 to 1000 nm), and apoptotic bodies (1000 to 5000 nm) are released from neurons, glia, and various other neural cells into the extracellular space.
6]
the central nervous system (CNS), it has been reported that ADassociated pathogenic proteins in brain EVs including tau and A oligomers play important roles in AD pathogenesis.
0]
EVs are involved in the extracellular enzymatic degradation of A and promote both A aggregation and clearance by microglia.
Moreover, models of neuron-to-neuron transfer of tau seeds by EVs were reported.
5]
One mechanism centers around bridging integrator 1 (BIN1), which is associated with the progression of tau pathology and observed by its abilities to alter tau clearance and by promoting the release of tau-enriched microglial EVs.
ile EVs recovered from human and mouse brain tissues were examined by morphology, proteomics, and RNA analyses,
Evaluation of these molecules for their roles in the spread and propagation of tau as therapeutic targets.

METHODS

Brain sample acquisitions

Purification of EVs from human brain samples
0.5 g of largely gray matter tissue from the frontal cortex of deceased AD or control cases were processed for EV extraction based on reported method with some modifications (see supporting information for detailed methods).

Protein concentrations
The bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay was used to determine protein concentration for each sample using Pierce BCA protein assay kit (# 23225
Pierce) (see supporting information for detailed methods).

Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
ELISAs were performed to assess levels of t-tau, p-tau, A1-40 and A1-42, and ANXA5 (see supporting information for detailed methods).

Nanoparticle tracking analysis
All samples were diluted in dfPBS at least 1:1000 or more to get particles within the target reading range for the Nanosight 300 machine (Malvern Panalytical Inc) (see supporting information for detailed methods).

Transmission electron microscopy
The EV isolated from AD or control brain tissue were analyzed by transmission electron microscopy (TEM; see supporting information for detailed methods).

Mass spectrometry
The EV samples were subjected to chemical treatment, tryptic digestion, and liquid chromatography (LC)-electrospray ionization (ESI) tandem mass-spectroscopy (MS/MS) analysis (see supporting information for detailed methods).

Sequence database
The raw LC-MS/MS data were converted into mZML format using Pro-teoWizard msConvert and analyzed using using

Machine learning
The protein biomarkers to distinguish patients with AD from controls were selected using least absolute shrinkage and selection operator (LASSO) on the proteomics data from the training set (n = 21), in which each patient's true state is labeled.
An ensemble machine learning classifier to evaluate the performance of the selected proteins was developed as described (see supporting information for detail methods).
e machine learning generated model's performance was evaluated on a separate, user-blinded test set (n = 17).

RESULTS
A
There were no statistical differences in the demographics between AD and controls with the exception of post mortem intervals (PMI) of the validation set, which will be discussed in the validation study (see Figure

Biochemical characterization of brain-derived EVs
The experimental workflow is summarized in Figure
The EV samples were isolated from 20 AD and 18 sex-and age-matched cognitively unimpaired controls using the discontinuous sucrose gradient ultracentrifugation as previously described with modifications (see Materials and Methods).
This technique of EV isolation has been successfully used to isolate EVs from frozen mouse brain tissues.
addition, we performed the quantitative proteomics analysis of human brain tissue homogenates and purified EV samples.
The tetraspanins and ESCRT proteins were enriched in the EV samples, and contamination of non-EV molecules such as nucleus, mitochondria, ER, and Golgi-related proteins as indicated in MISEV2018
guidelines
To determine the purity of the EV preparations, EV samples were analyzed for their size and number by nanoparticle tracking analysis (NTA).
The concentration of EVs derived from AD and control brains were not significantly different (P = .6075).
The mode size distribution for EVs was significantly different and peaked at 122 nm for AD and 131 nm for controls (P = .0095)
(Figure
The EVs isolated from frozen brain tissue showed cap-shaped morphology by transmission electron microscopy (TEM;
Figure
We next measured the concentration of total tau (t-tau) and p-tau at threonine 181 (pT181 tau), serine 199 (pS199 tau), and serine 396 (pS396 tau) in lysed EVs by ELISA.
The levels of t-tau, pT181 tau, and pS199 tau showed no significant differences between AD and controls (t-tau: P = .398,
pT181 tau: P = .7235,
and pS199 tau: P = .4384;
Figure
Conversely, pS396 tau was significantly increased in AD-brain derived EVs over controls (pS396 tau: P = .0375;
Figure
Moreover, we observed a significant increase in A1-42 in AD-derived EVs over controls (P < .0001),
but not in A1-40 (P = .119;
Figure
The amount of pS396 and A1-42 in the brain homogenate tissue were quantified by ELISA, and we performed the bivariate correlation analysis between the homogenate samples and EV samples purified from the same AD brain samples.
There is a significant difference in pS396 tau and A1-42 levels in the brain tissue homogenate between AD and controls (pS396 tau; P < .0001,
A1-42; P = .0001).
In addition, there is a significant positive correlation between the brain tissue homogenate and the EVs.
The results suggest increased pS396 and A1-42 level in the brain tissue might be related with elevation of pS396 and A1-42 in the EVs (pS396; r = 0.4987, P = .0050,
A1-42; r = 0.5632, P = .0005;
Figure

Proteomic profiling of brain-derived EVs
We performed a label-free Nano-LC-MS/MS analysis of 38 EV samples for proteomic profiling.
Across both cohorts, a total of 1088 proteins were identified with at least two unique peptides (Figure
There were 940 proteins identified in control EVs and 1000 proteins identified in AD EVs.
Among them, 852 proteins were detected in both groups, with 88 proteins unique to the controls and 148 proteins unique to the AD group (Figure
The common, AD-unique, and control-unique proteins were tested for properties pertaining to the "cellular component" and "pathway" ontologies by Gene Ontology analysis in the Database for Annotation, Visualization and Integrated Discovery (DAVID).
Among the 852 shared proteins, 60.9% were found to be included in the extracellular exosome ontology (Figure
The 148 proteins unique to the AD group were linked to mitochondria metabolism known to be dysfunctional in AD brain
Interestingly, in pathway analysis by DAVID, neurodegenerative disorders, including AD and Parkinson's and Huntington's diseases were enriched in common and unique proteins (Figure
Post-translational modification (PTM) analysis detected six phosphorylation sites (pT181, pS198, pS199, pS202, pT231, and pS404) on tau (Figure
Notably, A sequence was identified in APP fragments.
Figure
The list of AD pathwayrelated proteins is provided in Table
Proteins known to play an important role in AD pathogenesis, such as APP, APOE, tau, and NADH-ubiquinone oxidoreductase (Cx I-V), were all identified in the AD group, although they were not unique to this group.

Analysis of label-free quantitative proteomics comparison of AD and control brain-derived EVs
Label-free quantitative proteomics analysis was performed using PEAKS studio software.
A total of 949 proteins were quantified (Figure
The 934 quantified proteins were common between AD and control groups.
Between these groups, three proteins were uniquely expressed in the controls, while 12 proteins were uniquely expressed in the AD group.
The principal component analysis (PCA) showed a marginal separation of the two groups (Figure
Among these proteins, 15 proteins were significantly upregulated and three proteins were significantly downregulated in AD compared to the control group (as determined by P < 0.05 and log 2 fold change threshold of > 1 or < -1; Figure
The expression levels of 18 molecules identified in the AD group relative to the control group are displayed in a heatmap (Figure
We next searched for brain cell-type-specific molecules within the EV proteomics dataset using the mouse proteomics dataset as a reference.
e top 100 ranked cell type-specific molecules, which have at least two-fold change in concentration in the cell type of interest over the other cell types, were tested with our EV proteomics dataset (Figure
The distribution of these markers indicates that in the human brain, 49% of the identified molecules were related to neuronal origin, whereas the other 50% of EV proteins are related to glial origin, including microglia, astrocytes, and oligodendrocytes.
Moreover, using label-free quantitative value, differences in the expression of cell type-specific marker molecules between AD and controls were seen (Figure
Interestingly, neuron-specific molecules were enriched in the control group (Figure
These results suggest that glia may proliferate upon inflammatory response or accelerate

Machine learning to identify distinctive AD brain-derived EV proteins
To discover a combination of protein molecules that can accurately distinguish AD EVs from controls, the label-free quantitative proteomics dataset was analyzed using a machine learning method (Figure
For this purpose, we split the proteomics dataset into an unblinded training subset (AD: n = 11; control: n = 10) and a blinded testing subset (AD: n = 9; control: n = 8).
The ensemble machine learning model was built using only the data from the training subset, and then the accuracy of the diagnosis was determined using only the blinded testing set.
We found that a panel that included annexin-A5 (ANXA5), Neurosecretory protein VGF (VGF), neuronal membrane glycoprotein M6-a (GPM6A), and alpha-centractin (ACTZ), selected by the LASSO algorithm, resulted in an area under the ROC curve (AUC) of 0.95 within the training set (Figure
We then examined the accuracy in the independent blinded test set using the four proteins in the dotted green box (Figure
Using this model, we achieved an 88% accuracy (AUC = 0.97) in identifying AD patients using the panel that consisted of the four proteins (Figure
Further, we ran two control experiments that randomly selected four proteins from a total possible 949 proteins to form the diagnosis panel (repeated 20 times, AUC = 0.58, accuracy = 55%) and shuffling the true labels of the subjects within the training set (AUC = 0.47, accuracy = 48%).
The control's AUC was significantly worse than using the four-protein panel's AUC (P < .001)
(Figure
Figure
Although there was statistical difference in PMI between AD and control cases in this cohort (Table
P = .149).
Thus, this is not due to the difference in PMI between the two groups.
Interestingly, ANXA5 expression level shows a tendency to increase along with Braak stages in an AD-dependent manner (Figure
Therefore, ANXA5 is a potential EV molecule for both distinguishing AD and control EVs and as a surrogate marker for Braak stage.

DISCUSSION
The biophysical properties of EVs isolated from unfixed post mortem human brain tissues, quantitative analysis of tau and A species, and label-free quantitative proteomic profiling by Nano-LC-MS/MS analyses were performed.
pS396 tau and A1-42 levels were significantly increased in AD brain-derived EVs compared to controls.
A total of 1088 unique proteins from brain-derived EVs were found to be enriched as extracellular exosomes molecules.
We also quantified 949 proteins by label-free quantitative proteomic analysis, which were enriched in neuron-specific molecules in controls and glial cell typespecific molecules in the AD group.
We used the feature selection algorithm LASSO to select a panel of protein biomarkers that could accurately diagnose AD, including ANXA5, VGF, GPM6A, and ACTZ.
It is important to note that the feature selection algorithm we used identifies the best panel of biomarkers for diagnosis, but is not necessarily a list of the most informative individual biomarkers.
LASSO has the property that if there were, for example, two excellent biomarkers for AD, but which correlated highly to one another, only one of these biomarkers would be included in the panel because including both would bring only redundant information.
Using the validation cohort with the larger sample size, the increased protein level of ANXA5 in the AD group, compared to controls, was confirmed by ELISA.
Previous reports indicate pT181 tau to be an early PTM associated with AD, pS199 tau modification is thought to promote tau accumulation, and pS396 tau modification is associated with tau seeding activity and aggregation.
The PTM of tau at either pT181, pS199, or/and pS396 may facilitate the recruitment of tau in EVs, but neither pT181 nor pS199 tau is enriched in AD brain-derived EVs.
This was unexpected because both pT181 and pS396 tau are elevated in neuronderived exosomes in plasma samples obtained from AD and prodromal AD cases.
One potential explanation is that phosphorylation of specific sites on tau may be more preferentially incorporated into EV presumably via their ubiquitination, which is necessary for their multivesicular body (MVB) incorporation.
In general, protein phosphorylation induces ubiquitination of lysine residues proximal to the phosphorylation sites, and it is necessary for ESCRT-mediated incorporation of ubiquitinated molecules into MVBs.
Ubiquitination sites known for PHF-tau are K254, K311, and K353,
In addition, we also observed tau fragments from the mid-region (156 to 406), which is inclusive of proline-rich domains (151 to 240), and microtubule binding repeat domains (24 to 369).
Tau can be cleaved by various proteases including calpain-1 and -2 (at R230), thrombin, cathepsins, asparagine endopeptidase (at D255 and N368), caspase-2 (at D314), and caspase-3 (at D421).
6]
In the present study, we observed that the size of EVs derived from AD brain samples was smaller than from control EVs.
It is possible that cholesterol level might be related to EV size, as small EVs contain significantly higher cholesterol than large EVs
0]
It is well known that mitochondrial dysfunction occurs in AD and by A stimulation.
Recombinant tau mutant mimicking S396/S404 phosphorylation can enhance A-induced mitochondrial damage and neuronal dysfunction,
These reports suggest that A accumulation induces mito- reported that ANXA5 is associated with familial late-onset AD by whole exome sequencing.
Further, Sohma et al. have reported a significantly higher plasma level of ANXA5 in AD cases compared to controls.
number of previous studies in CSF and brain tissue have reported markedly lowered concentration of VGF in AD cases compared to controls.
Indeed, GPM6A is reported to cluster in lipid rafts upon palmitoylation, which are also enriched in sphingolipids and cholesterol.
In our study, ANXA5 was detected in brain-derived EVs from validation cohort, but VGF, GPM6A, and ACTZ were undetectable by commercial ELISA kits.
Further study is necessary to validate these molecules with higher sensitivity ELISA.
Finally, the combination of A, tau, and cell type-specific molecules from brain cells, including ANAX5, VGF, GPM6A, or ACTZ may serve as potential biomarker candidate molecules in AD patient body fluid samples.
Issadore, Weiming Xia, Joseph Zaia, and Tsuneya Ikezu edited the paper.



F I G U R E 1
Biophysical and biochemical characterization of extracellular vesicles (EVs) isolated from Alzheimer's disease (AD) and control (CTRL)brain tissues: A, Schematic of extracellular vesicle isolation protocol from human frozen brain tissue (see supporting information for detailed methods).
B, Left: particle numbers of brain-derived EV fraction from control (CTRL) or AD by nanoparticle tracking analysis.
P = .6075
by Mann-Whitney test.
Right: Particle size of brain-derived EV fraction.
P = .0095
by Mann-Whitney test.
C, Transmission electron microscopy image of frozen human brain-derived EVs.
Scale bar = 100 nm.
Left: CTRL, Right: AD.
D, Comparison of total tau and tau phosphorylated at threonine 181, serine 199, and serine 396 in EVs.
pS 396 tau; P = .0375
by Mann-Whitney test.
E, Comparison of amyloid beta 1-40 or 1-42 in EVs.
A1-42; P < .0001
by Mann-Whitney test.
F, Scattered plot of brain tissue homogenates and brain-derived EVs.
Left: pS396 tau (r = 0.4897, P = .005
using two-tailed t-test), Right: A1-42 (r = 0.5632, P = .0005
using two-tailed t-test)



F I G U R E 2
Proteomics profiling of extracellular vesicles (EVs) isolated from Alzheimer's disease (AD) and control (CTRL) brains: A, Venn diagram representing the number of EV proteins differentially identified in CTRL and AD.
B, Gene ontology (GO) analysis using DAVID Bioinformatics Resources 6.8.
The GO term of Top 5 Cellular Component with -log 10 (FDR P-value).
C, The GO term of Top 5 Pathway Ontology with -log 10 (FDR -value).
D, Sequence coverage of identified tryptic fragment peptide from AD-related protein (tau, APP, SNCA, APOE) in AD group by LC-MS/MS analysis.
Identified peptides and phosphorylation sites are shown in black and red bold, respectively.
E, KEGG pathway of AD.
The 68 proteins identified in the AD group are highlighted by red stars their turnover, leading to enhanced generation of EVs in AD brains, which may be attributed to enhanced gliosis often seen in AD brains.


in supporting information).
Next, we assessed the correlation of expression of these candidate molecules to the levels of p-tau and A1-42 in EVs by Pearson's correlation analysis.
There was a significantly positive correlation between GPM6A and pS396 tau, and between GPM6A and A1-42 levels (pS396 tau: r = 0.380, P = .019;
A1-42: r = 0.387, P = .016),
and a significantly negative correlation between VGF and A1-42 levels (r = -0.538,
P = .002)
(Figure4Eand Table S9 in supporting information).
ANXA5 expression level was significantly increased in AD brain-derived EVs compared to the control group in the validation cohort as determined by ELISA (P = .0042,
42 AD and 36 control cases, F I G U R E 3 Label-free quantitative proteomics comparison of Alzheimer's disease (AD) brain-derived extracellular vesicles (EVs) and control (CTRL) brain-derived EVs: A, Venn diagram representing the number of EV proteins differentially expressed in CTRL and AD.
B, A principal component analysis (PCA).
CTRL; blue symbols, AD; red symbols.
C, Volcano plot showing a degree of differential expression of EV proteins in AD compared with CTRL.
X-axis; log transformed fold change in expression, y-axis; log-transformed P-values.
Gray dot lines: 0.1 P-value and 1-or -1-fold change cutoff.
D, Heat map representation of the up-and downregulated proteins in AD.
Red shows upregulated proteins, and green shows


downregulated proteins.
E, Enrichment of brain cell type-specific markers in brain-derived EV proteins.
Yellow: Neuron, purple: microglia, green: astrocytes, orange: oligodendrocytes.
The parentheses show the number and percentage of identified cell type-specific protein.
F, Comparison of the cell type-specific protein in AD brain-derived EV and CTRL EV.
The red bar shows higher expression in AD.
Blue bar indicates higher expression in CTRL F I G U R E 4 Machine learning model to identify Alzheimer's disease (AD) brain-specific extracellular vesicles (EV) biomarker molecules: A, Workflow for machine learning approach.
The training set is fed into linear discriminant analysis (LDA) to generate LDA vectors, which are applied to the blinded test set for classification.
The predicted molecules are validated from the validation cohort by a commercial enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA).
B, The best performing panel based on the area under the reciever operating characteristic (ROC) curve using the least absolute shrinkage and selection operator (LASSO)algorithm was selected in the training set.
Y-axis; the area under the ROC curve, x-axis; AD brain cells that accumulate high cholesterol might secrete smaller EVs than controls.


chondrial dysfunction, increases tau phosphorylation at pS396, and enriches mitochondrial molecule in the EVs.
Indeed, accumulation of misfolded proteins and mitochondrial dysfunction induces secretion of large vesicles (exophers) containing dysfunctional organelle and misfolded proteins for neuroprotection in Caenorhabditis elegans. 48
In terms of enriched ANXA5 in AD brain-derived EVs, the cellular apoptosis induced by mitochondrial dysfunction expresses phosphatidylserine on the cell surface and recruit ANXA5, which is a well-known phosphatidylserine binding molecule.
ANXA5-containing plasma membrane may be incorporated into the endosome, eventually to MVBs and secreted in EVs.
There is, however, no literature to understand the connection between mitochondrial dysfunction and VGF, GPM6A, or ACTZ.
The quantitative proteomic analysis of brain-derived EV samples isolated from AD and control patients found enriched glia-specific molecules in AD brain-derived EVs, and identified ANXA5, VGF, GPM6A, and ACTZ as potential candidate molecules for monitoring the progression of AD.
Although the A and tau are tested for the diagnosis or progression of A and tau pathology in AD, it may not cover atypical AD cases in which A+T+N+ phenotype is incomplete.
The four candidate molecules that would predict degenerative changes of neuronal and non-neuronal cells may facilitate the cellular based evaluation of the brain state in AD.
Zhang et al. have recently



E 1 Patient information Discoverer set For proteomics AD (n = 20) Control (n = 18) P a



Validation set For ELISA AD (n = 42) Control (n = 36) P


The list of up-and downregulated protein in expression between Alzheimer's disease and control