IMPULSIVE, BUT NOT DISINHIBITED? THE DISSOCIATION BETWEEN IMPULSIVITY AND INHIBITORY CONTROL IN FRONTOTEMPORAL DEMENTIA
Introduction: Behavioral variant frontotemporal dementia (bvFTD) shares clinical, cognitive and behavioral features with Alzheimer's disease (AD), posing a challenge for differential diagnosis.
Considering that disinhibition and impulsivity are hallmarks of bvFTD, cognitive and behavioural assessment of such symptoms may be useful for the differential diagnosis between bvFTD and AD.
This study aimed to investigate the diagnostic value of neuropsychological tests of inhibitory control and behavioral measures of impulsivity and apathy to distinguish bvFTD from AD. Methods: Three groups of participants were enrolled: 27 bvFTD patients, 25 AD patients and 24 healthy controls.
Groups were matched for gender, education and socioeconomic level.
Participants underwent a comprehensive neuropsychological assessment, including tests of inhibitory control (Hayling Test, Stroop, the Five Digit Test [FDT] and the Delay Discounting Task [DDT]).
Caregivers completed the Barratt Impulsivity Scale (BIS-11) and the Apathy Scale (AS).
measures.
There was no difference between bvFTD and AD for the cognitive measures of inhibitory control, including the DDT.
Compared to AD, bvFTD patients were significantly more impulsive (BIS-11: bvFTD 76.1+9,5, AD 62.9+13, p<0.001) and more apathetic (AS: bvFTD 28.1+7,8, AD 16.9+9, p<0.001).
Conclusions: Neuropsychological tests of inhibitory control failed to distinguish bvFTD from AD.
On the contrary, apathy and impulsivity scales provided good distinction between bvFTD and AD.
These results highlight the limits of cognitive measures of inhibitory control for the differential diagnosis between bvFTD and AD, due to the dissociation between cognitive tests and behavioral symptoms.

INTRODUCTION
Behavioural variant frontotemporal dementia (bvFTD) shares clinical, cognitive and behavioural features with Alzheimer's disease (AD), posing a challenge for differential diagnosis between these two disorders.
In particular, disturbed executive functions that are classically found in bvFTD can also be impaired in AD, such as working memory, mental flexibility, and planning
However, among executive functions, tests of inhibitory control may be useful for the differential diagnosis between bvFTD and AD.
Indeed, as disinhibition is a hallmark of bvFTD
Inhibitory control refers to the ability to selectively supress thoughts or behaviours that are not adaptive or appropriate in the current context
Impulsivity is broadly defined as acting prematurely without foresight
The value of tasks of inhibitory control for the clinical diagnosis of bvFTD has been previously investigated.
For instance, some authors reported that the Hayling test provides good clinical differentiation between bvFTD and AD
In contrast, the Stroop test, a classical measure of prepotent response inhibition, has poor diagnostic value in differentiating bvFTD and AD
More recent studies using tasks of delayed discounting tried to overcome the limits of classical inhibitory control tests.
The Delay Discounting Task (DDT) requires the participant to make intertemporal choices, deciding between present vs. future reward options.
This paradigm may be a reliable model for testing impulsivity
Some reports indicate that DDT can differentiate bvFTD from AD
One of the limits of neuropsychological tests used to investigate inhibitory functions is that they usually lack ecological validity and do not recapitulate real life situations.
In the other hand, behavioural scales that tap into impulsivity are usually made of questions that investigate everyday situations.
Therefore, it is possible that these behavioural scales might capture with better accuracy the disinhibition-related disorders associated to bvFTD.
Taken together, there is some evidence that cognitive and behavioural assessment of impulsivity may facilitate the diagnosis of bvFTD.
However, it is not clear whether cognitive tasks such DDT and Hayling are superior to behavioural scales in distinguishing bvFTD from AD. Indeed, previous studies
This is a critical point, as some reports showed that the measurement of impulsive behaviour can effectively differentiate bvFTD from AD
The present study aims to assess inhibitory control and impulsivity using neuropsychological and behavioural instruments, in order to determine the accuracy of these tools in the differential diagnosis between bvFTD and AD.
As far as we know, this is the first time that the accuracy of the DDT and of other cognitive tests of inhibitory control are simultaneously compared with a behavioural measure of impulsivity (Barratt Impulsivity Scale;
We further contrasted these tools with a measure of apathy (Apathy Scale;
Indeed, apathy and disinhibition may co-occur in bvFTD (Le
Then, carefully characterizing these two behavioural disorders could provide a diagnostic yield for bvFTD.
All of them fulfilled consensus diagnostic criteria for probable bvFTD
The AD group included patients at early and moderate stages of the disease.
All bvFTD and AD patients underwent structural brain MRI.
We did not include patients with neuroimaging disclosing focal lesions or severe vascular lesions.

METHODS

Fifty
To improve diagnostic accuracy, patients were clinically followed for at least 18 months after the diagnostic definition and all of them showed clinical progression consistent with the diagnosis.
A subset of patients (eight AD and eight bvFTD) underwent lumbar puncture for cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) biomarkers (Aß42, Tau and P-Tau) analyses.
For this subgroup, all AD patients had an "AD CSF biomarker profile", defined by Tau/Aß42 > 0.52
None of the bvFTD patients had this biomarker profile.
This procedure was adopted to increase the specificity of the clinical diagnosis.
One bvFTD patient had a known genetic mutation (TARDBP).
Community-dwelling elderly, with no history of neurologic or psychiatric disorders and intact cognitive assessment constituted the control group.
Groups were matched for education level and socioeconomic status (Table
Socioeconomic level was controlled by the Brazilian standard classification
The local ethics committees approved the study (Project CAAE-17850513.2.0000.5149)
and all participants gave written informed consent to participate.

Cognitive Assessment
All participants underwent the same cognitive protocol: Mini-Mental State Exam (MMSE)
Stroop Test is a classical paradigm designed to evaluate the capacity of suppress a prepotent answer in saying colours instead of reading it.
Hayling Test evaluates the capacity to inhibit a prepotent verbal answer when completing phrases meaninglessly.
FDT evaluates two major executive functions: inhibitory control, in a non-verbal Stroop like condition, suppressing a prepotent answer in counting numbers rather than saying the stimuli, and cognitive flexibility, alternating two different rules in the same task.
FDT was chosen because it is a non-verbal option to Stroop, and it avoids low-formal education effects

Delay Discounting Task (DDT)
The DDT was performed using a computerized version of the original questionnaire
Participants were required to choose either an amount of money available today or a larger amount available in the future.
The amount of delay (days) and the sum of money varied.
A total of 27 forced-choices were presented to participants one at a time, and delayed vs. immediate reward options were randomised to occur on either the left or right side of the screen in equal proportions.
Figure
Participants were not awarded any actual monetary payments based on their performance, but they were encouraged to approach the choices as if real money was at stake.
A hyperbolic discount parameter (k) is inferred from subjects' choices on the DDT.
Delay discounting is the tendency to discount the present value of a reward as delay to the reward increases, calculated by the equation: PV = FV/(1 -kt), where: PV= Present Value; FV= Future Value; t= time; and, k= slope.
A higher k value is consistent with a steeper discounting of future rewards, indicating a higher degree of impulsivity.
The 27 options from DDT were comprised of nine items in three groups: small ($15 -$25), medium ($35 -$55) and large ($75 -$85) values, which refers to the size of the delayed reward.
Thus, four parameters are extracted from DDT: a general k for all the 27 items, and separate k values for small, medium and large items.
Based on values available in our task, k values could vary from 0.000158 to 0.25.

Behavioural Assessment
Behaviour was assessed by the Apathy Scale
Apathy Scale is formed by 14 items.
The Brazilian version is already designed for thirdparty reporting and presented good correlation with the apathy subscore from the Neuropsychiatric Inventory
BIS-11 is a self-report scale comprised by 30 items.
The participant is required to analyse each item and classify the frequency of that behaviour, using a Likert scale.
A higher score means a higher degree of impulsivity.
The minimum score is 30 and the maximum is 120.
In addition, three partial scores are obtained: motor impulsivity, attentional impulsivity and planning impulsivity
Similar to previous studies, the BIS-11 was adapted as a caregiver-report version, in order to avoid a possible anosognosia effect in the patients
Controls completed the BIS-11 original version, but were not evaluated with the Apathy Scale.
Patients were classified as "impaired" or "preserved" regarding their scores on Apathy Scale and BIS-11.
For the Apathy Scale, a cut-off of 14 was established to determine impairment, considering that this value exceeds two standard-deviations (SD) from mean value in a healthy-population
For the BIS-11, a cut-off of 82 was established to determine impairment, as this value is 2 SD superior to the mean score from the Brazilian norms

Statistics
Descriptive and comparative analyses were performed.
Normality was checked with Shapiro-Wilk test.
Non-parametrical tests were chosen considering the majority of nonnormal distribution found in the different measures, except for behavioural scales, whose distributions were normal.
For categorical variables chi-square was used.
Kruskal-Wallis and Mann-Whitney pairwise post-hoc comparison were applied for continuous variables, except for behaviour, for which ANOVA with Bonferroni posthoc tests was applied.
In the DDT, within group analyses were performed by the Wilcoxon method in order to evaluate magnitude effects.
Receiver Operator Characteristics (ROC) curve analyses were carried out to test diagnostic accuracy.
Analyses were performed with Statistical Package for the Social Sciences (SPSS) 22.0 and MedCalc 17.1 softwares.

RESULTS
The final groups consisted of 27 bvFTD patients, 25 AD patients and 24 healthy controls.
Table
bvFTD patients were significantly younger than AD; however, age did not differ between clinical groups and controls.
Other sociodemographic variables (schooling and socioeconomic level) were similar across groups.
AD and bvFTD patients had similar symptom duration.
Considering neuropsychological measures, there were statistically significant differences between clinical groups and healthy controls, with bvFTD and AD scoring worse than controls on most measures (Table
There were no significant differences between bvFTD and AD for all measures of executive functions, apart from the "Flexibility" domain from the FDT, in which AD performed significantly worse than bvFTD.
AD patients also performed worse than bvFTD in the delayed recall from the

Figure Memory Test.
Regarding the DDT, there were no differences among groups for all parameters.
The within group analyses, however, showed that the control group present k values for small rewards statistically higher than their k values for both the large and medium rewards.
In contrast, for the bvFTD and AD groups, their k values for the small rewards were only significantly higher than their k values for the larges reward size.
Both apathy and impulsivity measures revealed significant differences between the groups.
bvFTD patients were more impulsive than both AD and controls, and were more apathetic than AD patients.
Controls and AD did not differ in the impulsivity scale.
Considering Brazilian norms for the
The FDT Flexibility score, Apathy score and BIS-11 Total score were analysed in a ROC curve procedure to establish diagnostic accuracy of bvFTD versus AD (Table
For the Apathy scale, the cut-off of 19 provided 69.2% sensitivity and 92.6% specificity.
The BIS-11 cut-off of 68 achieved 68.2% sensitivity and 80% specificity.
FDT Flexibility achieved 86.4% sensitivity and 76.5% specificity with a cut-off of 54 seconds.
The composition of a unique score with all three or even two instruments did not improve the diagnostic accuracy significantly.
Patients were classified as "impaired" or "preserved" according to their scores on the Apathy Scale and BIS-11 (Table
Only 2.4% of bvFTD patients had alteration neither on apathy nor on impulsivity, while 19.5% of AD patients had similar profile (with significant difference of frequencies between groups, p < 0.05).
In the other hand, 19.5% of bvFTD patients had impairments on both apathy and impulsivity, while only 4.5% of AD had similar pattern (p < 0.05).
The two groups exhibited the same percentage of patients having apathy without impulsivity (no statistical difference).

DISCUSSION
This study investigated cognitive and behavioural markers of impulsivity for the differential diagnosis between bvFTD and AD.
Behavioural scales (BIS-11 and Apathy Scale) provided better diagnostic accuracy than cognitive measures of inhibitory control, including the DDT, Stroop, and Hayling.
Only one executive parameter ("flexibility" from FDT) was statistically different between bvFTD and AD.
Neuropsychological tests of inhibitory control and impulsivity failed to distinguish between bvFTD and AD.
Even though impulsivity is a clinical feature of bvFTD, previous studies assessing inhibitory control in bvFTD showed variable results.
For instance, there are data showing either difference
In the present study, bvFTD and AD also did not differ in their performance on the Hayling test.
Similarly, there was no difference in Stroop between patient groups, which is in agreement with previous observations showing that this test has poor association with behavioural and anatomical markers of inhibition
The DDT also failed to detect differences between bvFTD and AD, in contrast to previous reports
The reasons for the present result remain unclear, but may be due to cultural specificities related to Brazilian background, such as political and economic instability and a history of hyperinflation, especially in the 1980-1990s.
Further studies are required to explore intercultural variability in DDT.
Magnitude effect refers to the finding that discount rates decrease as the amount of reward increases, as subjects are more willing to wait for a larger reward
All groups exhibited magnitude effect on the DDT, showing largest k values for the smallest rewards.
Nonetheless, AD and bvFTD patients' differed only between large and small rewards, while controls had different scores between small rewards and both large and medium ones.
This suggests that controls discounted small rewards more steeply compared to both of the larger rewards.
This finding suggests that patients were less sensitive to magnitude effects, compared to controls.
Apathy is the most common behavioural change in AD
Our data confirms that apathy is frequent in both conditions.
However, apathy is more severe in bvFTD than in AD patients, in accordance to previous reports
There were significant differences between AD and bvFTD in the behavioural measure of impulsivity (BIS-11), which also achieved good accuracy for differential diagnosis, as revealed by ROC analysis.
The BIS-11 may be a practical resource to distinguish bvFTD from AD
Another point that may be useful for the differential diagnosis is that the association of apathy and impulsivity disorders is more frequent in bvFTD patients than in AD, with almost 20% of bvFTD cases achieving impaired levels on both scales, while only 4.5% of AD had similar profile.
Taken together, our results highlight the limits of using cognitive measures of inhibitory control for the differential diagnosis between bvFTD and AD.
Most tests of inhibitory control were not specifically designed for neurodegenerative disorders.
For instance, the DDT was initially developed to study addiction
It is also important to consider that inhibitory control is a set of complex cognitive functions
Indeed, distinct cognitive abilities are required for efficient inhibitory control.
For instance, the DDT may engage diverse cognitive operations, such as prospective memory and emotional processing.
Therefore, different cognitive deficits may underlie impulsive behaviour.
bvFTD and AD patients may fail in tests of inhibitory control due to deficits in different sub-processes, which are not specifically tapped by most standard tests.
Hence, the design of new tests of inhibitory control for the diagnosis of bvFTD should consider more specific sub-processes of this ability.
The development of new cognitive tests for the diagnosis of bvFTD should also take into account the clinical variability of the disease
In our sample, 20% of bvFTD patients had mixed profile.
The optimal cognitive diagnosis of bvFTD requires a set of tests tapping into the different possible behavioural aspects of the disease.
This study presents some caveats.
The diagnosis was established under clinical basis, and pathological confirmation was not available.
However, patients were selected according to consensual criteria and all patients had a minimal follow-up of 18 months and had clinical progression consistent with the diagnosis.
Apathy scale was not applied to controls, precluding comparative analyses with this group.
In conclusion, this study highlights the dissociation between cognitive tests of prefrontal functions and behavioural disorders related to these same regions, the "frontal paradox"
The present study reinforces this observation, as bvFTD patients presented higher scores of impulsive behaviour than AD and controls, while no differences were observed in tasks tapping inhibitory control.
There is a need to develop objective cognitive measures of disinhibited behaviour for clinical use.
The gap between behaviour and cognition in bvFTD remains a clinical challenge.


-two patients were recruited in two Brazilian centres of Cognitive and Behavioural Neurology, located at Belo Horizonte (University Hospital from Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais) and São Paulo (University Hospital from Universidade de São Paulo).



FigureFigure 2 -
Figure 1 -Title: Examples of the Delay-Discounting Task



Table 1 :
Demographical, clinical, neuropsychological and behavioural results



Table 1 :
Results for Receiver Operator Characteristics (ROC) Curve analysis