Endo-lysosomal proteins and ubiquitin CSF concentrations in Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s disease
Background: Increasing evidence implicates dysfunctional proteostasis and the involvement of the autophagic and endo-lysosomal system and the ubiquitin-proteasome system in neurodegenerative diseases.
In Alzheimer's disease (AD), there is an accumulation of autophagic vacuoles within the neurons.
In Parkinson's disease (PD), susceptibility has been linked to genes encoding proteins involved in autophagy and lysosomal function, as well as mutations causing lysosomal disorders.
Furthermore, both diseases are characterized by the accumulation of protein aggregates.
Methods: Proteins associated with endocytosis, lysosomal function, and the ubiquitin-proteasome system were identified in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and targeted by combining solid-phase extraction and parallel reaction monitoring mass spectrometry.
In total, 50 peptides from 18 proteins were quantified in three cross-sectional cohorts including AD (N = 61), PD (N = 21), prodromal AD (N = 10), stable mild cognitive impairment (N = 15), and controls (N = 68).
Results: A pilot study, including subjects selected based on their AD CSF core biomarker concentrations, showed increased concentrations of several targeted proteins in subjects with core biomarker levels indicating AD pathology compared to controls.
Next, in a clinically characterized cohort, lower concentrations in CSF of proteins in PD were found compared to subjects with prodromal AD.
Further investigation in an additional clinical study again revealed lower concentrations in CSF of proteins in PD compared to controls and AD.
Conclusion: In summary, significantly different peptide CSF concentrations were identified from proteins AP2B1, C9, CTSB, CTSF, GM2A, LAMP1, LAMP2, TCN2, and ubiquitin.
Proteins found to have altered concentrations in more than one study were AP2B1, CTSB, CTSF, GM2A, LAMP2, and ubiquitin.
Interestingly, given the genetic implication of lysosomal function in PD, we did identify the CSF concentrations of CTSB, CTSF, GM2A, and LAMP2 to be altered.
However, we also found differences in proteins associated with endocytosis (AP2B1) and the ubiquitin-proteasome system (ubiquitin).
No difference in any peptide CSF concentration was found in clinically characterized subjects with AD compared to controls.
In conclusion, CSF analyses of subjects with PD suggest a general lysosomal dysfunction, which resonates well with recent genetic findings, while such changes are minor or absent in AD.

Introduction
Alzheimer's disease (AD)
In AD, the aggregates are plaques and tangles containing aggregated amyloid β (Aβ) peptide
In PD, Lewy bodies are composed of an aggregated form of α-synuclein protein
Increasing evidence suggests dysfunctional proteostasis to play a central role in neurodegenerative diseases
Cellular proteostasis is maintained by the degradation of proteins and organelles by the autophagic and endolysosomal system
In AD, early pathological changes
Similarly, in PD, an accumulation of autophagic vacuoles has been seen in patients
Several lines of genetic evidence indicate the involvement of the autophagic and endo-lysosomal system in PD
There is a conferred increased risk of developing PD by having mutations in the GBA gene
Loss of β-glucocerebrosidase, encoded by the GBA gene, cause Gaucher's disease, a lysosomal storage disorder
Recently, genetic variants in numerous lysosomal storage disorder genes were associated with PD susceptibility
Similarly, genetic variants in numerous genes associated with the autophagic and endolysosomal system, in an aggregated manner, have been indicated to be associated with AD
Indeed, genetic variants in the endocytic genes BIN1 and PICALM have been associated with the susceptibility of AD
In AD, the core cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) biomarkers Aβ (specifically the 42 amino acid long variant (Aβ 1-42 )), total tau protein (T-tau), and P-tau
Some studies have also shown altered CSF concentrations in neurodegenerative diseases of proteins involved in the autophagic and endo-lysosomal system
To date, there is no validated biomarker in PD.
CSF αsynuclein concentrations have shown conflicting results, but often a slight decrease in PD compared to controls
However, lower activity of β-glucocerebrosidase in CSF has been identified
Also, lysosomal membrane proteins have been shown to exist at lower concentrations in CSF
Collectively, these findings might indicate dysfunctional lysosomes.
A combination of CSF biomarkers, including the AD CSF core biomarkers (to exclude amyloid and tau pathology) and α-synuclein
However, longitudinal studies are Fig.
Overview of the autophagic and endo-lysosomal system and the ubiquitin-proteasome system.
The proteins investigated in the present paper are shown in association with the parts and regions to which they are functionally associated or localized.
Proteins with peptides found to be significantly altered in any of the three cohorts presented herein have been indicated with a star lacking exploring biomarkers showing early alterations which are necessary for developing effective treatment strategies.
The aim of the current study was to explore potential CSF biomarkers associated with the autophagic and endo-lysosomal system and the ubiquitin-proteasome system in AD and PD.
Identifying biomarkers reflecting dysfunctional proteostasis in AD
Herein, an initial explorative phase was employed to identify and select the proteins of interest for quantification using solid-phase extraction (SPE) in combination with parallel reaction monitoring mass spectrometry (PRM-MS).
For the purpose, we adapted a previously described method
Using the method, one pilot cohort and two clinically characterized cohorts were investigated including subjects with AD (N = 62), PD (N = 21), prodromal AD (N = 10), stable mild cognitive impairment (MCI; N = 15), and controls (N = 69).

Materials and methods

Participants
Table
Participants designated as subjects having AD dementia and prodromal AD fulfilled the International Working Group biomarker criteria for research purposes
One abnormal core biomarker was allowed for control and stable MCI subjects.
No biomarker criteria were applied to subjects with PD.
The pilot study consisted of subjects with concentrations of the AD CSF core biomarkers suggesting AD pathology (N = 19) or having normal core biomarker concentrations (controls; N = 24).
The biomarker profile samples were collected after being analyzed in clinical routine at the Clinical Neurochemistry Laboratory, Mölndal, Sweden.
In clinical study I, participants have been consecutively enrolled at the Center of Memory Disturbances of the University of Perugia.
The cohort included patients affected by AD dementia (N = 6) diagnosed according to the National Institute on Aging-Alzheimer's Association criteria
Ten out of 25 developed AD (prodromal AD), while 15 remained stable for a median of 2 years follow-up (stable MCI).
clinical study II consisted of a set of participants from the Swedish BioFINDER study
The study included participants with AD dementia (N = 36), according to the National Institute of Neurological and Communicative Disorders and Stroke and the Alzheimer's Disease and Related Disorders Association
Cognitively healthy volunteers who underwent cognitive testing and neurologic examination with no objective cognitive or parkinsonian symptoms were included in the control group (N = 44).
In clinical studies I and II, clinical assessment included cognitive testing, psychiatric and neurological assessments in addition to brain imaging, and collection of CSF and blood.
CSF sampling was performed after informed written consent by the patient or the caregiver.

CSF samples
CSF collection was performed as previously described
CSF was collected via lumbar puncture in polypropylene tubes, centrifuged at room temperature
Tubes were frozen at -80 °C pending analysis.
CSF Aβ 1-42 , T-tau, and Ptau 181 concentrations were assessed by using commercially available enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays for diagnostic purpose (INNOTEST βAmyloid1-42, hTAU-Ag, and p-TAU181Ag; Fujirebio Europe, Ghent, Belgium), according to the manufacturer's instructions.

Sample digestion and SPE
Digestion and SPE were performed as described previously
In short, 100 μL of CSF from subject samples or a quality control CSF pool (QC) was mixed with 25 μL of internal standard mixture (Additional file 1: Supplementary Methods).
Similarly, 100 μL of QC was mixed with 25 μL of six internal standard mixture reverse calibration curve point dilutions (Additional file 1: Supplementary Methods).
Reduction and alkylation were performed in three consecutive steps by (1) the addition of 25 μL 30 mM 1,4-dithiothreitol (Sigma-Aldrich Co., Saint Louis, MO, USA) in 50 mM NH 4 HCO 3 and shaking incubation at + 60 °C for 30 min, (2) incubation for 30 min at room temperature, and (3) addition of 25 μL 70 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich Co.) in 50 mM NH 4 HCO 3 and incubation shaking at room temperature in the dark for 30 min.
Digestion was performed by the addition of 25 μL 0.08 μg/μL sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega Co., Madison, WI, USA) in 50 mM NH 4 HCO 3 and incubation for 18 h shaking at + 37 °C.
Digestion was ended by the addition of 25 μL 10% trifluoroacetic acid.
SPE was performed using Oasis HLB 96-well μElution Plates (2 mg sorbent and 30 μm particle size; Waters Co., Milford, MA, USA) and a vacuum manifold station.
The wells of the plate were conditioned by 2 × 300 μL methanol and equilibrated with 2 × 300 μL H 2 O.
The digested samples were loaded followed by a wash of 2 × 300 μL H 2 O. Finally, the samples were eluted in 2 × 100 μL methanol and dried by vacuum centrifugation.
The samples were frozen and stored at -80 °C pending analysis.

PRM-MS
The proteins of interest for quantification by PRM-MS are listed in Table
These proteins were identified as described in Additional file 1: Supplementary Methods.
Digested samples were dissolved in 50 μL 50 mM NH 4 HCO 3 shaking at room temperature for 1 h.
Dissolved samples were injected (20 μL in half of the pilot study samples and in clinical study I, and 10 μL in the other half of the pilot study and in clinical study II) and separated using a Dionex UltiMate 3000 standard-LC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., Waltham, MA, USA) and a Hypersil GOLD HPLC C18 column (length 200 mm; inner diameter 2.1 mm; particle size 1.9 μm; Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.).
Mobile phases were as follow: A: 0.1% formic acid in H 2 O (v/v) and B: 0.1% formic acid and 84% acetonitrile in H 2 O (v/v).
Separation was performed at a flow rate of 100 μL/min at + 40 °C with a gradient going from 2 to 6% B over 2 min, 6 to 20% B over 4 min, and finally 20 to 40% over 42 min.
Micro-flow high-performance liquid chromatography was performed by online coupling to a hybrid Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.).
Electrospray ionization was performed in positive ion mode with a HESI-II ionization probe (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.) with the following settings: a spray voltage of + 4.1 kV, a heater temperature of + 300 °C, a capillary transfer tube temperature of + 320 °C, a sheath gas flow rate of 25, and an auxiliary gas flow rate of 10.
Acquisition of single microscans was performed in PRM mode with an isolation window of m/z 3, a resolution setting of 70 k, an AGC target of 1 × 10 6 , a maximum injection time of 300 ms, and fragmentation with beamtype collision-induced dissociation (or "higher-energy collisional dissociation" (HCD)
Targeting of peptides was made within a 2-min acquisition window where the retention time of the peptides was monitored in each experimental session using a mixture of stable isotope-labeled peptides.
The peptides targeted and their mono-isotopic m/z, isolation m/z, and an example of retention time isolation windows are shown in Additional file 2: Table
The normalized collision energy, used for fragmentation with HCD, was optimized for each peptide by direct infusion of stable isotope-labeled peptide in solution and varying the energy while monitoring the intensity of the product ion in relation to the precursor ion (Additional file 2: Table

Methodological evaluation
In five separate experiments, eight technical replicate QC samples were analyzed to determine experimental precision.
Repeatability and intermediate precision were calculated according to ISO 5725-2
Additionally three separate reverse calibration curves were prepared and analyzed as duplicate technical replicates to investigate methodological linearity.
The limit of quantification (LOQ) was set to the concentration range with a relative error ≤ 20% of calculated to nominal concentration, determined by least squares linear regression.

Data analysis
Skyline v3.6
Skyline was set to pick and integrate [M + H] + y-ions from a data-independent acquisition method with a fixed isolation window of m/z 3. Evaluation of which product ions to include in the integration was performed by manual inspection of MS/MS spectra, inspecting individually extracted product ion chromatograms in Skyline and by an in-house software comparing product ion ratios.
The evaluation enabled exclusion of product ions not reproducibly detected and product ions potentially afflicted by interferences.
The ratio of the sum of the product ion areas of tryptic to isotope-labeled peptide was used for quantification.
In the pilot study, the number of samples, approximately divided by half, was measured at different occasions.
For the pilot study, the peptide ratio was normalized against the median peptide ratio of eight QC samples for each respective peptide at each occasion.
The first occasion was normalized against a factor of 1 (median occasion 1/median occasion 1).
The eight QC of the second occasion were used to normalize the ratio for each peptide against the first occasion using multiplication with a factor corresponding to median occasion 1 divided by median occasion 2. The clinical cohorts were analyzed coherently and thus no normalization was required.

Statistical analysis
Normality was assessed by evaluating the distribution using histograms and boxplots as well as by using the Shapiro-Wilk W test of normality.
The non-parametric Wilcoxon 2-sample rank sum test was used for comparing two groups and the Kruskal-Wallis test with Dunn's test for multiple comparisons, comparing all pairs, for more than two groups.
P ≤ 0.05 was considered statistically significant.
Correlations were investigated using Spearman's rank correlation where Spearman's ρ ≥ 0.8 or ≤ -0.8 and a P value ≤ 0.01 were considered to indicate a correlation.
Statistics were calculated using JMP Pro Amyloid beta A4 protein P05067 APP Transmembrane protein with a number of suggested functions
Processed by secretases into fragments, for example Aβ peptides
Complement component C9 P02748 C9 Innate immunity component of the membrane attack complex
Cathepsin B P07858 CTSB Lysosomal cysteine protease with carboxydipeptidase activity
Cathepsin D P07339 CTSD Lysosomal aspartic protease
Cathepsin F Q9UBX1 CTSF Lysosomal cysteine protease
Cathepsin L1 P07711 CTSL Lysosomal cysteine protease
Cathepsin Z Q9UBR2 CTSZ Lysosomal cysteine protease with carboxymonopeptidase activity
Dipeptidyl peptidase 2 Q9UHL4 DPP7 Lysosomal protease producing dipeptides from tripeptides
Ganglioside GM2 activator P17900 GM2A Extracts lipids from membranes.
Required for ganglioside GM2 degradation
Beta-hexosaminidase subunit beta P07686 HEXB Lysosomal β-hexosaminidase A is a heterodimeric complex composed of Betahexosaminidase subunit beta and subunit alpha
β-hexosaminidase A hydrolyses ganglioside GM2 with the aid of ganglioside GM2 activator
Lysosome-associated membrane glycoprotein 1 P11279 LAMP1 Lysosomal transmembrane protein important in vesicle fusion
Lysosome-associated membrane glycoprotein 2 P13473 LAMP2 Lysosomal transmembrane protein important in vesicle fusion
Lysozyme C P61626 LYZ Glycan cleaving polypeptide.
Produced and found in secretory vesicles of neutrophils, monocytes, macrophages and epithelial cells
Tissue alpha-L-fucosidase P04066 FUCA1 Lysosomal fucosidase hydrolyzing fucose containing glycoconjugates
Transcobalamin-2 P20062 TCN2 Delivers cobalamin to lysosomes where it is released
Tripeptidyl-peptidase 1 O14773 TPP1 Lysosomal aspartic or serine protease producing tripeptides
Ubiquitin P0CG48 Ubiquitin a Labels proteins for degradation by the proteasome
Has a multitude of functions as a post-translational modification
a Ubiquitin originate from several genes and is therefore simply referred to as ubiquitin v.13.2.1 (SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NC, USA), and graphs were created using GraphPad Prism v.8.2.0 (GraphPad Software, Inc., La Jolla, CA, USA).
Calibration curves were created using least square linear regression and evaluated in GraphPad Prism (GraphPad Software, Inc.).

Results

Identification of target proteins and peptides
Initial exploration was performed to identify proteins of relevance to include in the panel.
First three technical replicates, dissolved in 0.1% formic acid prior to injection, and then three technical replicates dissolved in 0.1% formic acid, 50 mM NH 4 HCO 3 , or 20% acetonitrile were analyzed.
The proteins identified in steps 1 and 2 are shown in Additional file 3: Table
Proteotypic stable isotope-labeled peptides were acquired for method development.
Ubiquitin in CSF was targeted in a previous study
In total, 51 peptides from 19 proteins were included in the method, including added bovine serum albumin as a tool to monitor the status and variability of the method within and between experiments.

LOQ and methodological precision
The LOQ was investigated for all peptides by creating a six-point reversed calibration curve by using least squares linear regression and was determined as the concentration range with a relative error of ≤ 20% of calculated to nominal concentration.
By analyzing eight technical replicate QC samples at five separate time points, the repeatability and intermediate precision of the peptides were found to range between 3 and 22% and 7 and 38%, respectively.
Three peptides, DPP7 (40-47), LAMP2 (153-161), and FUCA1 (114-130), were measured outside the LOQ; however, they displayed a precision in line with the precision of peptides measured within the LOQ.
The peptide LOQs are shown in Additional file 2: Table
Information about approximate peptide concentrations in CSF and precision data are shown in Additional file 2: Table
Additionally, extracted ion chromatograms and MS/MS spectra for all peptides included in the method are shown in Additional file 5: Figure

CSF protein concentrations in the pilot study
The pilot study, consisting of subjects having normal CSF concentrations of the AD CSF core biomarkers or concentrations suggesting AD pathology, was analyzed (control, N = 24; AD, N = 19).
The CSF concentration of AP2B1, CTSB, GM2A, LAMP2, and ubiquitin was significantly increased in the AD group compared to that in the controls (see Fig.
All peptide measurements are presented in Additional file 6: Table
Furthermore, analyzing correlations in the pilot study, P-tau 181 was found to correlate with one of the AP2B1 peptides (712-719) in the control group (see Additional file 7: Table
No further correlations were found between the AD CSF core biomarkers and the peptides measured, neither in the AD nor control group.
Typically, but not for all peptides, there was a correlation between peptides originating from the same protein.
Age was found to be significantly different between AD and controls (Table

CSF protein concentrations in clinical cohorts
In clinical study I, the investigation continued with measurements of CSF protein concentrations in CSF collected from subjects with prodromal AD (N = 10), stable MCI (N = 15), AD dementia (N = 6), and PD (N = 10).
The level of several proteins was found to be significantly decreased in PD compared to prodromal AD (see Fig.
These included AP2B1, CTSF, LAMP1, LAMP2, and ubiquitin.
No correlation was found between the AD CSF core biomarkers or age and the peptide concentrations in the stable MCI group (see Additional file 7: Table
In the prodromal AD group, P-tau 181 correlated with two AP2B1 peptides (712-719 and 835-842) and a LAMP2 peptide (153-161), and a correlation was also found between GM2A (89-96) and age.
In the AD group, P-tau 181 correlated with one APP peptide (289-301) and Aβ 1-42 correlated with one C9 peptide (146-154).
In the PD group, P-tau 181 correlated with all AP2B1 peptides, one LAMP2 peptide (153-161), and all ubiquitin peptides.
Also, in the PD group, Aβ 1-42 correlated with a FUCA1 peptide (163-173).
The finding in clinical study I that proteins had lower concentration in PD and no alterations in prodromal AD or AD dementia called for an additional investigation in a clinical cohort.
Clinical study II consisted of subjects with AD dementia (N = 36), PD (N = 11), and cognitively normal healthy controls (N = 44).
In clinical study II, the concentrations of AP2B1, CTSF, GM2A, and ubiquitin were significantly decreased in PD compared to AD and controls (Fig.
Also, C9, CTSB, CTSF, TCN2, and ubiquitin were found to be significantly decreased in PD compared to AD.
All peptides with significantly different CSF concentrations in clinical studies I and II have been combined showing the results of both studies in Additional file 8: Figure
In clinical study II, correlations were identified between the AD CSF core biomarkers T-tau and P-tau 181 and the AP2B1 and ubiquitin peptides in the control group (Additional file 7: Table
Moreover, both AP2B1 peptides, one LAMP2 peptide (281-289), and one ubiquitin peptide (12-27) correlated

Discussion
In the present study, an explorative approach has been used to investigate the CSF concentrations of proteins associated with endocytosis, lysosomal function, and the ubiquitin-proteasome system in AD and PD (see Fig.
A method quantifying 18 proteins by measuring 50 peptides, using 100 μL CSF, has been developed.
The LOQ and precision have been described for each peptide.
Initially, the pilot study, including subjects having an AD CSF core biomarker profile or a normal profile (controls), showed increased CSF concentrations of several proteins, AP2B1, CTSB, GM2A, LAMP2, and ubiquitin, in AD compared to controls.
Exploration of a clinically characterized cohort, clinical study I, instead showed decreased CSF concentrations of AP2B1, CTSB, CTSF, LAMP1, LAMP2, and ubiquitin in PD compared to prodromal AD.
A recent study, using a similar method as described herein, showed increased CSF concentrations of proteins involved in vesicular transport and synaptic function in prodromal AD compared to AD and controls
Presently, further investigation in an additional clinically characterized cross-sectional cohort confirmed decreased CSF concentrations of several proteins in PD compared to AD and controls, including AP2B1, C9, CTSB, CTSF, GM2A, TCN2, and ubiquitin.
Proteins repeatedly identified at altered CSF concentrations, in more than one of the four studies, were AP2B1, CTSB, CTSF, GM2A, LAMP2, and ubiquitin, which position them as the most potent markers of those investigated.
The importance of lysosomal function in PD has been indicated by an increased risk of developing the disease in carriers of GBA gene mutations
β-glucocerebrosidase has been shown at decreased amounts
Lysosomal alterations in PD seem also to be measurable in CSF as shown by decreased activities of β-glucocerebrosidase in PD compared to controls
However, unaltered β-glucocerebrosidase activity has also been indicated
Additionally lower activities have been shown in dementia with Lewy bodies
We measured primarily lysosomal proteins and did identify decreased CSF concentrations of several in PD.
We found decreased concentrations of AP2B1, essential in clathrin-mediated endocytosis
To our knowledge, AP2B1 has not been previously investigated in CSF from subjects with AD or PD.
Further, concentrations of CTSB and CTSF peptides were also decreased in PD compared to controls, prodromal AD, and AD dementia.
The cathepsin peptides selected originated from the propeptide, propeptide-active chain cleavage site, and the active chains to provide functional information.
However, no such information could be deduced from the present findings.
No alterations of CSF concentrations of CTSD, CTSL, or CTSZ were found in PD.
Previous investigations have revealed decreased
GM2A concentration, which in cooperation with β-hexosaminidase degrades ganglioside GM2
Previously, the CSF concentration has been found increased in dementia with Lewy bodies but unaltered in PD compared to controls
The LAMP1 and LAMP2 concentrations were decreased in PD compared to prodromal AD in clinical study I. Chu et al.
Furthermore, unaltered
Three isoforms of LAMP2 exists: A, B, and C
The peptides measured in the present study are not isoform specific.
LAMP2A is fundamental in chaperone-mediated autophagy (CMA)
Interestingly, CMA decreases with aging
Also, the level of LAMP2A in substantia nigra pars compacta and amygdala has been shown to be decreased in PD
The CSF concentration of LAMP2 has previously been indicated to be decreased in PD
The CSF ubiquitin concentration in PD has been suggested to be unchanged
However, in the present investigation, we identified a decreased concentration of ubiquitin in PD compared to prodromal AD, AD dementia, and controls.
Previously, we found no significant difference in the CSF concentration of full-length ubiquitin in PD compared to controls or progressive supranuclear palsy
Ubiquitin has been shown to be a component of Lewy bodies
How this would contribute to lower ubiquitin concentration in PD remains speculative.
We found no differences in the CSF concentration of HEXB between groups.
Previously, the CSF enzymatic activity of β-hexosaminidase has been shown to be either increased
We also identified significantly decreased concentration of TCN2 in PD compared to AD in clinical study II.
TCN2 transports cobalamin to the lysosome, (See figure on previous page.)
Fig.
Clinical study II included cross-sectional samples from clinically characterized subjects with AD (N = 36) and PD (N = 11) as well as cognitively normal healthy controls (N = 44).
A significant decreased concentration of a AP2B1_712-719 (P < 0.001), b AP2B1_835-842 (P < 0.001), c C9_232-242 (P < 0.05), d CTSB_80-87 (P < 0.05), e CTSF_103-116 (P = 0.001), f CTSF_236-245 (P < 0.01), g CTSF_266-278 (P < 0.01), h CTSF_442-450 (P < 0.01), i GM2A_89-96 (P < 0.0001), j GM2A_170-179 (P < 0.0001), k TCN2_45-59 (P < 0.05), l TCN2_300-313 (P < 0.05), m Ubiquitin_12-27 (P < 0.001), and n Ubiquitin_64-72 (P < 0.001) was found in PD compared to AD.
Additionally, a significant decreased concentration of a AP2B1_712-719 (P < 0.01), b AP2B1_835-842 (P < 0.05), e CTSF_103-116 (P < 0.05), h CTSF_442-450 (P < 0.05), i GM2A_89-96 (P < 0.0001), j GM2A_170-179 (P < 0.001), and n Ubiquitin_64-72 (P < 0.05) was identified in PD compared to controls.
Statistics were calculated using Kruskal-Wallis test with Dunn's test for multiple comparisons and the graphs show Tukey boxplots where it is released
Disturbed lysosomal acidification and protease inhibition
Lysosomal dysfunction might thus cause retention of cobalamin as well as TCN2.
C9 is a component of the innate immunity membrane attack complex
We observed a significantly lower concentration of C9 (232-242) in PD compared to AD in clinical study II.
C9 expression in the brain has been shown to be higher in AD compared to controls
In AD, there is an accumulation of intraneuronal enlarged early endosomes
These alterations are accompanied by an increased expression and presence of endosomal and lysosomal proteins
Additionally, endosomal, lysosomal, and autophagic proteins have shown elevated CSF concentrations in AD compared to controls
We did not observe significant differences for any peptides in AD or prodromal AD compared to stable MCI in clinical study I or between AD dementia and controls in clinical study II.
The pilot study consisted of biochemically characterized subjects suggesting AD pathology in the AD group.
The subjects could have AD dementia, prodromal AD, or preclinical AD, alone or in combination with other comorbidities.
Similarly, the pilot study controls are not necessarily healthy as they have sought medical advice with a neurological implication.
This might in part explain the discrepancies in the results between the pilot study and the clinical studies.
Nonetheless, we found elevated concentrations of AP2B1 in AD compared to non-AD controls in the pilot study.
Musunuri et al.
Also, the CTSB CSF concentration was increased in AD compared to non-AD controls in the pilot study.
Enzymatically active CTSB and CTSD have been identified as components of plaques
Increased CTSB plasma concentration has previously been shown in AD
However, the CSF concentration in AD has been suggested to be unaltered
However, we did not detect any significant differences for any of the CTSL peptides.
Significantly increased concentrations of LAMP2 peptides were observed for AD compared to non-AD controls in the pilot study.
Previous investigations have suggested increased CSF concentrations of LAMP2
Recently, GM2A was found to have significantly increased CSF concentration in AD compared to controls
We here show increased concentrations of GM2A peptides in AD compared to non-AD controls in the pilot study.
The CSF concentration of ubiquitin has been shown to be increased in AD
Also, the CSF ubiquitin concentration in prodromal AD has been shown to be higher compared to subjects with stable MCI
Herein, the CSF concentration of ubiquitin peptides was found increased in AD compared to non-AD controls in the pilot study.
Previously, we have measured full-length ubiquitin
The CSF concentrations for APP, DPP7, LYZ, FUCA1, and TPP1 were not significantly altered.
When recently measured, no difference in APP peptide concentration was found between AD and controls
Furthermore, a recent meta-analysis showed no difference between the CSF levels of soluble αand β-APP in AD compared to controls
The activity of DPP7 in CSF and serum has been suggested to be increased in PD
However, the frontal cortex DPP7 activity in PD and dementia with Lewy bodies has been indicated to be low compared to controls whereas no difference was detected in AD
Concordant with our recent findings
The CSF concentration of LYZ has previously been suggested to be increased in AD compared to controls [103, 104].
To our knowledge, the CSF level of FUCA1 in AD or PD has not previously been investigated.
FUCA1 is a lysosomal glycosidase
ApoE is a lipid transporter of which three isoforms exists: E2, E3, and E4 (encoded by the ε2, ε3, and ε4 alleles, respectively, of the APOE gene)
In a gene dosedependent manner, the APOE ε4 allele is the most prominent genetic risk factor for AD susceptibility [107].
Previously, it has been shown that enlarged endosomes, as seen early on in AD, are accentuated and even larger in carriers of APOE ε4
Furthermore, apoE regulate Aβ production [108] which is amplified by the E4 isoform [108] and apoE4, in conjunction with Aβ, cause lysosomal leakage
In this paper, we investigated an association between CSF protein levels and APOE ε4 carrier status and found significant differences between carriers and non-carriers in cognitively healthy controls.
The protein concentrations of C9, CTSF, DPP7, and GM2A were decreased in the APOE ε4 carriers.
No difference in protein expression was identified between ε4 carriers and non-carriers with AD; the differences were confined to the non-AD groups, a finding that needs to be confirmed in additional studies because of the relatively small sample size.
As the increased risk of sporadic AD having an APOE ε4 genotype also relates to an earlier age of onset [107] additional investigation in a longitudinal cohort including subjects with prodromal AD would be preferable.
The present exploration includes the analysis of a large number of analytes in a restricted number of participants which might increase the risk of identifying false positives.
However, four independent cohorts were analyzed resulting in the identification of a few repeatedly altered CSF protein concentrations.
Not all protein concentrations were altered suggesting no general alteration in protein concentrations in any of the disorders.
For proteins with altered concentrations between groups, in most cases, not all peptides originating from that protein had altered concentrations.
There are several possible explanations for this discrepancy, for example, peptides belonging to different protein domains, endogenous protein fragments [110], or peptides being subjected to post-translational modifications.
Also, no protein in the current investigation was specifically of neuronal
The limited number of participants likely also affects the interpretation of the correlation analyses.
For tryptic peptides originating from the same protein, correlations were typically high (Additional file 7: Table
A GM2A peptide (89-96) correlated with age in clinical study 1; however, for this peptide, there was no significant difference in concentration between groups.
For the proteins identified at significantly altered levels between groups; AP2B1, LAMP2, and ubiquitin peptides correlated with P-tau.
Ubiquitin is a component of tangles
How AP2B1 and LAMP2 relate to tangle formation remains elusive.
We also found AP2B1 and ubiquitin to correlate with T-tau.
The CSF concentration of T-tau is considered to reflect neuronal and axonal degeneration [114], a degeneration which might also explain a leakage of AP2B1 and ubiquitin.
While T-tau and P-tau were found to correlate with AP2B1, LAMP2, and ubiquitin which might relate to the differences observed between prodromal AD and AD compared to controls and PD, the association with tau pathology is less clear for the non-correlating proteins CTSB, CTSF, and GM2A.
Also, the association with tau pathology does not explain the differences observed between controls and PD (Fig.
In PD, lower levels of lysosomal proteins in regions with α-synuclein pathology
, it might seem odd to find these proteins in the CSF.
An additional source of CSF production is the drainage of parenchymal interstitial fluid into the CSF through interstitial fluid bulk flow
Additional pathways for soluble proteins in the brain parenchyma to reach the CSF might still be discovered.
Extracellular vesicles in CSF, including exosomes, have been shown to be associated with several proteins investigated herein: APP, C9, CTSB, CTSD, CTSF, CTSL, GM2A, LYZ, TCN2, and ubiquitin
Recently, neuronally derived exosomes in blood were found to contain elevated concentrations of CTSD, LAMP1, and ubiquitinated proteins already at a preclinical stage of AD, compared to controls and subjects with frontotemporal lobar degeneration

Conclusion
The present investigation revealed altered CSF concentrations of several proteins associated with the endolysosomal system and the ubiquitin-proteasome system in PD.
Potentially, these altered concentrations reflect dysfunctional proteostasis, which has been suggested to be a pathological feature of PD
Future studies are required to examine the biomarker evolvement during PD onset and progression, as well as how they relate to genetics.
From a biomarker perspective, the involvement of lysosomal dysfunction in AD pathogenesis appears limited, at least as compared to PD.


with P-tau 181 in the AD group.
Finally, both AP2B1 peptides, two LAMP2 peptides (133-144 and 153-161), and one ubiquitin peptide (12-27) correlated with P-tau 181 in the PD group.
A subset of subjects in clinical study II had a known APOE genotype.
Being APOE ε4 positive by having one or two ε4 alleles had a significant effect on the CSF protein concentrations in the control group.
The level of C9, CTSF, DPP7, and GM2A was decreased in controls being APOE ε4-positive carriers (N = 10) compared to non-carriers (N = 17) (see Additional file 9: Figure S4).



Fig. 2
Fig.2CSF endo-lysosomal proteins and ubiquitin concentrations in the pilot study.
The pilot study included subjects designated as controls (N = 24) or AD (N = 19) based on their CSF AD core biomarker profile.
Shown are peptides found to be significantly increased in AD compared to controls; a AP2B1_712-719 (P < 0.001), b AP2B1_835-842 (P < 0.0001), c AP2B1_868-878 (P < 0.001; peptide measured in: AD, N = 7, and control, N = 10), d CTSB_80-87 (P < 0.01), e CTSB_210-220 (P < 0.01), f GM2A_89-96 (P < 0.01), g GM2A_170-179 (P < 0.01), h LAMP2_133-144 (P < 0.01), i LAMP2_281-289 (P < 0.01), j Ubiquitin_12-27 (P < 0.01), and k Ubiquitin_64-72 (P < 0.05).
Statistics were calculated using Wilcoxon 2-sample rank sum test and the graphs show Tukey boxplots


There was no association between APOE ε4 and CSF protein concentrations in AD (carriers, N = 25; noncarriers, N = 10).



Fig. 3 Fig. 4 (
Fig. 3 CSF endo-lysosomal proteins and ubiquitin concentrations in clinical study I. Clinical study I included cross-sectional samples from clinically characterized subjects with AD (N = 6) and PD (N = 10) as well as longitudinal samples from subjects with prodromal AD (N = 10) and stable MCI (N = 15).
A significant decreased concentration of a AP2B1_868-878 (P < 0.05), b CTSF_103-116 (P < 0.05), c LAMP1_357-363 (P < 0.05), d LAMP2_133-144 (P < 0.05), e LAMP2_153-161 (P < 0.05), f LAMP2_281-289 (P < 0.01), g Ubiquitin_12-27 (P < 0.05), and h Ubiquitin_64-72 (P < 0.05) was identified in PD compared to prodromal AD.
Statistics were calculated using Kruskal-Wallis test with Dunn's test for multiple comparisons and the graphs show Tukey boxplots


A pathway for intracellular endo-lysosomal proteins to reach the CSF might be facilitated by lysosomal exocytosis [115], exosomes [116], and degenerating and dying neurons.
Lysosomal exocytosis [115] serves a purpose in membrane repair [117], myelination [118], and neurite outgrowth [119].
Lysosomal exocytosis [117] and neurite outgrowth [119] might act as a repair response in damaged neurons.
By lysosomal exocytosis, through fusion with the plasma membrane, lysosomal hydrolases and contents are expelled into the extracellular milieu [115].
In the CSF, there are a great number of proteins [120, 121] and endogenous peptides [110].
Considering a fairly rigid and controlled path of CSF production at the main site, the choroid plexus [122]



Table 1
Cohort demographics



Table 2
Protein targets



Table 3
Proteins and peptides showing significant differences