Integration of Machine Learning Methods to Dissect Genetically Imputed Transcriptomic Profiles in Alzheimer’s Disease
The genetic component of many common traits is associated with the gene expression and several variants act as expression quantitative loci, regulating the gene expression in a tissue specific manner.
In this work, we applied tissue-specific cis-eQTL gene expression prediction models on the genotype of 808 samples including controls, subjects with mild cognitive impairment, and patients with Alzheimer's Disease.
We then dissected the imputed transcriptomic profiles by means of different unsupervised and supervised machine learning approaches to identify potential biological associations.
Our analysis suggests that unsupervised and supervised methods can provide complementary information, which can be integrated for a better characterization of the underlying biological system.
In particular, a variational autoencoder representation of the transcriptomic profiles, followed by a support vector machine classification, has been used for tissue-specific gene prioritizations.
Interestingly, the achieved gene prioritizations can be efficiently integrated as a feature selection step for improving the accuracy of deep learning classifier networks.
The identified gene-tissue information suggests a potential role for inflammatory and regulatory processes in gut-brain axis related tissues.
In line with the expected low heritability that can be apportioned to eQTL variants, we were able to achieve only relatively low prediction capability with deep learning classification models.
However, our analysis revealed that the classification power strongly depends on the network structure, with recurrent neural networks being the best performing network class.
Interestingly, cross-tissue analysis suggests a potentially greater role of models trained in brain tissues also by considering dementiarelated endophenotypes.
Overall, the present analysis suggests that the combination of supervised and unsupervised machine learning techniques can be used for the evaluation of high dimensional omics data.

INTRODUCTION
Nowadays researchers can access omics data at different levels, such as genomics (e.g., dbGaP
Given the advancement of high-throughput technologies, the increasing availability of omics data can be expected over time.
This will allow researchers to better analyze complex systems characterized by many interacting features as the biological systems.
Traditional analytical methods on omics data, such as Genome-wide association study (GWAS) and differential expression analysis, usually rely on univariate approaches with specific statistical modelling
These approaches, despite being robust, are limited in detecting potential combinatorial effects in the underlying biological system.
Indeed, biological networks can be highly complex with many feedback regulatory loops
A comprehensive analysis of interaction effects is not feasible with traditional approaches due to the combinatorial explosion of the input factor space
On the other hand, machine learning methods have proved to be efficient for the analysis of high dimensional complex systems, although the application of machine learning methods in omics data is still relatively uncommon due to the limited interpretability of the outcome of machine learning frameworks
In this work, we investigate the applicability of different machine learning methods on omics data using, as a case study, matrices of tissue-specific predicted transcriptomic profiles in Alzheimer's disease (AD).
AD is a progressive neurodegenerative disorder, representing the predominant form of dementia
The pathophysiology of AD involves the formation of the characteristic extracellular amyloid plaques and intracellular neurofibrillary tangles
A lot of research has been done in order to identify the genetics factor contributing to AD.
In cases of specific familiar forms of AD, which are recurrent among family members and are characterized by early onset (i.e., age < 65), disease causing mutations in specific genes have been identified, namely amyloid precursor protein (APP), Presenilin 1 PSEN1 and Presenilin 2 PSEN2
This is not the case of the most common sporadic AD forms, characterized by late onset (age > 65), representing about 95% of AD cases
However, the relatively high heritability also of sporadic AD, estimated to be around 60% to 80%
Indeed, GWAS hits can be associated with different biological pathways, such as cholesterol and lipid metabolism, immune system, inflammatory response, and endosomal vesicle cycling
Moreover, several susceptibility loci are localized in gene-dense regions, but it remains unknown which genes of these regions are responsible for the association
In fact, identifying the functional role of variants in intergenic regions is not a trivial process, since the related genes might not be the closest to the loci (e.g., chromatin 3D structure can place in proximity relatively distant region in the primary DNA sequence)
Moreover, many complex phenotypes have a polygenic architecture, in which many variants have minor effects over a phenotype, and polygenic risk score modeling is capable of finding significant genetic associations for traits with no monogenic causes, but with relatively high heritability
Different works show a co-localization between Expression Quantitative Loci (eQTL) and GWAS hits indicating that the biological effect of non-coding variants can be exerted through the regulation of gene expression
Indeed, different tools model the combined effect of eQTL signals, considering both strong functional SNP effects and additive effects for modest-strength signals
Conducting gene association on the basis of the genetic component of gene expression regulation, also called Transcription Wide Association Study (TWAS), proved to be particularly efficient in finding associations with many traits
There are many advantages in testing the genetic component of gene expression rather than evaluating the nominal variant GWAS association: I) the aggregation of multiple eQTL into one gene can boost the association by including additive effect among variants; II) genes are more interpretable biological unit in comparison with variants; III) the statistical power is increased due to the reduction of multiple-comparison tests from hundreds of thousands/million variants (before/after imputation) to the order of thousands of genes (after filtering for gene expression heritability); IV) eQTL are tissue specific and therefore it is possible to perform gene association analysis in the target tissue for the phenotypes and also in secondary tissues for potential peripheral biomarkers (e.g., blood).
Noteworthy, the evaluation of the solely genetic component of gene expression is less comprehensive than the actual gene expression analysis, but has the advantage to focus only on the genetic/heritable component, avoiding environmental confounding effects
Since polygenic effects can be expected also at gene expression level, given the complexity of biochemical systems, performing multi-gene evaluation can provide greater insights concerning potential biological associations
Therefore, machine learning and deep learning methodologies have proved to be efficient at identifying transcriptomic profiles associated with specific phenotypes, considering different input data, such as measured RNA-seq data
In this work, we tested multiple machine learning and deep learning approaches to study multi-tissue imputed transcriptomic profiles in the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) cohort
Noteworthy, the analysis of imputed transcriptomic profiles on ADNI data has been already performed at single gene level identifying, suggesting potential specific gene-tissue associations with amyloid deposition
In the following sections we introduce the supervised and unsupervised methods we exploited in this work, the results achieved combining these approaches, and a discussion of the achieved outcomes.

METHODS

Machine Learning Methods in Bioinformatics
Machine Learning (ML) algorithms have proved to be particularly useful for the analysis of complex big biological data
For instance ML has been applied to detect epistasis within the human genome
In the same direction, more recent deep learning approaches have been profitably exploited to analyze genotype/ phenotype associations
Deep learning methods follow a data-driven approach and are therefore well-designed to detect nonlinear-behaviors, which are relatively common in natural systems
Networks can vary depending on the number of layers and type of nodes and not all of them perform equally well on different data typology.
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) are generally applied to recognize objects in a pattern, Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN) to analyze temporal data, but it is not mandatory to use any kind of network only for a specific task.
For instance, CNNs were successfully used to predict the enhancer-promoter interactions with DNA sequences
RNNs were used instead for predicting transcription factor binding sites
Noteworthy, also variational autoencoders (VAEs) showed good performance in capturing biologically relevant feature in gene expression data analysis
VAEs are part of a large branch of deep learning architectures, the so called generative models
These architectures are based on an encoding-decoding approach and, differently from the standard autoencoders, they assume a stochasticity in the modelling of the data.
The original input matrices of features are compressed in a lower dimensional space, the so called encoding phase, and are reconstructed back in a second step, called decoding phase.
Both phases are composed by neural networks.
VAEs have seen increasing success in many different applications in the last few years, among the unsupervised methodologies recently developed, and they are widely used in different types of data such as time series, images or gene expressions

Tissue Specific Gene Expression Imputation
Data used for the preparation of this article were obtained from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) database (adni.loni.usc.edu).
ADNI was launched in 2003 as a public-private partnership led by Michael W. Weiner, MD.
The primary goal of ADNI has been to test whether serial Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI), Positron Emission Tomography (PET), other biological markers, clinical and neuropsychological assessment can be combined to measure the progression of mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and early Alzheimer's disease (AD).
In the present work, we analyzed the ADNI1-GWAS dataset including gene array genotyping data for 808 samples available on ADNI portal.
Rigorous quality control has been performed.
Namely, samples have been checked for sex, missing genotype rates lower than 0.05 and heterozygosity levels F < 0.2, while variants with Hardy-Weinberg p-value < 1e -10 have been removed.
Then, using the tool by W. Rayner
In order to increase the available genetic information, we imputed our data using Sanger Imputation Server
As a postimputation quality control, we removed variants with info quality level < 0.6.
Genotype calls with posterior probability < 0.9 were set to missing.
Post-QC imputed data was used to estimate gene expression regulation across the different samples.
In order to predict the genetic component of gene expression, we used PrediXcan that evaluates the aggregate effects of cisregulatory variants (within 1MB upstream or downstream of genes of interest) on gene expression via an elastic net regression method
PediXcan needs a reference dataset in which both genome variation and gene expression levels have been measured to build prediction models for gene expression.
We exploited already available models trained on GTEX data
The imputed transcriptomic profiles were subsequently analyzed using different machine learning approaches (Figure
On the one hand, unsupervised machine learning methods were used to analyze data structure, on the other hand, supervised methods were used to test for the presence of "signal" compared to AD related phenotypes.

Gene Prioritization
Gene prioritization was performed considering as input the predicted transcriptomic matrices from ADNI1-GWAS (excluding sex-specific tissues) resulting in a total of 42 tissues with 808 samples each (42 × 808 = 33, 936 samples overall).
We performed an independent analysis involving 528 "cases", that included people affected by dementia and/or with cognitive dysfunction (AD and MCI) for a total of 528 × 42 = 22, 176 input data, and 280 controls including healthy subjects for a total of 280 × 42 = 11, 760 input data.
Each sample was comprised of 24, 203 genes in total.
To identify relevant genes we used variational autoencoders (VAEs) with a single hidden layer with a dimension of 42 units, hence matching the number of tissues.
We adapted the code publicly provided by
In the encoding phase, the network inputs are the original dataset features representation x  .
These are transformed by means of non-linear activation functions in a hidden representation that we denominated z  and that we assume being characterized by a Gaussian probability density function.
In this phase the 2 latent representations of μ and λ of the distribution are learned.
The second part of the architecture that we denoted as the decoder is again built as a neural network.
The input this time is the vector z  i.e. the latent stochastic representation of the input dataset and the output will be the reconstructed representation ′  x of the original input vector x  .
A representation of the VAE architecture can be seen in Figure
The loss function of the VAE consists of two parts: the first part being the reconstruction loss (negative log-likelihood) and the second part being the function expressing the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence considering the learned hidden distribution and a priori Gaussian distribution
The first term of the loss function is considered over the encoder distribution of the hidden representation and it "encourages" the decoding phase to correctly reconstruct the input data
KL divergence is used to enforce the similarity between the distribution of the latent representation and the normal distribution.
We used separate VAEs to encode the gene expression of the cases and healthy classes.
Original data include positive (upregulated genes) and negative values (downregulated genes).
In order to compute VAE analysis, input data have been scaled between 0 and 1. Noteworthy, different genes can be present in different tissues while VAE pipeline requires an equal number of gene as input, thus NaN (non-existent/Not a Number) values during VAE input preprocessing were set to 0. The input samples were randomly split in training (80%) and test sets (20%) using a stratified approach to maintain the same proportion of samples per tissue.
We used the Adam optimizer
The entire autoencoding procedure was repeated 75 times separately for the healthy and AD classes in order to study the repeatability of results.
The main goal of the unsupervised analysis was to identify the up or down-regulation of certain genes in specific tissue types in cases and healthy samples.
We used a two-step procedure to achieve this association: we identified the tissue(s) encoded in each latent dimension unit of the VAE models, and then we identified the genes most strongly connected to the given latent dimension unit.
In order to identify the tissue(s) encoded in each latent dimension, we used the activations of the hidden layer in the VAEs as an input feature to 42 binary Support Vector Machine (SVM) classifiers, one for each tissue.
We trained each SVM classifier to predict whether the input sample to the VAE belonged to a specific tissue relying on the activation value of a single unit from the embedded latent dimension of the VAE.
We repeated this tissue-latent unit association procedure for each tissue and each unit in the hidden VAE layer.
We performed a 5-fold stratified cross-validation using a linear SVM (C = 1 with class weight balance), thus running a total of 5 × 42 × 42 SVM classifiers for each VAE (a 5-fold cross validation procedure, for 42 binary classifiers, for each one of the 42 hidden layer's unit).
We considered a given latent VAE unit to be predictive of a specific tissue type, hence associated with it, if the F1 score was greater than 0.8.
We found that some hidden units encode more than 1 tissue type.
It is noteworthy to mention that we tried other unsuccessful approaches.
Firstly, we tried to use a single VAE with both cases and controls, trying to find subclusters besides the tissues which cluster very well (see Figure
We also tried to use a single VAE for each tissue in separate.
No obvious structures were found when trying to match the results of t-SNE algorithm with all the available phenotypes, including case/control status.
Filtering the input for genes within each tissue that show nominal significance for case/control status using standard simple univariate tests did not improve the results.
Filtering genes with R 2 > 0.15 of expression prediction using the same threshold as in Hohman et al.ʹs work
In order to understand the features important for classification, we also implemented a saliency map approach.
This method is able to detect where the attention of the network (VAEs in our study) is focused
Saliency maps are generally applied in computer vision but, they can be used in other areas.
In our case, the maps were computed on the encoder part of the VAEs and the information extracted is the importance of each gene in the analysis, which is coded as an rgb color code.
From this analysis we were not able to identify significative patterns in the input data.
Considering the VAE used in this work, the association of the genes with the latent dimension units can be performed solely relying on the magnitude of the corresponding network weights.
Given that each VAE has a single hidden layer, each latent dimension unit is connected directly to every output unit, i.e. reconstructed gene, via a linear transformation.
Since each reconstructed gene is a summation of the weighted contribution of each latent unit, we could rank the relative importance of the units in the hidden layer relying on the magnitude of the weights.
Thus, we selected the 100 most positive and 100 most negative weights for each latent unit encoding a given tissue.
This resulted in a set of 100 upregulated and 100 downregulated genes, respectively for each of the trained VAEs.
The entire association procedure was performed for the 75 VAEs from healthy and AD samples.
We counted the total number of times a given gene was considered up or downregulated by our association procedure and kept it if it appeared more than three times overall.
As a result, we produced a list of up or down regulated genes associated with each of the 42 types of tissues.
We used this list as an input for pathway enrichment analysis.
In order to perform enrichment analysis, we used Fast Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (FGSEA), a tool developed by Sergushichev et al.
The approach implemented by FGSEA deals with quantitative data having inherently directionality like gene expression.
The model is based on gene statistic array S = Si‚…Sn where N is the number of samples and Si > 0 represent over-expression of gene i while Si < 0 represent down-expression.
The absolute value of Si represents a magnitude of the change.
The list of gene sets P of length m usually contains groups of genes that are commonly regulated in certain biological process.
To quantify a co-regulation of genes in a gene set p
Given a gene set p the more positive is the value of sr(p) the more enriched the gene set is in positively-regulated genes g with Sg > 0, accordingly, negative sr(p) corresponds to enrichment of negatively regulated genes.
To deal with multiple-comparison issues an empirical p-value is computed by randomly sampling gene sets of the same size of p.
The lists of downregulated and upregulated genes per tissue (referred as List-unsupervised) have been considered also as a feature selection step to build prediction models.
We also tested other approaches to identify the most relevant genes as considering: I) nominal significantly associated genes from logistic association test between predicted gene expression levels and phenotype status (referred as List-PrediXcan), II) nominal associated genes derived by the combination of single tissue-trait association using generalized Berk-Jones test (referred as List-UTMOST) obtained with UTMOST tool

Phenotype Prediction Models From Imputed Transcriptomic Matrices
Several supervised analysis techniques were tested in order to understand which one could achieve better results in identifying cases and controls from the transcriptomic profiles: Logistic Regression (LR), Support Vector Machine (SVM), Random Forest (RF) and Deep Learning networks.
The latter are known to achieve better results compared to other machine learning methods, especially when the relationships between the observed features is not supposed to be linear
Since we imputed data according to specific tissues, we searched the model that would perform better among them.
For this reason, we randomly selected 6 of the 42 tissues (Adipose Subcutaneous, Artery Aorta, Brain Spinal, Colon Transverse, Thyroid, Whole Blood) and trained the models on 600 of the 808 samples from ADNI1-GWAS, considering that the dataset is slightly unbalanced, as it contains more AD samples (528) than controls (280).
SVM, RF and LR were not capable of learning how to classify cases and controls, since they assigned the samples only to the majority class.
Concerning Deep Learning, the first accomplishment was understanding the appropriate architecture to elaborate transcriptomic data: we tested two Dense Neural Networks (DNN), two CNNs and an RNN.
The first DNN (DNN-1) consisted of 6 layers with respectively 800, 500, 400, 200, 40 and 2 nodes (called neurons).
The second DNN (DNN-2) tested consisted of only three layers with 800, 200 and 2 neurons.
The first CNN (CNN-1) had 6 layers: a convolutional layer of 10 filters, a convolutional layer of 5 filters after which a dropout regularization was applied, another convolutional layer of 5 filters, a dense layer of 200 neurons with a dropout, and two dense layers of 100 and 2 neurons in the end.
The second CNN (CNN-2) was a pure convolutional network of two convolutional layers of 10 and 5 filters, with a dropout regularization applied between them, and a dense layer with 2 neurons as the output layer.
The RNN had 3 layers: two Long Short-Term Memory cells (LSTM) with output dimension of 30 and 20 and a final dense layer of 2 neurons.
FIGURE 2 | t-SNE embedding of tissue genes, run using the 42 activations on the latent dimension of a VAE to check the embedded structure of all samples.
It is obvious that the latent activations are encoding information about each tissue.
Looking at the preliminary training results (Table
The final architecture consisted of the input and output layers and two hidden LSTM layers of 150 and 10 output dimensions.
After every hidden layer a batch normalization was applied to maintain the mean activation close to 0 and the activation standard deviation close to 1.
The input layer dimension was equal to the number of genes characterizing the tissue transcriptomic profile, while the output layer was a dense layer of dimension two to make possible the classification of the samples in AD and not-AD.
Considering all the 42 tissues, we had the chance to perform two types of analysis: a tissue-specific analysis and a crosstissue analysis.
In the tissue-specific analysis, we trained models on transcriptomic data specific for each tissue.
Therefore, we implemented predictive models that could impute the case/ control condition on new transcriptomic data related to the same tissue.
The input dimensions of the networks were in the order of thousands, but different for every tissue: the minimum was 2,041 characterizing the Brain Substantia Nigra tissue, and the maximum was reached by the Thyroid tissue with 9,655.
The aim of the cross-tissue analysis was, on the other hand, to observe the similarities between tissues in relationship with the Alzheimer's disease.
Models were trained on each single tissue, taking as input the genes shared by all the 42 tissue transcriptomic profiles
The column reporting the information for a gene was filled with zeros if it was not possible to impute the transcriptomic profile of that gene in a specific tissue.
Comparing the maximum number of genes imputed for the tissues and the total number of genes identified in all the analysis, it was clear that the new arranged matrices of 24, 203 genes for 808 samples were particularly sparse.
The models were then used to impute the case/control condition on tissues different to the one used for the training.
Both in single tissue and cross-tissue analyses all the models were trained on 600 samples from ADNI1-GWAS and the tests were performed on the remaining 208 samples.
The network architecture was in all cases the one in Figure
A 10-fold cross validation was applied and models compiled with the Adam optimizer and the binary cross-entropy as the optimization score function.
The monitored scores were the accuracy, area under the curve (AUC), precision, recall, and F1.
The saliency map was applied in the first LSTM layer, therefore we could observe if some samples were more informative than other for the classification purpose.
Keras
We then worked on features selection to find groups of genes that were likely to improve the model performance regarding the samples partition in case/control, both in the single-tissue and cross-tissues approaches.
The identification of such groups in single-tissue analysis can bring to the determination of tissue specific markers, on the other hand in the cross-tissues section we could focus on the set of genes that explained the relationship between tissues.
We used three different filter lists: List-unsupervised, List-PrediXcan and List-UTMOST (see Supplementary Materials Section 3).
Using these lists the input dimensions for all the tissues decreased: the number of unique genes identified by the List-unsupervised was 2,016, 4,984 with List-PrediXcan.
List-UTMOST (649 genes) was used only in the cross-tissue analysis as it doesn't provide tissuespecific information.
All the steps described above (except the architecture selection and saliency map) were also performed considering Cognitive Decline over time rather than diagnosis at screening.
This dataset consisted of 528 samples (some samples did not have this information), 281 controls and 247 cases.
Cognitive Decline has been calculated by considering the difference between the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) score 4 years after recruitment and the MMSE score at recruitment.
Then, regardless of the original recruitment diagnosis, we classified the samples into two groups: one group showing no cognitive decline (difference equal or greater than 0) and the other showing a cognitive decline (difference minor than 0).
The genes imputed for each tissue were therefore the same in ADNI1-GWAS dataset and Cognitive Decline dataset.
To consider the effect of AD related variables, we also performed the same analyses by stratifying by sex and early/late onset for dementia and AD [using 65 years of age as a cutoff

RESULTS
We predicted the genetic component of gene expression across 42 non-sex-specific tissues for all the samples included in ADNI1-GWAS dataset.
We exploited tissues specific eQTL models available on precictDB
The gene levels obtained by these sample matrices represent transcriptomic profiles based on eQTL across tissues in the analyzed dataset.
In the present work the matrices of imputed expression were analyzed using several machine learning strategies to identify potential tissue specific transcriptomic profiles associated with cognitive decline in Alzheimer's.

Gene-Based Results Per Tissue
We runned t-SNE
Although interpretations of Euclidean distances between points in a t-SNE plot is not straightforward
Indeed, we were able to identify associations between latent dimensions of VAE and tissue.
The evaluation of the weights associated with the latent dimension (see Methods) allow us to rank gene importance per tissue considering case/control status.
Table
Check Supplementary Table
The saliency map implementation returned not useful information.
If taken individually, genes don't have much impact: it is evident also with this result that the AD phenotype is due to a combination of many genes and environmental factors.
In order to investigate the presence of specific gene expression regulation associated with case/control status we considered the lists of tissue-specific up and down regulated genes derived by VAE analysis.
Additionally, for each tissue we considered the genes that were differentially regulated in cases but not in controls, that is representing a disease-specific signature.
The enrichment analysis have been performed considering Gene ontology 13 , KEGG 14 and reactome 15 and pathway databases
Complete enrichment analysis results are available as supplementary files (see Supplementary Materials Section 1) while significant enrichment tissues specific pathways after FDR correction are shown in Table
Interestingly enrichment analysis shows the presence of tissue specific signal in a specific brain tissue (i.e., brain nucleus) concerning pathways involved in gene expression regulation and in immune-related pathways in colon (Figure
The most significant alterations in brain pathways concern the brain nucleus accumbens (basal ganglia) region.
Interestingly, this region has been found to be associated with AD
Instead, the detected downregulation of immune system pathways in cases in comparison to controls could indicate a higher level of inflammation in dementia.
This is in line with the association observed between inflammatory bowel diseases and AD
Given the pivotal role of APOE
APOE gene expression is not predicted by gene expression imputation GTEx based models, due to the absence of eQTL explaining a relevant fraction of APOE expression level.
However, AD susceptibility due to APOE isoforms (∫2, ∫3 and ∫4), which are well known to confer a different risk for AD depending on the 13
ttps://reactome.org/
presence of missense coding variants, are associated with APOE gene functionality and can be independent from the genetic component of gene expression regulation.
We investigated if other genes directly interacting with APOE, according to string functional database 16 , have a significant association in our analysis (see Supplementary Materials Section S3).
One of the 11 genes identified, namely APOC2
Interestingly, the same gene is also the only one (among the 11 APOE interacting genes) significantly associated with AD according to a transcription wide association analysis performed according to a GWAS on AD in UK Biobank dataset
This suggests a potential role for APOC2 associated with the gene expression regulation and, interestingly, a recent work showed that the methylation profile in such a gene (which in turn affect gene expression) is associated with AD

Tissue-Specific and Cross-Tissues Classification
To understand which network performs better on different tissues, we tested five models on six sample tissues.
In Table
Therefore we decided to optimize the RNN and obtained the network structure described in Phenotype Prediction Models From Imputed Transcriptomic Matrices, which was then applied for the single-tissue and cross-tissue analysis on ADNI1-GWAS and Cognitive Decline dataset.
Without the feature selection, we observed a great performance during the training in terms of AUC, accuracy, precision, recall and F1 scores (see Supplementary Materials Section 2) on both datasets.
On test set (composed of 208 samples for tissue for ADNI1-GWAS and 128 for Cognitive Decline) the metrics reached values below expectations, with AUCs near 0:5 especially for ADNI1-GWAS. 16
ttps://string-db.org/cgi/network.pl 17
ttp://twas-hub.org/
TABLE 1 | Most upregulated and downregulated genes from the brain nucleus.
On ADNI1-GWAS (Figure
We did not observe a major impact of a list in this phase but the t-test confirmed a significant improvement compared to the no filter approach (p-value = 0.001474 for List-unsupervised and p-value = 2.693e -06 for List-PrediXcan).
Models trained for the cross-tissue analysis instead had a less evident improvement with the lists filter: only the List unsupervised returned a slightly significant improvement (p-value = 0.04084).
List-UTMOST did not give any improvement and, as we could not use it on single-tissue models, we decided not to further analyze it.
Cognitive Decline models performed better than ADNI1-GWAS, both in single-tissue and cross-tissue analysis (Figure
The lists application on Cognitive Decline models also led to an improvement for tissues with borderline or below the threshold performance (Figure
On cross-tissue models we obtained a significant p-value = 0.008766 for List-unsupervised and p-value = 0.04346 for List-PrediXcan.
Comparing the two lists on ADNI1-GWAS, List-unsupervised showed the bigger improvement on cross-tissue models: the t-test returned a p-value of 0:009123, but on single-tissue the difference was not significant.
Also on Cognitive Decline we observed a slightly major impact of List-unsupervised both for the single-tissue and cross-tissue models.
In Figure
Figure
The top heatmap describes the relationships between tissue when no filter is applied: we could observe that models trained on Brain  tissues, if they were able to correctly identify the AD subjects on a non-Brain tissue, they could do the same on all the other non-Brain tissues.
Instead, models trained on non-Brain tissue could identify AD-MCI/CTRL subjects only on a subset of tissues.
We performed the same analysis on ADNI1-GWAS models filtered by List-PrediXcan and List-unsupervised, respectively the middle and bottom heatmaps of Figure
We also tested the stratification for sex, age, APOE effect, and AD condition on ADNI1-GWAS dataset for single-tissue and cross-tissue analysis.
It returned no considerable variation in the performance.
The saliency map application was also not informative: each sample has the same importance.
Lastly, we performed the filter analyses on Cognitive Decline, pointing out the same results (Figure

DISCUSSION
In the present work we dissected the tissue specific genetic component of gene expression in association to AD related cognitive decline.
Our analysis consisted on the imputation of tissue specific gene expression profiles by using a TWAS-like approach
However, contrary to the standard TWAS analysis, we did not specifically focus on univariate analysis (e.g., gene association based on logistic or linear regression).
Instead, we dissected individual transcriptomic levels using different machine learning approaches.
We believe that our approach can be of particular interest since is capable of capturing data structure and non-linear behaviour in the system.
In fact, it is well known that gene expression levels are not independent, since many genes are actually correlated in terms of regulation
FIGURE 3 | ADNI1-GWAS feature selection evaluation.
The single-tissue models (top panel) significantly improved their ability to classify case/control condition thanks to both List-unsupervised (blue) and List-PrediXcan (red) compared to the no filtering approach (black).
On cross-tissue models (bottom panel), where there is also the performance with the List-UTMOST (green), the improvement was less evident.
Interestingly, we observed that a combination of unsupervised and supervised machine learning methods on matrices of predicted expression provided complementary information that can be integrated in order to get new insights in gene expression regulation.
On one hand, the VAE combined with enrichment analysis suggests the presence of a specific biochemical pathways alteration in dementia occurring in a specific brain area and in the gut.
The identified alteration occur in brain nucleus, a brain region found to be associated with AD by several studies
This alteration seems to be related to the regulation of gene expression and 436 therefore possibly associated to tissue-specific pathways regulation.
Instead, the enriched pathways in gut are related to immune systems and noteworthy, it is well established that immune system dysfunctions can lead to a greater increase of inflammation in AD
These results suggest that our analytical approach can identify relevant biological alterations occurring in AD.
Noteworthy, enrichment analysis identified alteration in biological pathway specifically in a brain area and gut, which is in line with the presence of a gut-brain axis dysfunction in AD.
Indeed, several researchers pointed out that brain-gut axis can be associated with many neurological disorders
In the present work, APOE genotype has not been directly included as covariate in prediction models since our aim was to identify other genetic factors that can explain part of the missing heritability on the established polygenic component in AD
However, APOE is expected to be by far the most influencing risk factor for late onset AD.
Though estimation of APOE contribution on the heritability component of AD is still not well defined, ranging from 10% to 28% of the overall genetic heritability
Moreover, in the present work, gene-expression derived genetic signals neglect not-eQTL effects and therefore we have limited analytical power.
This justifies the relatively low AUC values in comparison to other prediction models in AD, including the complete genomewide polygenic signal and using APOE as a covariate
Our aim was indeed to test whether or not there is a genetic signal associated with AD that could be apportioned to tissue specific gene-expression regulation rather than identify a prediction model.
It is also known that genetics is just one of the component involved in AD susceptibility and therefore the use of multimodal data (e.g., imaging data, clinical features, metabolomic, and environmental factors) should be taken into account in order to build a reliable classifier in term of translational application
Despite that, our classification models were still capable of finding a signal between cases and controls (overall AUC > 0:5) suggesting that part of the genetic signal in AD related dementia can be associated with tissue-specific gene expression regulation.
Moreover, we observed that feature selection can play a major role in the performance of deep learning networks classification.
We are aware that our work presents some limitations.
We performed a genetic association with dementia by considering ADNI data evaluating the solely genetic component of gene expression, which neglects other potential genetics effect not related to gene-expression regulation.
Our models are also limited by the current version of GTEx data, which has a relatively small size, therefore it is expected that over time new models will optimize eQTL estimation leading to more precise analyses of the genetic component of gene expression.
We also focused on non-sex specific tissues, since we wanted to study general potential alterations not involving sex-specific organs, but this could also be a limitation given the different prevalence of AD in females and males

CONCLUSION
In the present work, we performed an analysis of the predicted genetic component of gene expression in ADNI1-GWAS dataset in association with AD cognitive decline.
We dissected the predicted tissue specific gene expression by means of different supervised and unsupervised machine learning approaches.
Our results suggest that a framework including unsupervised and supervised methods in data-analysis can provide complementary information and thus leading to better insights into the underlying system.
In particular, variational autoencoder pre-processing of input data proved to be efficient for features selection prior to the implementation of deep learning classification models.
However, the limited AUC prediction performance of the developed models suggests that the evaluation of the solely genetic component of gene expression by exploiting up to date available GTEx models is currently under-powered in comparison to genome-wide polygenic risk score modeling.
This is not surprising since we are neglecting the effect of non-eQTL variants.
On the other hand, we can disclose tissue specific effects and reveal potential biological mechanisms associated with a given phenotype.
In this regard, our analysis showed that brain tissues are more associated with dementia status and that inflammatory processes in brain-gut axis can play a role in AD.

AUTHOR'S NOTE
Data used in preparing this article were obtained from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) database (adni.loni.usc.edu).
As such, many investigators within the ADNI contributed to the design and implementation of ADNI and/or provided data but did not participate in analysis or writing of this report.
A complete listing of ADNI investigators can be found at:



FIGURE 1 |
FIGURE 1 | Framework of integrative analysis of multi-tissues expression profiles.
Starting from genotyping data (m individuals per n variants) we imputed tissues specific transcriptomic profiles (for any tissue T i , where i = 1‚…‚ k) by means of cis-eQTL PrediXcan models trained on GTEx data.
Variational autoencoder followed by support vector machine (SVM) latent dimension-tissue match on the imputed gene expression matrices (m individuals per z genes) is used as a feature selection to identify the most relevant genes per tissue (T i = gene 1 ‚…‚ gene s where i is the i th tissue and s in the number of prioritized genes) to provide as input of the recurrent neural network classifier.



FIGURE 4 |
FIGURE 4 | ADNI1-GWAS and Cognitive Decline comparison: Cognitive Decline (red boxes) returns higher AUCs on test sets than ADNI1-GWAS (blue boxes) both in cross-tissue models (left) and in single-tissue models (right).



FIGURE 5 |
FIGURE 5 | Brain tissues analysis.
In green the AUCs on test sets for the no filter application are reported, in red for List-unsupervised and in yellow for List-PrediXcan.
The top two panels report respectively the cross-tissue and single-tissue models performance on ADNI1-GWAS dataset, the third and fourth panels on Cognitive Decline.
In both datasets, feature filtering improved the classification in almost all the Brain tissues.



FIGURE
FIGURE 6 | Continued



FIGURE 6 |
FIGURE 6 | ADNI1-GWAS cross-tissues performance.
By column we can observe how much a model trained on a tissue is able to recognize without mistakes (AUC) AD/non-AD subjects from data related to different tissues.
On the diagonal for each tissue the AUC obtained for that model during the training is reported.
The top panel reports the cross-tissue results without any filter application, the middle panel when using List-PrediXcan and the bottom using List-unsupervised.



TABLE 2 |
Significant tissue-pathways enrichment analysis using Reactome database.



TABLE 3 |
Preliminary networks training performance on six sample tissues: accuracy (Acc) and area under the curve (AUC).