What outcomes are important to patients with mild cognitive impairment or Alzheimer's disease, their caregivers, and health‐care professionals? A systematic review
Introduction: Clinical trials involving patients with Alzheimer's disease (AD) continue to try to identify disease-modifying treatments.
Although trials are designed to meet regulatory and registration requirements, many do not measure outcomes of the disease most relevant to key stakeholders.
Methods: A systematic review sought research that elicited information from people with AD, their caregivers, and health-care professionals on which outcomes of the disease were important.
Studies published in any language between 2008 and 2017 were included.
Results: Participants in 34 studies described 32 outcomes of AD.
These included clinical (memory, mental health), practical (ability to undertake activities of daily living, access to health information), and personal (desire for patient autonomy, maintenance of identity) outcomes of the disease.
Discussion: Evidence elicited directly from the people most affected by AD reveals a range of disease outcomes that are relevant to them but are not commonly captured in clinical trials of new treatments.

Background
Dementia has a substantial global impact, affecting over 46 million people in 2015 and costing an estimated US $818 billion
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the most common cause of dementia, accounting for 50-70% of cases
AD is typically characterized by impairments in memory, executive functions, and activities of daily living (ADLs), but the range and impact of symptoms and outcomes across the disease spectrum are diverse.
The underlying causes of AD and effective treatments for the disease remain elusive
Clinical trials involving patients with AD continue to try to identify disease-modifying treatments.
However, although such trials may meet regulatory and registration requirements, they may not provide convincing evidence of relevance to patients, caregivers, or health-care professionals.
Some trials are criticized for using inappropriate or inadequately sensitive endpoints
Helping key stakeholders to understand which AD outcomes are most relevant and what constitutes a meaningful delay in disease progression could help researchers develop and evaluate relevant, effective treatments and improve health services and care
This systematic review, conducted on behalf of the international consortium Real World Outcomes Across the AD Spectrum for Better Care (ROADMAP;
ROADMAP partners will seek to match these to "real-world evidence" sources, including disease registries, population-based cohort studies, and electronic health records documenting routine patient care.
We sought evidence from studies covering a spectrum from prodromal AD and mild cognitive impairment (MCI) to confirmed AD dementia
We sought research studies that elicited information from stakeholders, addressing the following research questions:
1. Which outcomes of AD across the spectrum are prioritized by patients, caregivers, and health-care professionals? 2. What do these stakeholders consider a meaningful delay in progression of AD across the spectrum?

Methods
The systematic review protocol is available in the PROS-PERO database (

Search strategy
We developed a search strategy for the MEDLINE database, balanced for sensitivity and specificity, and adapted it for use in Embase, CINAHL, and PsycINFO (Table
We developed groups of search terms for each research question using input from ROADMAP partners.
We combined terms related to AD across the disease spectrum, stakeholder groups and study methods, with terms related to outcomes and priority (for research question 1) and separately with terms related to a meaningful delay of disease (for research question 2).
We combined all searches to remove duplicates.
We searched for gray literature using "Alzheimer" in combination with "outcome" or "progression", applying date limits 2008-2017 on relevant websites (Table
We included relevant studies regardless of language by arranging translation into English by colleagues.
We sought additional relevant studies through manual searches of key articles' citation lists and checking relevant conference abstracts for full publications.

Study screening, quality appraisal, and selection
We established specific inclusion and exclusion criteria to guide the selection of relevant studies for inclusion and screened the titles and abstracts of all retrieved citations (Table
Two members of the research team independently screened the first half of the retrieved citations, with 95% agreement on decisions to include/exclude (Cohen's kappa, 0.53 [0.42-0.64]).
A discussion of discrepancies with a third member of the team revealed that most disagreements were due to the appraiser including potentially relevant articles that did not meet all inclusion criteria.
The risk of missing relevant evidence was considered to be low; hence, one research team member screened the remaining half of the citations.
Two members of the team independently used published tools with our inclusion and exclusion criteria to appraise the full text of articles that passed screening for relevance and quality.
Checklists from the Clinical Appraisal Skills Program were used to appraise qualitative studies (
and the National Institute of Health for quantitative studies (
Discrepancies were discussed by the team and resolved through consensus.
Through iterative discussion, we established a minimum quality threshold for inclusion, agreeing to exclude studies with incomplete descriptions of recruitment or analysis or unclear reporting of results which did not allow appraisal of their rigor.

Data extraction
For each included study, one member of the research team completed data extraction, noting the research approach, recruitment methodology, participant stakeholder demographics, disease stage, data analysis and synthesis methods, research findings, and conclusions (Table
At least one additional member of the team verified the extracted data.

Data synthesis process
We extracted quotations and other study findings that referred to outcomes or meaningful delay of AD across the disease spectrum.
We sought feedback from consortium colleagues to group specific outcomes into overarching domains (e.g., memory within the cognition domain) (Table
Because many outcomes were multifaceted and some overlapped domains, we placed each outcome where it fitted best according to clinical nosology (e.g., grouping behavioral, mental, and neuropsychiatric outcomes as used in international classification systems
To allow integration of evidence emerging from studies using a range of different methodologies, we established a framework for deciding which of the outcomes discussed within each study should be considered important from the perspective of the relevant stakeholder group.
In studies where outcomes were directly ranked for priority, the top 50% of outcomes were included.
In studies where outcomes were surveyed for importance but not ranked in the order of priority, outcomes that were deemed important by over 50% of participants were included.
In studies adopting qualitative methods, outcomes that were grouped into themes by authors or that recurred frequently in participant quotations were included.

Results
Of the 3772 citations identified in the deduplicated searches, we excluded 3653 at title/abstract screening and a further 92 after full-text screening (Fig.
In addition to the 27 studies that passed full-text review and quality appraisal, we further found seven studies meeting all inclusion criteria through citation searching key articles and follow up of relevant conference abstracts.
No additional studies were found through the gray literature search.

Study characteristics
The 34 included studies (representing 32 distinct research projects) were conducted in 13 countries (Fig.
Individual studies involved between four and 1116 participants.
Twenty studies recruited patients with MCI or AD dementia, 23 recruited caregivers, and six recruited health-care professionals (the majority of whom were generalist or specialist physicians and community or nursing home nurses; details are shown in Table
No studies included the views of patients living with preclinical or prodromal AD or with AD at the severe end of the spectrum.
Qualitative methods were used in 23 studies
Six studies included explicit prioritization of outcomes through ranking or survey responses from stakeholders
Only three of the 34 included studies provided any evidence on stakeholders' views about criteria for a meaningful delay in disease progression
Evidence was sought on either the duration of such a delay or the symptoms delayed in their onset or worsening, which would be considered meaningful.
These studies gathered data via stakeholder interviews and clinical assessments of cognition.

Outcomes of AD across the spectrum
Table
Fig.
The most consistent evidence across the stakeholder groups is summarized in the following section, including illustrative quotations and other relevant findings.

Outcomes raised by all stakeholder groups
Eight outcomes, spanning all seven overarching domains, were considered important by all stakeholder groups.
They emerged from between six and eleven studies, from a range of evidence types (Table
The impact and importance of memory decline was considered in relation to MCI and AD.
This encompassed recalling names and dates and a general sense of forgetfulness.
".it gets .
frustrating to not be able to finish a conversation without at least having one instance where I don't remember a certain item, a name or place" (patient with MCI)
"I was losing my mother-she was forgetting people, how to do the most basic things.
forgetting who she was" (familial caregiver of AD patient)
The ten studies
ADLs and loss of functioning included completion of routine activities, such as independently managing cooking, finances, and self-hygiene.
Evidence for significance in relation to MCI and AD came from ten studies
"Improve ADLs so far as you know... buttoning up a shirt or closing a zipper" (physician regarding expectations of treatment)
"A big issue is car driving.. we have to fight that they give up.. call the police" (professional describing main topics emerging after early AD diagnosis)
The importance of maintaining patient independency and autonomy was discussed in relation to MCI and AD in ten Fig.
Darker shading implies a larger number of studies within a country, as shown on the scale beneath the map.
Lu; USA (English)
Qualitative: focus groups, content analysis MCI patients: ADL, patients' independence and autonomy MCI caregivers: language and communication, ADL, patients' mental health MacRae; Canada (English) (a)
Qualitative: in-depth, semistructured interviews, thematic analysis AD patients: memory, patient independence and autonomy, delaying entry into care, maintaining identity or personality, stigma, length of patient life, patient QoL, length of patient life Malthouse; UK (English)
Minimally, clinically relevant changes determined to be 3 points.
Smith; Australia (English)
Qualitative: in-depth, semistructured interviews, thematic analysis AD patients: stability of symptoms and general symptom control Smith; Canada (English)
Qualitative: in-depth narrative interviews conducted, grounded theory AD caregivers: maintaining identity or personality, stability of symptoms, and general symptom control Sorensen; Denmark (English)
This concept went beyond functional capacity to the ability to self-govern, preserving both physical and psychological autonomy.
"The issue is [they] want to maintain [their] autonomy.
[They] don't want to be patronised" (health-care professional for AD patients)
The impact of mental health issues, such as anxiety, depression, and reality distortion, was mentioned in relation to MCI and AD, with evidence from ten studies
When asked which key areas should be targeted in an intervention for MCI, spousal caregivers believed that targeting depression was important
The importance of maintaining patient quality of life (QoL) (encompassing the concepts of living a fulfilled and dignified life) was highlighted in relation to MCI and AD; evidence came from six studies
In one study, caregivers of patients with MCI ranked patient QoL as the most important outcome from a predetermined list of twelve outcomes
Maintenance of patients' identity and personality was discussed in relation to MCI and AD in nine studies
This related to the preservation of personality traits, knowledge, and emotional bonds with others.
"My best friend [husband with MCI] has gone.
He is part of me, but he is no longer the same person.
I really miss him"
The impact of the disease through caregiver burden was discussed in relation to MCI and AD in nine studies
"I quit my job, my house, to take care of her.
I do not go to the cinema, I do not go out for a walk, I do not go to the shopping mall, I do not go to the hairdresser" (caregiver of AD patient)
The importance of health services and disease information (and its absence) was discussed by all stakeholder groups in relation to MCI and AD in eleven studies
"If there is something I don't understand, I will go on [the computer] and look it up.
I just want to be able, [if] something happens, [to] take care of him as far as [possible] in every situation ."
(caregiver of an AD patient)

Outcomes raised by both patients and caregivers
Patients and caregivers mentioned the importance of retaining language and communication functions in relation to MCI and AD.
This included cognitive aspects of verbal and written communication, such as verbal fluency and object naming.
Evidence came from six studies
Patients and caregivers dealing with MCI and AD discussed the importance of maintaining a quality patient-caregiver relationship.
Evidence emerged from four studies
"My husband gets angry with me when I can't remember things we have decided to do.
He talks a lot about it.
Sometimes I think that it is worse for him than for me" (a patient with AD)
The impact of experiencing stigma due to AD emerged in four studies
Stakeholders described anticipated, perceived, and overt stereotyping because of AD. "We haven't discussed this, but I get the feeling that [my husband] wouldn't like that, because there is a certain amount of stigma attached to dementia.
So no, I haven't" (wife of an AD patient when asked about seeking social support)

Outcomes mentioned by both health-care professionals and caregivers
Both health-care professionals and caregivers discussed the difficulty of dealing with challenging and distressing behaviors in relation to MCI and AD, such as verbal or physical aggression.
Evidence came from six studies
"If you don't have patience here, you won't last for even 2 months because of patients' yelling and their aggression" (a paid caregiver of AD patients)
The benefits of caregiver social support and the challenges of accessing it were discussed in relation to MCI and AD, with evidence from six studies
"I started to realize that I should get someone to talk to when feeling helpless sometimes.
I felt better after letting everything out from within" (a caregiver of AD patients)
Patients dealing with MCI and AD described the importance of maintaining family participation in care throughout the disease process to preserve relationships and spread duties.
This emerged in six studies
"He (the patient) loved his sister so much, and now she won't even call to see how he's doing.
She's angry that I keep insisting there's something wrong, and that he 'took my side' because he hasn't called her.
But of course he can't call her.
This is tearing the family apart."
(a caregiver of an AD patient)
Outcomes discussed less frequently are described in Table

Meaningful delay
Only three included studies
One study involving patients with mild AD described changes in symptomatology without specific reference to time periods (e.g., slowing memory deterioration and retaining ability to undertake ADLs)
Two studies involving patients with mild to moderate AD referred to disease progression in terms of cutoff points on the AD Assessment Scale-Cognitive describing 3-
Authors of both these studies emphasized that although these changes may be significant when analyzed at a group level, there was a substantial variation among individuals and their experienced symptoms at any given score on the scale.

Discussion
Our systematic review provides a framework of realworld outcomes which represents the voices of stakeholders personally impacted by AD across the spectrum of disease, adding a different perspective to the previous work based on AD trial outcomes and their measures
Important outcomes included clinical aspects of the disease, e.g., memory and mental health, and social aspects, such as the devastating impact of caregiver burden.
Other frequently observed important outcomes reflect practical challenges such as accessing AD information or the ability to complete ADLs alongside personal aspects such as maintenance of patient autonomy, identity, and QoL.
Our review identified the importance of several outcomes consistent with those typically assessed in clinical trials, such as cognition and ADLs.
However, we revealed the importance of several additional outcomes that are infrequently assessed in clinical trial settings, including preservation of the patient's personality or the accessibility of health services and disease information.
These concepts may be captured by patient reported outcome and experience measures
Stakeholders prioritized outcomes with tangible and directly observable effects on the daily lives of patients and caregivers.
Disease biomarkers (e.g., those based on tau or amyloid, structural neuroimaging measures, or combination of these) are now incorporated into research diagnostic criteria and therefore commonly used to assess interventions in clinical trials
These were not mentioned by stakeholders, although the desire for certainty of diagnosis was identified in two studies.
It is possible that clinical biomarker-based outcomes were not flagged as being important because of the sparsity of data from health-care professionals (six of the 34 included studies), the lack of data from people with prodromal or severe AD, and/or the relatively new and tentative nature of the evidence linking biomarkers to clinical symptomatology.
Although we identified a substantial body of research reporting on the importance of various outcomes to stakeholders, no reliable conclusions relating to the definition of a meaningful delay in AD progression could be drawn.
The available evidence highlighted the difficulty of using scales to determine clinically relevant or meaningful change because these are not accurate or predictive of symptoms at the individual level, suggesting the need for further investigation of this issue.

Strengths and limitations
This review benefitted from the multidisciplinary team of researchers and experts across Europe who conducted the work and contributed at key decision-making stages.
The inclusion of studies published in multiple languages in different countries (although few from developing countries) improves the generalizability of the evidence, and its methodological heterogeneity adds confidence by incorporating outcomes that emerged from a range of study types.
This combined evidence facilitates a complete understanding of stakeholder perspectives.
Although our search strategy was relatively sensitive, it may not have captured all relevant material.
We used the term "patient" with condition terms to identify individuals with AD across the spectrum, so relevant studies may have been missed which used terms such as "person" or "subject".
We found no studies that addressed the opinions of patients or corresponding stakeholders at the severe end of the AD spectrum.
Given the time-intensive and complex nature of qualitative work and the requirement of appropriate consent procedures, it would be practically and ethically difficult to conduct such research.
We also did not capture the opinions of former caregivers of people with AD.
Both groups represent important missing voices in the evidence presented.
The interpretation of research evidence into outcomes and their categorization into domains may have obscured some relevant concepts.
For example, language and communication may have been captured by the broader "cognition" domain from the perspective of health-care professionals.

Conclusions
Our systematic review provides evidence about the outcomes of MCI and mild to moderate AD dementia which are of importance to patients, caregivers, and health-care professionals.
It demonstrates that although current clinical trials typically assess some of these, others are rarely included as outcomes.
Involving these varied and nuanced AD outcomes in the trial design would be a substantial challenge, but as they reflect distinct, important aspects of the experience and burden of the disease, they could help ensure that successful treatments or evaluation of the quality of care is better focused on aspects of AD most important to the people affected by it.
As there was limited evidence to define a "meaningful delay in AD disease progression" from any of the stakeholders' perspectives, further research is essential to explore this important issue at different stages of the AD spectrum.
AD outcomes of importance in preclinical and severe stages of the disease should also be explored.
Our findings will help future researchers meet the challenge of designing and undertaking optimized clinical trials with the greatest potential to provide treatments for AD which mitigate its most devastating effects at a personal and social level.



Fig. 1 .
Fig. 1.
Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) flowchart showing citation numbers in each stage of the screening process.
Abbreviations: AD, Alzheimer's disease; MCI, mild cognitive impairment.



Fig. 3 .
Fig.3.
Overlap of outcomes according to the stakeholder group which raised their importance and the number of studies in which they appeared.



Table 1



Table 2
Domains and outcomes: the number of included studies in which each outcome was considered important and the number of countries involved in those studies (Continued )



Table 3
Summary of characteristics and results of included studies



Table 3
Summary of characteristics and results of included studies (Continued )


Disease Assessment Scale-Cognitive Subscale; ADL, activities of daily living; CDRS, Clinical Dementia Rating Scale; CIBIC1, Clinician Interview-Based Impression of Change plus caregiver input; CGAS, clinician Goal-Attainment Scaling; FAQ, functional activities questionnaire; HPs, health-care professionals; MCI, mild cognitive impairment; PGAS, patient/carer Goal-Attainment Scaling; QoL, quality of life.
C. Tochel et al. / Alzheimer's & Dementia: Diagnosis, Assessment & Disease Monitoring 11 (2019) 231-247