Focus on the Correlations between Alzheimer’s Disease and Type 2 Diabetes
Background: In the last decades, both diabetes mellitus and Alzheimer's disease are constantly increasing.
Affected individuals, therefore, represent an enormous problem for the society, governments and global organizations.
These diseases are usually considered as independent conditions, but increasing evidence shows that there are links between these two disorders.
In this review, we analyzed common features present in Alzheimer's disease and diabetes mellitus, showing how these two diseases are strictly correlated to each other.
Results: Some pathogenetic factors are shared by Type 2 Diabetes and Alzheimer's Disease: chronic inflammation, oxidative stress, mitochondrial dysfunction, adiponectin deficiency, different expression of plasma cholinesterase activity and vascular damage could represent a possible explanation for the coexistence of these two conditions in many patients.
A better understanding of this issue and an appropriate management of diabetes by means of physical activity, low fat diet, and drugs to achieve a good glycemic control, avoiding both hyperglycemia and hypoglycemia, can represent a way to prevent cognitive decline and Alzheimer's disease.

INTRODUCTION
Alzheimer's Disease (AD) and diabetes mellitus are both frequently encountered conditions
These diseases, representing a very important health problem, are considered as independent diseases, but growing evidence shows that there are many links between these two disorders.
Alzheimer's disease, the most common cause of dementia, is a progressive and limiting neurodegenerative disorder.
The two anatomic and histopathological main characteristics of AD are Senile Plaques (SPs) and Neurofibrillary Tangles (NFTs)
Memory deficiency first, followed by a steady loss of judgement, verbal fluency, reasoning skills, and other cognitive functions are the most frequent consequences of this illness.
Enormous SP deposits in the cerebral cortex induce inflammatory response through astroglial and microglial activation, causing synaptic degeneration, and consequently, cognitive dysfunction
NFTs consist of an intracellular accumulation of the aggregated microtubule-binding protein tau
Evidence in the literature shows that hyperphosphorylation of tau protein leads to the formation of NFTs.
These deposits are related to synaptic loss and neuronal death, causing cognitive impairment
Although it is scientifically demonstrated that mutations in certain genes cause Familial AD (FAD), more than 90% of AD patients have the sporadic form
This suggests that aging is an important non-modifiable risk factor for AD but not the only one.
The aim of this narrative review is to show these links, highlighting the possible role of different factors, such as insulin resistance, inflammation, oxidative stress and mitochondrial dysfunction, which are common to both conditions, explaining their frequent association and mutual influence.

RISK FACTORS FOR ALZHEIMER'S DISEASE
Most authors claim that AD occurs as a result of complex interactions between genes and other risk factors.
Age, a family history of AD and heredity are the most important risk factors that cannot be changed, but emerging evidence suggests that there may be other factors which can be modified.
Genetic variation in Apolipoprotein E (APOE) gene is the most known genetic risk factor for AD
In elderly patients, other risks factors for AD are: obesity, Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus (T2DM), and a long lasting diet high in saturated fat (Table
These risk factors are linked to reduced cognitive function in both humans
Furthermore, insulin resistance has been identified as a major risk factor for the onset of AD.

WHY INSULIN RESISTANCE AND T2DM ARE RISK FACTORS FOR AD
Insulin has a key role in learning and memory, in particular directly regulating ERK, a kinase required for the type of learning and memory compromised in early AD.
In non-pathological situation, insulin binds to the Insulin Receptor (IR) which phosphorylates IR Substrate (IRS) on a tyrosine residue, activating the signaling cascade.
In peripheral tissues, this signaling leads to the uptake and sequestration of blood glucose to satisfy cellular energy requirements
In the brain, neuronal cells use glucose with a process that is insulin independent.
However, in the brain, insulin plays a key role in neuronal functions by regulating energy metabolism, growth, survival, and differentiation via insulin signaling
Several hypotheses claim hyperinsulinemia, insulin resistance and T2DM as influence factors for the risk of AD.
According to many scientific studies, hyperinsulinemia and insulin resistance can lead to amyloid extracellular deposition and augmented production of tau proteins, increasing the risk for the brain to develop AD
In the same way, an aberrant insulin signaling can lead to an AD-like pattern of reduced cerebral glucose metabolic rate in the brain
Various studies show that T2DM gets worse
In addition, T2DM, can lead to small vessel vasculopathy, through various mechanisms such as: accumulation of polyols, non-enzymatic glycosylation of structural proteins (AGE products), oxidative stress, activation of Protein Kinase C (PKC) causing endothelial damage.
Small vessels vasculopathy contributes to dementia, independently or in association with AD pathology and causes a disruption of proper function of the brain vasculature

TYPE 3 DIABETES: A CONSEQUENCE OF AD
Insulin, produced by pancreas beta cell, crosses the Blood Brain Barrier (BBB) through a carrier -mediated and temperature-sensitive active process
Insulin, linking to IR, activates a cascade of intracellular phosphorylation.
Through this process, insulin exerts several roles as neuromodulation
Especially in hyperinsulinemia conditions, insulin has a further role in the formation of SP deposits
Chronic cerebral hyperinsulinemia in AD brains probably could be caused by a defected IR because its expression is increased in cerebral cells
In the case of SP, consisting of Aβ peptides, some studies demonstrate that high insulin levels promote their deposits after activation of the mitogen activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathways
Other studies give more importance to Insulin-Degrading Enzyme (IDE)
When insulin levels are normal, IDE degrades insulin and some peptides, included Aβ, but when there are high insulin levels, it promotes only insulin degradation, and in this way, can induce formation of SP deposits
Additionally, hypoglycemia can decrease IDE levels, causing an impairment of SP degradation
Furthermore, SP deposits cause dysregulation of glucose metabolism
Relative to phosphorylation of tau and NFT aggregation, they are promoted by GSK-3β activated by insulin and Insulin-like Growth Factor-1 (IGF-1) stimulation
It has been demonstrated that when GSK-3 is inhibited there is an improvement of cognitive functions
Several studies carried out on AD brains showed that in this disease, there are conditions of brain insulin resistance and brain insulin deficiency
These conditions are both consequences of chronic hyperinsulinemia, as already described, a mediator of neurodegeneration, that leads to brain insulin resistance and impaired insulin uptake
Furthermore, hyperinsulinemia increases SPs and NFT deposits, that can competitively inhibit the binding of insulin to the IR
Consequently, it has been termed "type 3 diabetes"

PHYSIOPATHOLOGICAL FEATURES COMMON TO T2DM AND AD
It has been observed that there are some pathogenetic factors shared by T2DM and AD (Table
1) Several studies show that in chronic inflammation process, inflammatory cells, such monocytes and macrophages, produce interleukins, including IL-6 and cytokines, including TNF-.
The latter plays a key role in this process underlying these two diseases
Particularly, TNF-is a pro-inflammatory cytokine, produced by macrophages and by microglial cells and when it is activated it can cause inhibition of insulin receptor signaling, promoting phosphorylation of IR, and consequently persistent hyperinsulinemia
It has been demonstrated that when TNF-is neutralized, insulin sensitivity improves
Besides hyperinsulinemia, hyperglycemia can cause production and increase of AGEs (Advanced Glycation Endproducts), identified in SP e NFTs, indicating a further link between hyperglycemia and AD
Additional production of pro-inflammatory cytokines is stimulated by SP that further activates microglial cells and astrocytes involved in chronic inflammation and consequently in oxidative stress that secondly leads to damage and cellular death, activating moreover inflammatory process
Additionally, metabolic disorders, such as T2DM, insulin resistance and hyperinsulinemia, set off a chronic lowgrade inflammation, causing further production of proinflammatory citokines
This hypothesis is supported by studies conducted both in animal and human models
So, it is clear that chronic inflammation could be the principal cause of AD and metabolic disorders, such as T2DM
Furthermore, some evidence suggests that bacterial infection could play a key role in inflammatory process, particularly in T2DM
In this case, bacterial infec-tion could start chronic inflammation and then SP deposition, causing the onset of AD
2) Oxidative stress is another link between these diseases, evidenced in animal models
It is a mechanism of cellular damage caused by Reactive Oxygen Species (ROS), produced by high fat diet.
They are targeting cellular components, leading to cellular structural alterations, such as an impairment of mitochondrial function
Furthermore, they cause an impairment of insulin secretion and sensitivity
Increased cytosolic Ca2+ levels are involved in amyloidogenic process and cause a continuous oxidative stress, getting worse the situation
Additionally, aging is associated with a deficit of antioxidant production and this condition aggravates the pathological situation
3) Another important factor is Adiponectin (APN), an adipocytokine secreted by adipocytes, that is involved in the pathophysiology of these diseases.
Indeed, it has been observed that low APN levels are related to hyperinsulinemia, and then APN would have an insulin sensitizing role possibly improving T2DM and AD too

4) Another important component in inflammatory process is represented by plasma cholinesterase activity (pChE).
There are two different type of cholinesterase: acetylcholinesterase (AChE) e Butyrylcholinesterase (Bu-ChE).
In this case, when we talk about pChE, we refer to BuChE.
AD and T2DM are positively related to pChE
PChE is also positively correlated to SP deposition
Indeed, high levels of BuChE have been found in SP and NFT
It has been observed that pChE induces AChE downregulation
Since AChE arrests inflammation
5) Finally, evidence shows that vascular damage is verifiable in both T2DM e AD but, although it is demonstrated that it is caused by T2DM and that could contribute to dementia

COGNITIVE DECLINE IN AD
AD is characterized by a particular cognitive decline with specific clinical features such as: 1) Memory impairment: AD patients have a gradual memory impairment, starting with a deficit of episodic memory, especially in the short term, and then semantic (concerning then meaning of words), prospective (regarding their commitments), procedural (regarding the manner in which daily functions are performed), autobiographic (concerning personal experiences) memory.
As a result, at the beginning of this disease, AD patients are aware of this deficit and then they can be depressed.
2) Apraxia: Not capable of carrying out daily life movements.
3) Aphasia: Difficulty in using the word that causes deficit of verbal and written comprehension.
4) Echolalia: Constant repetition of a word or phrase.
5) Agnosia: Inability to recognize objects and their use.
6) Alteration of behavior: Difficulty in speaking, reading and understanding the language, which can cause depression, mutism and isolation.
This results in alterations of personality, in contrast with the nature (can suddenly cause aggression) thereby resulting in abrupt humoral changes.
7) Disorientation: Loss of sense of temporal-space orientation.
8) Loss of attention: Inability to focus attention on external inputs and to perform multiple actions at the same time.
9) Urethral and fecal incontinence: Loss of control of anal and urethral sphincters.
Various tests are conducted to examine cognitive decline in this severe illness, but the most used are two:
• Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE), a point test to evaluate temporal-space orientation, memory, attention, language and spatial visual function.
• The clock drawing test that is used as a screening test to evaluate cognitive functions.
It consists to draw a clock and a time indicated by the operator.

CONNECTIONS BETWEEN T2DM AND COGNITIVE DECLINE
There are studies that analyzed connections between T2DM and cognitive decline in human models with
About studies that analyzed connections between T2DM and cognitive decline, a study effectuated in Korean men with T2DM evidenced that T2DM leads to an impairment of cognitive function, even if there is a good metabolic control
Many other studies observed connection between AD, T2DM and cognitive impairment.
A study focused on the progression of cognitive decline examining a cohort of AD patients divided into two different groups based on the presence or absence of T2DM and the result was that AD patients with T2DM showed less functional cognitive decline over an 18-month period compared with AD patients without T2DM
A review analyzed 10 studies to find connections between diabetes and cognitive impairment in AD patients
It was observed that in 2 of these studies a faster cognitive decline in AD patients was caused by diabetes.
Other studies evidenced, however, that in AD patients there was not a correlation between diabetes and cognitive impairment, rather some studies indicated that diabetes could have a protective role
Researchers have speculated that these discordant findings could be caused by the possible role of different causes of cognitive decline, as a cerebral vascular impairment, hyperglycemia (even without diabetes)
Another possible interpretation could be differences in the use of antidiabetic
Another study focused attention on chronic inflammation in both the illnesses.
According to a study on post-mortem AD brain, researchers found that patients with a T2DM had more inflammation than patients without T2DM
This hypothesis has been confirmed by another study on postmortem AD brain that demonstrated that rate of inflammation was correlated to high synapse loss
Furthermore, it has been observed that diabetic retinopathy could be correlated with cognitive impairment and AD

CONCLUSION
There is increasing evidence that diabetes mellitus is associated with depression
In this review we analyze the close links between diabetes and AD showing how these two diseases are strictly related to each other.
It is known that insulin resistance and obesity are risk factors for the development of AD.
Notably, a chronic condition of hyperinsulinemia favors the formation of SP deposits and the phosphorylation of tau protein, an important component of NFTs.
Furthermore, the increase in SP and NFT deposits may competitively inhibit the binding of insulin to its receptor and this translates into further insulin resistance.
In addition to hyperinsulinemia, hyperglycemia can generate the production and increase of AGE (advanced glycation end products) that have been identified in SP and NFT; this indicates a further link between diabetes mellitus and AD.
Therefore, it is well understood how important it is to prevent and treat diabetes through changes in lifestyle (physical activity, low fat diet, etc.) as well as achieving a good and stable glycemic control, avoiding both hyperglycemia and hypoglycemia and the administration of antioxidant agents
Furthermore, it is really important to accurately evaluate patients to look for the clinical conditions frequently found in the elderly that can precipitate cognitive impairment, such as hypothyroidism

CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION
Not applicable.



Fig. ( 1
Fig. (1).
Type 3 diabetes.



Table 1 . Risk factors.



Table 2 . Physiopathological features common to both T2DM and AD.