Plasma P-tau181 to Aβ42 ratio is associated with brain amyloid burden and hippocampal atrophy in an Asian cohort of Alzheimer's disease patients with concomitant cerebrovascular disease
There is increasing evidence that phosphorylated tau (P-tau181) is a specific biomarker for Alzheimer's disease (AD) pathology, but its potential utility in non-White patient cohorts and patients with concomitant cerebrovascular disease (CeVD) is unknown.
Single molecule array (Simoa) measurements of plasma P-tau181, total tau, amyloid beta (Aβ)40 and Aβ42, as well as derived ratios were correlated with neuroimaging modalities indicating brain amyloid (Aβ+), hippocampal atrophy, and CeVD in a Singapore-based cohort of non-cognitively impaired (NCI; n = 43), cognitively impaired no dementia (CIND; n = 91), AD (n = 44), and vascular dementia (VaD; n = 22) subjects.
P-tau181/Aβ42 ratio showed the highest area under the curve (AUC) for Aβ+ (AUC = 0.889) and for discriminating between AD Aβ+ and VaD Aβ-subjects (AUC = 0.903).
In addition, P-tau181/Aβ42 ratio was associated with hippocampal atrophy.
None of the biomarkers was associated with CeVD.
Plasma P-tau181/Aβ42 ratio may be a noninvasive means of identifying AD with elevated brain amyloid in populations with concomitant CeVD.

INTRODUCTION
The neuropathological hallmarks of Alzheimer's disease (AD) include the deposition of extracellular amyloid plaques composed of highly aggregated, fibrillar 40-to 42-amino-acid amyloid beta peptides (Aβ40 and Aβ42), as well as intracellular neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs) consisting of paired-helical filaments of hyper-phosphorylated tau protein.1, 2 After AD, vascular dementia (VaD) has been reported to be the next most common form of dementia in elderly populations.3
In VaD, there is a temporal relationship between the presence of cerebrovascular disease (CeVD), as evidenced by structural magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) findings, and onset of cognitive impairment.3
Of interest, MRI markers of CeVD are also frequently observed in AD brains.4,
5 The presence of vascular lesions and associated disruption of blood-brain barrier may interact with AD pathophysiological processes in an additive or synergistic manner to exacerbate cognitive decline.3,
5-9 It is important to note that the prevalence of concomitant AD and CeVD may be higher in specific geographic regions, such as Asia, with consequent implications for prevention and treatment strategies.10
Although current imaging (Aβ-PET [positron emission tomography] radiotracers) and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF; Aβ42 or Aβ42/Aβ40 ratio) biomarkers demonstrated high diagnostic performance, barriers to clinical implementation remain, including high costs, limited accessibility to PET scanners and cyclotrons, as well as the invasiveness of the procedures.11,
12 In response to this unmet clinical need, research efforts have focused on evaluating blood as an alternative source of viable biomarkers, with the recent use of immunoprecipitation-mass spectrometry, single molecule array (Simoa) immunoassay, and other high-sensitivity platforms showing particular promise.
Several studies, including work from our group, have found that plasma P-tau181 strongly associates with PET Aβ load and differentiates AD from non-AD neurodegenerative diseases.13-20
In contrast, decreases in plasma Aβ42 and Aβ42/Aβ40 ratio variably associated with PET Aβ,21-25 whereas total tau measures were slightly increased in AD in some studies but not others.26-28
However, most of the aforementioned biomarker studies were carried out in White populations in North America and Europe with relatively "pure" AD burden.
Whether the postulated clinical utility of these blood biomarkers could be applied to non-White cohorts who simultaneously have significant baseline CeVD remains unclear.
In this study, we measured plasma P-tau181, T-tau, Aβ40, and Aβ42 in a Singapore-based cohort of AD and vascular cognitive impairment (VCI) patients assessed with Aβ PET imaging as well as MRI measures of hippocampal atrophy and CeVD, and examined the diagnostic value of the plasma markers and their derived ratios.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Study population
This study adopted a case-control design.
Demographic data are presented in Table
Patients who were cognitively impaired, no dementia (CIND), AD, and VaD were recruited from National University Hospital (NUH).
Control subjects were recruited from both the NUH memory clinic and the community, and are defined as having no cognitive impairment (NCI) based on objective neuropsychological assessments.
neuropsychological test battery,29 which did not meet the DSM-IV criteria for dementia (see Supplementary Data S1).
Participants also underwent detailed medical histories, physical, clinical, neuroimaging, and cognitive assessments, including the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE).30
Apolipoprotein E genotyping for APOE ε4 carrier status was as described previously.31
Approval for the study was obtained from the Singapore National Healthcare Group Domain-Specific Review Board.
Written informed consent was obtained for all participants prior to study commencement.

Blood biomarker measurements
Non-fasting blood was drawn from study participants and processed for plasma extraction before storage at -80°C until use.
All biomarkers were measured with evaluators blinded to clinical information at the Sahlgrenska Academy at University of Gothenburg in Sweden on the Simoa HD-1 or HD-X platforms (Quanterix, Billerica, MA, USA).
Measurements of plasma P-tau181 with the AT270 mouse monoclonal antibody (MN1050; Invitrogen, Waltham, MA, USA) specific for the threonine-181 phosphorylation site was based on an ultrasensitive Simoa immunoassay as described previously-16 with satisfactory cross-site and test-retest reliabilities (Supplementary Data S2).
Plasma Aβ42, Aβ40, and total tau (T-tau) were measured using the Neurology 3-plex A assay kit from Quanterix (Billerica, MA, USA).
Plasma P-tau181 was not available for six participants, and plasma T-tau, Aβ42, and Aβ40 were not available for three participants due to limited sample availability.

RESEARCH IN CONTEXT
Systematic review: Alzheimer's disease (AD) is characterized neuropathologically by deposition of amyloid beta (Aβ40 and Aβ42)-containing plaques and neurofibrillary tangles consisting of hyperphosphorylated tau.
Recent studies have demonstrated the potential utility of plasma phosphorylated tau (P-tau181) as a specific biomarker for AD pathology.
However, these studies were conducted in White populations with relatively low cerebrovascular disease (CeVD) burden, and the postulated clinical utility of the biomarker in non-White cohorts with significant baseline CeVD remains unknown.
Using a Singapore-based cohort of AD and vascular cognitive impairment (VCI) patients, we investigated associations between plasma biomarkers (P-tau181, total tau [T-tau], Aβ40, and Aβ42, as well as their derived ratios) and with PET Aβ burden, MRI measures of hippocampal atrophy and CeVD, and cognitive function.
Interpretation: In this study, we found that plasma P-tau181, P-tau181/T-tau, and P-tau181/Aβ42 ratios were significantly increased in AD, but not in vascular dementia (VaD).
Furthermore, P-tau181 and P-tau181/Aβ42 ratio were increased in AD patients with elevated PET amyloid (Aβ+).
Among the investigated biomarkers, plasma P-tau181/Aβ42 ratio showed the strongest associations with Aβ burden, brain atrophy, and cognitive scores, and was the best biomarker in identifying elevated Aβ PET and in differentiating between AD Aβ+ and VaD Aβ-subjects.
None of the plasma biomarkers was associated with CeVD.
Future directions: The current findings suggest that the P-tau181/Aβ42 ratio may be a clinically useful, noninvasive means of identifying individuals with amyloid and brain atrophy in populations with high baseline CeVD.
These findings warrant further validation in larger independent cohorts.
The potential clinical applications of P-tau181/Aβ42 ratio for prognosis and longitudinal monitoring should also be examined in future studies.
In addition, amyloid PET images were independently visually interpreted by three raters blinded to the clinical diagnosis of each subject and following the criteria described previously.33-35
Binary criteria were derived by merging the equivocal scans with the positive scans (Aβ+).34,
35

Neuroimaging

MRI markers of brain atrophy and CeVD
MRI scans were performed on a 3T Siemens Magnetom Trio Tim scanner using a 32-channel head coil, at CIRC, NUS.
The sequences included T1-weighted, fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR), and T2-weighted Imaging sequences as described previously36 (see Supplementary Data S4 for details).

Quantitative measurements
The image preprocessing and tissue classification algorithms used have been described elsewhere.37
Briefly, a k-nearest-neighbor classifier was used to classify voxels into CSF, gray matter, and normalappearing white matter, and subsequently volume was calculated from these measurements for the detection of white matter hyperintensity (WMH) using an adapted threshold technique based on the tissue segmentation method.38
Intracranial volume (ICV) was calculated by a non-rigid registration technique, with six atlases (masks) registered to the subject of interest.
The volume of the resulting mask is the ICV.
Hippocampal volume was segmented using a model-based automated procedure (FreeSurfer v5.1.0,
Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA) on T1-weighted images.
Segmentation was performed by rigid-body registration and nonlinear normalization of images to a probabilistic brain atlas.
In the segmentation process, each voxel of the MRI volumes was labeled automatically as a corresponding brain region based on a parcellation guide.39

Visual gradings
Cortical infarcts were defined as focal lesions involving cortical gray matter, signal following CSF intensity, hyperintense rim on FLAIR images, and tissue loss of variable magnitude, with prominent adjacent sulci and ipsilateral ventricular enlargement.
Lacunes were defined as lesions, 3-15 mm in diameter, with low signal on T1-weighted image and FLAIR; a high signal on T2 weighted image; and a hyperintense rim with a center following CSF intensity on FLAIR.
For binary logistic regression analyses, MRI markers of CeVD were transformed into binary variables and recorded as presence/absence of ≥2 lacunes and cortical infarct.

Statistical analyses
Statistical analyses were performed using SPSS version 26 (IBM SPSS, Armonk, NY, USA).
For group comparisons of continuous variables, one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) with Bonferroni post hoc tests were used for normally distributed data, whereas non-parametric Kruskal-WaIIis ANOVA with Dunn post hoc tests were used for skewed distributed data.
Chi-square tests were used for categorical variables.
All correlation analyses were performed using Spearman rank correlation.
To assess the association between each plasma biomarker and the dichotomous neuroimaging variables, binary logistic regressions with odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) were computed.
To identify the associations between each plasma biomarker and the continuous neuroimaging variables and MMSE, unadjusted and covariate-adjusted linear regression models were performed.
The regression models were performed independently for each plasma biomarker.
All biomarkers in the regression analyses were standardized to z scores to facilitate comparison between models.
Multicollinearity of independent variables was measured with the variance inflation factor (VIF), with VIF >5 indicative of multicollinearity.40
Diagnostic accuracies were assessed using area under the receiver-operating characteristic curve (AUC).
Sensitivity and specificity were determined using the Youden index.
The AUCs were compared with each other using the DeLong test.
Subsampling cross validation was used to evaluate the predictive value of the biomarkers' cut-offs for PET Aβ positivity on test cases.
In this Monte Carlo process, 151 cases were randomly selected as the training data set ("Training") and the cutoff, sensitivity, and specificity determined via ROC and Youden index analyses.
The remaining unseen 40 cases ("Test") were classified as PET Aβ+ or Aβ-based on the computed cutoff, and the classification compared to their respective actual PET Aβ status to determine sensitivity and specificity.
The average cutoff, sensitivity, and specificity, along with their standard deviations, were reported.
P-values < .05
were considered statistically significant.

RESULTS

Participant characteristics
Demographic data, imaging, and plasma marker measurements are shown in Table
Cortical Aβ status was based on visual read of PET imaging using [11C]PiB (PiB-PET, n = 170) or [18F]Flutafuranol (FF-PET, n = 30).
As expected, in the cohort of 170 subjects with PiB-PET imaging, the AD patients had the highest SUVr values among the diagnostic groups.
For brain atrophy markers, CIND, AD, and VaD subjects showed significantly smaller hippocampal volumes compared with NCI (all P < .05).
For CeVD markers, the VaD group had the highest proportion of subjects, with CeVD burden like lacunes (55%) and cortical infarcts (36%).
Similarly, the VaD group had the highest WMH volumes (median = 14.6 mL), followed by AD, CIND, and NCI (median = 5.3 , 3.6, and 1.4 mL, respectively).
Higher P-tau181, P-tau181/T-tau, and P-tau181/Aβ42 ratios (all P < .001),
as well as lower Aβ42 and Aβ42/Aβ40 ratios (P = .013
and .030,
respectively) were associated with APOE ε4 carrier status.
For demographic factors, plasma T-tau and Aβ40 negatively correlated with years of education (r = -0.144,
P = .043
and r = -0.149,
P = .037,
respectively), whereas none of the biomarkers was associated with gender (chisquare tests P > .05).
For vascular risk factors, higher plasma Aβ42 and Aβ40 values were associated with presence of hypertension, hyperlipidemia, and diabetes (all P < .05;
Supplementary Figure
There was no significant difference among the diagnostic groups in the frequency of vascular risk factors (Supplementary Table

Altered plasma biomarker levels in diagnostic groups
The results for diagnostic group comparisons of plasma biomarkers are shown in Table
All plasma biomarkers that included P-tau181 (P-tau181, P-tau181/T-tau, and P-tau181/Aβ42 ratios) were significantly raised in AD but not VaD.
In contrast, plasma Aβ42/Aβ40 ratio was significantly decreased in the CIND, AD, and VaD groups.
Aβ40 was significantly increased in VaD compared with NCI, CIND, and AD, whereas both T-tau and Aβ42 concentrations were unchanged.

Associations between plasma biomarkers, neuroimaging, and cognition
Correlations between individual plasma biomarkers, continuous neuroimaging variables, and MMSE scores are shown in Supplementary Table
All biomarkers, except T-tau and Aβ40, significantly correlated with brain amyloid burden.
In contrast, only P-tau181, P-tau181/T-tau, Aβ42/Aβ40, and P-tau181/Aβ42 ratios correlated with hippocampal volume and MMSE.
For WMH volume, only Aβ42 and Aβ40 showed a significant positive correlation.

Associations with brain amyloid burden
Associations between each plasma biomarker and brain Aβ burden are shown in Table
After adjustments for covariates, five of the biomarkers, namely P-tau181, P-tau181/T-tau ratio, Aβ42, and Aβ42/Aβ40 and P-tau181/Aβ42 ratios, showed significant associations with elevated brain Aβ (Aβ+, as determined by both PiB-PET and FF-PET visual reads); and PiB-PET SUVr (logistic regression for Aβ+; linear regression for PiB-PET SUVr, all P ≤ .003,
Table
P-tau181/Aβ42 ratio had the strongest association with PiB-PET SUVr (β = .127).
We further compared the five plasma biomarkers by clinical diagnoses and Aβ status (Figure
Within CIND and AD, P-tau181, P-tau181/T-tau, and P-tau181/Aβ42 ratios were significantly higher in the Aβ+ subjects compared with Aβ-subjects.
In contrast, Aβ42/Aβ40 ratio was significantly lower in the Aβ+ subjects.
Compared with the NCI Aβsubjects, P-tau181, P-tau181/T-tau, and P-tau181/Aβ42 ratios were significantly higher in CIND Aβ+ and AD Aβ+ subjects, whereas Aβ42/Aβ40 ratio was significantly decreased in CIND Aβ-, CIND Aβ+, AD Aβ+, and VaD Aβ+ subjects (Figure
Results from binary logistic regression for dichotomous outcome and linear regression for continuous outcome.
The linear regression models were independently performed for each plasma biomarker and adjusted for covariates as stated below.
All plasma biomarkers were standardized to z scores to facilitate comparisons between models.
Therefore, β coefficients refer to standardized effects (β = 1 implies that 1-SD increase in the plasma biomarker was associated with 1 unit increase in PiB-PET SUVr).
For Model 3, the range of VIF (variance inflation factor) for the independent variables were given, with the lowest and highest VIF values listed as shown in the rightmost column.
Indicated VIF of < 5 denotes absence of collinearity of independent variables.
OR = odds ratio.
Associations between each plasma biomarker and hippocampal volume are shown in Table
Only the three biomarkers that included P-tau181 (P-tau181, P-tau181/T-tau, and P-tau181/Aβ42 ratios) were negatively associated with hippocampal volume (β = -0.275,
-0.249, and -0.305, respectively, all P < .001).
Similar to the Aβ-PET findings, P-tau181/Aβ42 ratio was also found to be the strongest influence on hippocampal volume.
Results from linear regression models.
The linear regression models were independently performed for each plasma biomarker and adjusted for covariates as stated below.
All plasma biomarkers were standardized to z scores to facilitate comparisons between models.
Therefore, β coefficients refer to standardized effects (β = 1 implies that 1-SD increase in the plasma biomarker was associated with 1 mL increase in hippocampal volume).
For Model 3, the range of VIF (variance inflation factor) for the independent variables were given, with the lowest and highest VIF values listed as shown in the rightmost column.
Indicated VIF of < 5 denotes absence of collinearity of independent variables.

Associations with cognition
Associations between each plasma biomarker and MMSE are shown in Table
After adjustment for covariates, only P-tau181/Aβ42 ratio was significantly associated with MMSE (β = -0.556,
P < .05),
whereas P-tau181 itself showed a non-significant trend (β = -0.518,
P = .065).
For the neuropsychological cognitive domains, the associations between each plasma biomarker and global cognition or individual cognitive domain are listed in Supplementary Data S1.
Results from linear regression models.
The linear regression models were independently performed for each plasma biomarker and adjusted for covariates as stated below.
All plasma biomarkers were standardized to z scores to facilitate comparisons between models.
Therefore, β coefficients refer to standardized effects (β = 1 implies that 1-SD increase in the plasma biomarker was associated with 1 unit increase in MMSE).
For Model 3, the range of VIF (variance inflation factor) for the independent variables were given, with the lowest and highest VIF values listed as shown in the rightmost column.
Indicated VIF of < 5 denotes absence of collinearity of independent variables.
MMSE = Mini-Mental State Examination.

Association with CeVD
Associations between each plasma biomarker and markers of CeVD are presented in Supplementary Table
Although higher plasma Aβ40 was significantly associated with the presence of lacunes (Supplementary Table
None of the other biomarkers was associated with lacunes, cortical infarcts, or WMH.
3.4 Plasma P-tau181 to Aß42 ratio as a biomarker for elevated brain amyloid Given the associations between elevated brain Aβ-PET (Aβ+) and plasma P-tau181, P-tau181/T-tau ratio, Aβ42, Aβ42/Aβ40, and P-tau181/Aβ42 ratios (Table
In the combined cohort (Figure
However, P-tau181/Aβ42 ratio was consistently the best predictor of increased Aβ-PET in the combined cohort and the two subgroups (Delong P < .05; Figure
AUC of P-tau181/Aβ42 ratio was also significantly higher than those of all other markers except Aβ42/Aβ40 ratio in the non-dementia subgroup (Figure
For differentiation between AD Aβ+ and VaD Aβ-subjects, P-tau181/Aβ42 ratio showed the highest AUC of 0.903, with a high sensitivity and specificity of 92.6% and 88.9%, respectively (Supplementary Table
As observed in Supplementary Table
This suggests the generalizability of their respective cutoff as computed from the combined cohort to test cases.
In contrast, there was an adjustment in the cutoffs and decreased specificity in the Training or Test for the other biomarkers.

DISCUSSION
In most clinical settings, AD is conceived as a clinical-pathological construct, such that cognitive symptoms define the presence of AD.11
However, the National Institute on Aging-Alzheimer's Association (NIA-AA) research framework has recently suggested that AD should be defined as a biological construct, using biomarkers that are characteristic of AD pathophysiology, such as Aβ and pathologic tau.41, 42 The pathophysiological relevance of Aβ biomarkers for AD is suggested by findings from post-mortem and in vitro studies showing the Aβ42/Aβ40 ratio as an index of increased amyloidogenicity, neurotoxicity, and disease severity,43-45 whereas P-tau181 is one of the sites contributing directly to tau hyperphosphorylation and NFT formation in the brain.46,
47 In addition, hyperphosphorylated tau has been implicated as a principal instigator of degenerative axonal loss in AD.5 Notwithstanding the close mechanistic links between amyloidogenesis and tauopathy,48, 49 Aβ42 and P-tau181 represent distinct pathophysiological processes.
Therefore, the present study had a twofold aim: to compare the utility of combined P-tau and Aβ42 with individual markers, and to investigate potential confounding by higher baseline of concomitant CeVD, a known characteristic of certain populations in Asia, including ours.10.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study on blood P-tau181 in non-White populations outside of Europe and North America, and the findings support the potential clinical utility of plasma P-tau181/Aβ42 ratio in a number of ways as detailed below.
First, in agreement with previous CSF studies, we showed that plasma P-tau181 concentrations were specifically increased in AD, but not VaD.
In addition, P-tau181 was increased in Aβ+ subjects in the CIND and AD groups.
We further demonstrated the utility of this biomarker in discriminating PET Aβ+ from Aβ-subjects (AUC = 0.840 for all subjects).
Our results are corroborated by recent studies that reported higher plasma P-tau181 in Aβ+ NCI, mild cognitive impairment (MCI), and AD subjects, but not in non-AD neurodegenerative diseases.14,
16, 17 Nonetheless, a direct comparison of the diagnostic performance of CSF versus plasma P-tau181/Aβ42 ratios will be needed to comprehensively evaluate the clinical utility of the plasma biomarkers.
Next, we compared the single biomarkers with their derived ratios in detecting PET Aβ+.
Of the five biomarkers studied (P-tau181, P-tau181/T-tau ratio, Aβ42, and Aβ42/Aβ40 and P-tau181/Aβ42 ratios), P-tau181/Aβ42 ratio showed the strongest association with Aβ PET SUVr.
In addition, P-tau181/Aβ42 ratio consistently gave the highest AUC for detecting PET Aβ+ in the entire cohort and in subgroups of non-dementia and dementia subjects, and in distinguishing between AD Aβ+ and VaD Aβ-subjects.
In contrast, the other biomarkers yielded variable AUCs depending on the clinical subgroup.
Of interest, our data suggest that the P-tau181/Aβ42 ratio may be useful in enriching recruitment of NCI and CIND participants who are likely to be Aβ+ on PET (Figure
Furthermore, Aβ42/Aβ40 ratio yielded a higher AUC than P-tau181 alone (AUC = 0.848 vs 0.807) in the non-dementia subgroup, suggesting that plasma Aβ42/Aβ40 ratio, putatively reflecting Aβ pathology, may become abnormal earlier during the course of AD than P-tau, in line with current understanding.50
Although further studies in larger cohorts are warranted to assess the diagnostic performance of these plasma biomarkers across the AD continuum, our findings on the generalizability of the P-tau181/Aβ42 ratio cutoff to cases (Supplementary Table
The superiority of P-tau181/Aβ42 ratio over other single biomarkers and ratios may be due to a number of reasons.
First, the P-tau181/Aβ42 ratio combines measures of two different pathophysiological processes into a single variable, thus improving its ability to distinguish AD from controls and VCI.
Second, given that P-tau181 was elevated in Aβ+ subjects while Aβ42 was decreased, a ratio of the two biomarkers may accentuate differences between the Aβ+ and Aβsubjects.
Third, as mentioned earlier, plasma P-tau and Aβ42 may change at different stages in the disease.
Therefore, a combination of both Aβ42 and P-tau may correspond better to Aβ PET burden in all stages of the AD continuum.
Besides Aβ-PET, we reported the association between the biomarkers and other neuroimaging hallmarks of dementia, such as neurodegeneration and CeVD.
A recent study on a separate cohort by our team reported significant associations between plasma P-tau181 and hippocampal volume and

MMSE.16
We now show that the P-tau181/Aβ42 ratio demonstrated stronger associations with lower hippocampal volume and poorer cognitive performance compared to P-tau181 alone.
Furthermore, after adjustment for covariates, only plasma P-tau181, P-tau181/Aβ42 ratio, and Aβ40 were significantly associated with global cognition.
For the individual cognitive domains, whereas plasma P-tau181 was associated with both non-memory (attention, language, visuoconstruction) and memory (verbal memory, visual memory) domains, plasma P-tau181/Aβ42 ratio was associated primarily with the memory domains.
This suggests that P-tau181/Aβ42 ratio is a marker of memory function.
On the other hand, plasma Aβ40 was associated with visuoconstruction and visual memory (see Supplementary Data S1).
In contrast to markers of brain amyloid burden and neurodegeneration, the plasma biomarkers were generally not associated with markers of CeVD.
Whereas higher plasma Aβ40 was associated with the presence of lacunes (Supplementary Table
The putative associations between plasma Aβ40 and WMH51 also remain unclear, as they were not neither observed by us or by
Furthermore, we have considered possible confounding effects of demographic characteristics and vascular risk factors (Supplementary Table
We also used a state-of-the-art, ultrasensitive Simoa immunoassay platform, with all P-tau181 measurements above the limit of detection, thus offering an advantage over Meso Scale Discovery (MSD) platforms.14
However, several limitations are also apparent.
First, we do not yet have tau-PET, and therefore could not determine the association between the investigated plasma biomarkers and cortical tau pathology (eg, NFTs) in our cohort.
This would be of interest in follow-up studies in view of work by others reporting significant association between plasma P-tau181 and tau-PET.14, 16, 17 Furthermore, the cross-sectional design of this study does not allow the examination of the temporal association between the plasma biomarkers and the progression of brain Aβ accumulation and atrophy, and cognitive impairment, necessitating followup studies using longitudinal data.
Finally, with the rapid changing landscape of biomarkers, new P-tau candidates continue to be introduced, including P-tau217, and it remains unclear which P-tau species has long-term clinical utility.
Of interest, a study examining P-tau217 in a familial AD (FAD) cohort found significant increases as early as 20 years before the expected year of onset (EYO) of symptoms,53 whereas another study found significant increases in P-tau181 around 16 years before EYO in FAD mutation carriers.54
More recently, head-to-head comparisons of P-tau181 and P-tau217 (together with another candidate, P-tau231) in CSF showed similar performance.55,
56 These findings support the idea that both these plasma P-tau biomarkers reflect AD pathology.
However, further studies directly comparing P-tau181 and P-tau217 in plasma using the same assay technology and in the same cohort, are needed to learn whether these biomarkers substantially differ in diagnostic utility in the different phases of the AD continuum.
In conclusion, we showed that plasma P-tau181 and Aβ measurements in an Asian population are broadly in line with findings in Caucasian populations showing clinical utility in detecting cortical amyloid burden and AD (see Introduction).
Furthermore, plasma P-tau181 and Aβ42 were unaffected by CeVD status, thereby extending their potential clinical utility to populations with higher baseline vascular risk factors and CeVD burden.
Finally, plasma P-tau181/Aβ42 ratio may have superior utility compared to single biomarkers in differentiating Aβ+ AD from Aβ-VaD subjects.


Diagnosis of clinical dementia was based on the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fourth Edition (DSM-IV) with further etiologic diagnoses following the National Institute of Neurological and Communicative Disorders and Stroke and the Alzheimer's Disease and Related Disorders Association (NINCDS-ADRDA) criteria for AD, and the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke and Association Internationale pour la Recherché et l' Enseignement en Neurosciences (NINDS-AIREN) criteria for VaD.
Diagnosis of CIND was determined by impairment in at least one cognitive domain on a locally validated, detailed



2. 3
.1 Amyloid PET-MRI acquisition and quantification Amyloid PET imaging was conducted at the Clinical Imaging Research Centre of the National University of Singapore (CIRC, NUS) using either the [11C]Pittsburgh Compound B (PiB) or [18F]Flutafuranol amyloid tracer radioligands.
One hundred seventy subjects underwent a 30-minute brain PET scan on an mMR synchronous PET/MR scanner, 40 minutes after intravenous injection of 370 (+/-15%) MBq of [11C]PiB.
In addition, 30 subjects underwent a 20-minute brain PET scan on an mCT PET-CT scanner (Siemens Healthcare GmbH), 50 minutes after intravenous injection of 185 MBq of [18F]Flutafuranol (range 166-203 MBq).
Details on the synthesis of [18F]Flutafuranol are in Supplementary Data S3.
All images were reconstructed using ordinary Poisson ordered-subsets expectation maximization with all corrections applied.
Global standardized uptake ratio (SUVr) values were derived from the [11C]PiB scans and individually parcellated MRI for reference and target region definition and using an in-house developed automated pipeline.32


ROC analyses for distinguishing PET Aβ+ and Aβ-subjects.
(A) All subjects (n = 191); (B) Non-dementia subjects only (n = 130); (C) Dementia subjects only (n = 61).
Sensitivity and specificity were calculated using the cutoff that produced the highest Youden index (sensitivity + specificity -1).
P-values are from the comparison of AUCs (DeLong statistics).
AUC = Area under the receiver-operating characteristic (ROC) curve.
NA = Not applicable Finally, we assessed the predictive value of the biomarkers cutoffs for PET Aβ positivity on test cases.



TABLE 1 .
Demographic and clinical characteristics of a Singapore-based study cohort All data are median (interquartile range) unless otherwise specified.
SD, standard deviation.
P-values are derived from Chi-square tests for categorial variables, and from one-way ANOVA or Kruskal-Wallis ANOVA for normally distributed or skewed continuous variables, respectively.
Amyloid PET status was based on visual read of [11C]PiB (n = 170) or [18F]Flutafuranol (n = 30) imaging.
Among subjects who underwent PiB-PET imaging, SUVr data were not available for one participant.



TABLE 2 .
Associations between individual plasma biomarkers and brain Aβ burden



TABLE 3 .
Associations between individual plasma biomarkers and hippocampal atrophy



TABLE 4