Proteomic signatures of brain regions affected by tau pathology in early and late stages of Alzheimer's disease
Background: Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the most common neurodegenerative disorder.
Depositions of amyloid β peptide (Aβ) and tau protein are among the major pathological hallmarks of AD.
Aβ and tau burden follows predictable spatial patterns during the progression of AD.
Nevertheless, it remains obscure why certain brain regions are more vulnerable than others; to investigate this and dysregulated pathways during AD progression, a mass spectrometry-based proteomics study was performed.
Methods: In total 103 tissue samples from regions early (entorhinal and parahippocampal cortices -medial temporal lobe (MTL)) and late affected (temporal and frontal cortices -neocortex) by tau pathology were subjected to label-free quantitative proteomics analysis.
Results: Considering dysregulated proteins during AD progression, the majority (625 out of 737 proteins) was region specific, while some proteins were shared between regions (101 proteins altered in two areas and 11 proteins altered in three areas).
Analogously, many dysregulated pathways during disease progression were exclusive to certain regions, but a few pathways altered in two or more areas.
Changes in protein expression indicate that synapse loss occurred in all analyzed regions, while translation dysregulation was preponderant in entorhinal, parahippocampal and frontal cortices.
Oxidative phosphorylation impairment was prominent in MTL.
Differential proteomic analysis of brain areas in health state (controls) showed higher metabolism and increased expression of AD-related proteins in the MTL compared to the neocortex.
In addition, several proteins that differentiate brain regions in control tissue were dysregulated in AD.
Conclusions: This work provides the comparison of proteomic changes in brain regions affected by tau pathology at different stages of AD.
Although we identified commonly regulated proteins and pathways during disease advancement, we found that the dysregulated processes are predominantly region specific.
In addition, a distinct proteomic signature was found between MTL and neocortex in healthy subjects that might be related to AD

Introduction
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the most prevalent neurodegenerative disorder and also the major cause of dementia (60-80% cases) (Alzheimer's Association,
Major hallmarks of AD are loss of synapses, neuronal death and deposition of extracellular amyloid β peptide (Aβ) and intracellular hyperphosphorylated tau protein
During AD progression Aβ and tau aggregates spread through the brain, following predictable patterns
Tau deposition was classified into six neuropathological stages designated as Braak/Braak (B/B) stages
During B/B I-II, tau inclusions are restricted to the transentorhinal and entorhinal cortices.
They disseminate into the limbic system during B/B III-IV with the mild engagement of the hippocampus (CA1-4), parts of the frontal and temporal neocortices and the amygdala.
The final stages, B/B V-VI, are distinguished by the destruction of the neocortex by protein inclusions
There is a correlation between cognitive impairment and the number of neuritic plaques (Aβ plaques) in the neocortex, but cortical tau neurofibrillary tangles (NFT) burden correlates better with cognitive decline
Since AD progressively affects distinct brain regions, many studies compared the changes that occur in different regions, trying to elucidate which processes make an area more vulnerable than another one
Other authors focused on the temporal advancement of AD by investigating changes that occur in one brain area at different disease stages
Both strategies were also merged through transcriptomic/proteomic investigation of brain areas considering distinct disease stages
Although many works have profiled molecular alterations in the AD brain, a large human study investigating proteomic changes at different B/B stages in brain areas vulnerable and resilient to tau pathology is still lacking.
With the aim to map proteome dysregulation during AD progression in brain regions with distinct susceptibility to neurodegeneration and to investigate which processes make some brain areas more vulnerable to AD, we performed quantitative proteome profiling of 103 human brain samples from regions affected by tau pathology already in the early (medial temporal lobe (MTL)) or only the late stages of AD (neocortex).

Methods

Patient cohort
A total of 103 postmortem human brain samples from 4 distinct brain regions (entorhinal cortex (Brodmann areas 28 and 34), parahippocampal cortex (posterior two thirds of the parahippocampal gyrus), temporal cortex (Brodmann area 21) and frontal cortex (Brodmann area 10)) were acquired from the Human Brain Tissue Bank (Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary).
All brains were diagnosed by a neuropathologist according to the standard diagnostic criteria as described previously
In brief, the neuropathological diagnosis of AD was established when AD-type tau pathology was present in forms of neurofibrillary tangles, neuropil threads and Alzheimer's type (neuritic) plaques with coexisting characteristic amyloid beta pathology.
The probability of AD is based on tau Braak & Braak (B/B) stage.
Pure AD cases have been selected, i.e. brains without significant coexisting non-AD pathologies such as FTLDtau, PSP, CBD.
Cases were classified according to tau pathology (B/B stages) into controls (negative or minimal age-related tau pathology) and B/B stages (I, II, III, IV, V and VI) (Table
The work has been carried out in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki.
Brains were donated under informed written consent.

Microdissection procedure
After dissecting the whole brain from the skull, the leptomeninges were first removed from the surface of the brain.
Subsequently, the cortex with the diencephalon was separated from the lower brainstem/ cerebellum by a knife cut through the midbrain.
Then, the cortex was sliced at the coronal level from the frontal pole with 1.5-2.0
cm thick sections.
Each section (generally 11-12 from the whole brain) was immediately frozen individually on dry ice powder, covered in aluminum foil and stored at -70 °C.
During the microdissection of the cortical samples, each frozen coronal section was further cut into 1-2 mm thin sections and the cortical areas were dissected out by the "micropunch technique"
The microdissected tissue pellets were collected in 1.5 ml Eppendorf tubes and kept until use at -70 °C.
During each step of the microdissection procedure, the brain slices and samples were kept frozen.
For the present study, samples were taken from the entorhinal and parahippocampal cortex, the temporal cortex represented by micropunches from the middle temporal gyrus, and the frontal cortex by samples from the superior frontal gyrus.

Reagents
All reagents used were acquired from Sigma-Aldrich unless specified.
Organic solvents and water with LC-MS quality were bought from Merck.

Protein extraction and digestion
The microdissected frozen tissue samples were sectioned at -20 °C using a cryostat to obtain 10 μm slices (20-60 slices per sample) and samples were stored at -80 °C until further usage.
200 μL of lysis buffer (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 50 mM Tris pH 7.4, MS-SAFE protease inhibitor) was added to each microcentrifuge tube containing the tissue slices.
Samples were vortexed and then sonicated on ice (Digital Branson Sonicator SFX 150): 20% amplitude, pulsed mode (9 pulses with 10 s each and intervals of 10 s between each pulse).
Lysates were centrifuged at 21,000 xg at 4 °C for 30 min (Eppendorf Nordic A/S) and the supernatant was transferred to a new tube to avoid cell debris.
Prior to digestion, protein quantification was done using the Bradford 96 well plate assay, according to the manufacturer instructions.
Protein digestion was carried out using a modified Filter Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) protocol
100 μg protein was used for digestion.
Reduction of disulfide bonds was performed by the addition of 50 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) to the lysates that were then incubated for 1 h at 30 °C.
The samples were then transferred to 30 kDa Microcon filters (Merck Millipore) connected to collection tubes.
200 μL of U/Tris buffer (8 M Urea in 0.1 M Tris-HCl pH 8.5) was added and the filter units were centrifuged at 12,000 xg for 15 min at room temperature.
For alkylation of the cysteine residues, 50 μL of 50 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) in U/Tris buffer was added to the samples and the reaction was incubated in dark for 20 min at room temperature.
IAA was then removed from the samples by filtration at 12,000 x g for 15 min.
After that, 100 μL of U/Tris buffer was added to the filters and another centrifugation step with the same conditions was carried out.
Prior to digestion U/Tris buffer was replaced to ammonium bicarbonate buffer (AMBIC) by the addition of 100 μL of 50 mM AMBIC, followed by centrifugation 12,000 xg for 15 min.
This step was repeated 4 times.
Filters containing the proteins were transferred to new collection tubes and 50 μL of 0.04 μg/uL sequencing grade modified trypsin (1:50 enzyme: protein ratio, Promega Biotech AB, Madison, WI) in AMBIC was added to each sample.
Following overnight digestion at 37 °C, the peptides were collected by centrifugation at 12,000 xg for 15 min.
Two elution steps were carried out by the addition of 100 uL of AMBIC, followed by centrifugation.
Formic acid was added to a final concentration of 0.5%.
Peptides were dried with speed vacuum centrifugation, then resuspended in 100 μL of 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and finally desalted by reversed phase chromatography using C18 spin columns (MacroSpin Columns®, The Nest Group Inc.).
After desalting, tryptic peptides were dried and resuspended in 50 μL of 0.1% formic acid.
Prior to injection onto the mass spectrometer, peptides were quantified using the Pierce Quantitative Colorimetric Peptide Assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, lL).

Liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/ MS)
1 μg of the tryptic peptides was injected for each analysis spiked with the Pierce retention time calibration mixture (PRTC) (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, lL) (25 fmol/injection).
For LC-MS/MS analysis, we used a Thermo Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA) equipped with a Dream ionization source (AMR Inc., Tokyo) and connected to an Easy n-LC 1000 liquid chromatography system (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA).
Peptides were injected on an Acclaim PepMap 100 pre-column (100 μm × 2 cm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and separated on a Zaplous α Pep-C18 analytical column (0.1 mm × 20 cm, AMR Inc., Tokyo) at a flow rate of 500 nL/min and a column temperature at 24 °C.
A non-linear gradient was established using solvents A (0.1% formic acid in water) and B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) to elute the peptides.
The gradient started with 5% solvent B and increased to 22% during 100 min.
In the next 14 min, solvent B increased to 32% and finally, it augmented to 95% in 12 min and it was kept at 95% for 14 min.
Samples were analyzed using a top 15 data-dependent acquisition (DDA) method.
MS1 scan was acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer with a 400-1600 m/z interval, 70,000 (@ 200 m/z) resolution, target AGC value of 1e6 and maximum injection time of 100 ms.
The 15 most intense peaks (charge ≥2) were selected and fragmented in a Higher Energy Collisional Dissociation (HCD) cell with a normalized collision energy of 30%.
MS2 spectra were acquired with a 17,500 (@ 200 m/z) resolution, target AGC value of 2e5 and maximum injection time of 120 ms.
The ion selection threshold was set to 8.3e3 and dynamic exclusion was set to 20 s.
Samples were randomly analyzed and each run was followed by a blank injection (0.1% formic acid in MilliQ water) with a short gradient of 35 min to avoid any residues from the previous sample.
A quality control sample (QC) was prepared from a pool of 4 brain digests spiked with PRTC. 1 μg of QC sample together with 25 fmoles of PRTC peptides was injected after every 15 samples in order to evaluate system stability.

Protein inference and relative quantification
Raw data generated on the mass spectrometer was analyzed using the software Proteome Discoverer (PD) version 2.1 (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA).
Peptide identification was done with the SEQUEST HT algorithm using the UniProt human database as reference (version from 07/09/2016, canonical sequences only).
The following search parameters were employed: cysteine carbamidomethylation as static modification, methionine oxidation as dynamic modification, 10 ppm tolerance for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions.
A maximum of 2 missed cleavages was allowed.
Protein quantification was done using the Precursor Ions Area Detector node, where the average of the 3 most intense peptides was used for protein quantification, being considered only unique peptides.
The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE

Targeted MS/MS analysis by parallel reaction monitoring (PRM)
Parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) was employed to verify a set of differentially expressed proteins.
One to five unique peptides for each protein of interest were selected, and in the final assay, 75 peptides corresponding to 21 proteins (including apolipoprotein E2, E3, and E4 and a peptide associated with Aβ) were monitored (Table
The protein digests were spiked with a mixture of stable isotope standard peptides (SIS) correspond to apolipoprotein E (4 isoform-specific peptides and one peptide that is common in all isoforms).
1 μg of the tryptic peptides was injected for each analysis spiked with SIS peptides (20 fmoles/injection).
For the PRM analysis, a Thermo Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer was used equipped with an Easy-spray source and connected to an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA).
Peptides were injected on an Acclaim PepMap 100 precolumn (75 μm × 2 cm, C18, 3 mm, 100 Å Thermo Scientific) and separated on an EASY-Spray column (75 μm × 25 cm, PepMap RSLC C18, 2 mm, 100 Å) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min and a column temperature at 45 °C.
A non-linear gradient was established using solvents A (0.1% formic acid in water) and B (0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile) to elute the peptides.
The gradient started with 4% solvent B and increased to 30% in 30 min.
In the next 5 min, solvent B increased to 45% and finally increased to 98% in 1 min and it was kept at 98% for 5 min.
Targeted MS2 mode was operated with the time-scheduled acquisition of the selected precursors with 3 min retention time windows.
MS2 scans were acquired using 30,000 (@ 200 m/z) resolution, the AGC target value was set to 2e5 and 100 ms maximum injection time was used.
Fragmentation was performed with a normalized collision energy of 27.
Samples were randomly analyzed, and each run was followed by a blank injection to avoid any residues from the previous sample.

Bioinformatics and statistical analysis
Proteins identified from database search that fulfilled the following requirements were subjected to further analysis: master protein, 1% FDR, and identified with at least 2 peptides.
Statistical analysis was carried out in Perseus v 1.6.0.7 and R. Protein area values were converted to log2 scale and normalized by subtracting the median of the sample distribution.
Proteins with < 50% valid values in each group (controls, early and late B/B) were removed from the analysis.
The remaining proteins were subjected to missing value imputation using the default parameters (width 0.3, down shift 1.8) of the Perseus imputation tool.
Sex, age and post mortem intervals were compared between the three groups (control, early and late B/B stages) in each region using Chi-square test (for binary data) and linear regression (for continuous numerical values) to determine whether these variables differ between groups.
These tests showed that the disease groups were unbalanced with respect to age (p-value < 0.0338) and sex (pvalue < 0.1551) in the four brain regions (Fig.
Accordingly, all proteins significantly associated with age or sex (linear regression analysis, p-value < 0.05) were removed from the list of differentially expressed proteins.
In order to evaluate differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) during disease progression, Student's t-test was applied to compare early B/B (I-III) and late B/B (IV-VI) stages with the control group (p-value < 0.05, fold change ≤0.66 or ≥ 1.5) in each brain region.
Analysis of DEPs between the 4 brain regions in health state was performed using one-way ANOVA with post-hoc Tukey's honestly significant difference (HSD) test.
The following requirements were used to determine significance: adjusted p-value < 0.05 and fold change ≤0.66 or ≥ 1.5.
Heat maps were generated from hierarchical clustering based on average Euclidean distance and complete linkage, using R.
Venn diagrams were generated with an online tool from Ghent University (
Protein-protein interaction networks were built with String version 10.5 (
using 0.7 as the minimum required interaction score (high confidence).
Gene ontology enrichment analysis was carried out on String version 10.5 and DAVID version 6.8 (
Verification of DEPs identified in the present work was performed by comparison with two other AD proteomic studies
From the study reported in
For the comparison, the highest log2 fold change values were used in case of all DEPs.

Results

Human brain proteome profiling
We employed a mass spectrometry-based approach to interrogate the human brain proteome during AD progression (B/B stages) in four distinct brain regions: entorhinal cortex (EC), parahippocampal cortex (PHC), temporal cortex (TC) and frontal cortex (FC).
Importantly, we wanted to evaluate brain areas that are affected by tau pathology at different disease stages, in order to gain insights if there are common mechanisms or patterns shared between different brain regions during disease progression.
Among the investigated regions EC and PHC that belong to the medial temporal lobe are affected already at the early, while the neocortical regions (TC, FC) are affected by tau pathology only at the late stages of AD
A total of 103 samples were analyzed individually, furthermore, digestion replicates were generated for each brain region in order to evaluate the reproducibility of sample preparation.
As expected, the correlation was higher between digestion replicates than biological replicates from the same disease group (Fig.
In total 3809, 3815, 3610 and 3720 protein groups with at least 2 peptides were identified in EC, PHC, TC, and FC, respectively.
There was a large overlap (> 85%) between the identified protein groups from different disease stages in each brain region as it is indicated in Fig.
Gene ontology enrichment for cellular components (GOCC) revealed similar categories for the four brain regions (Fig.

Comparative proteome profiling during disease progression

Proteins differentially expressed during AD progression
In this work, we employed two approaches to analyze differences in proteome profiles of brain areas affected by tau in early (EC, PHC) and late disease stages (TC, FC) (Fig.
Firstly, in order to understand how the brain proteome is altered during AD progression, we investigated which proteins are differentially expressed when comparing early (B/B I-III) and late disease stages (B/B IV-VI) to control individuals in each brain region.
Secondly, to investigate physiological proteomic signatures that might contribute to brain area susceptibility to AD, we compared the proteomic profiles of the four brain regions in healthy subjects (controls).
Regarding the first approach (investigation of changes in the proteome of each region during AD progression), a total of 248, 278, 163 and 171 proteins were significantly different in EC, PHC, TC, and FC, respectively, totalizing 737 proteins (Table
Interestingly, the highest numbers of DEPs were observed in the regions affected early by tau pathology.
Early changes in protein levels were observed in each region but the number of altered proteins increased when the late disease stage was compared with controls (Fig.
The comparison of DEPs from various brain regions revealed that there is only a small overlap between regions, especially during the early stages, although there is an increase in the number of shared proteins during the late stages.
The comparison of differentially expressed proteins found in each region indicated that in total 101 proteins are shared between two, and only 11 proteins are shared between three brain regions (Table
Out of these 112 proteins, 99 showed similar expression level changes across brain regions (up-or down-regulated in all comparisons) and only 13 changed in opposite directions across comparisons (upregulated in one and down-regulated in another brain region).
Some of the aforementioned 11 proteins are involved in metabolic processes (CTNND1, FLNA, AUH, RNPEP, and NUMBL) and related to cell-adhesion: CTNND1, FLNA and NUMBL play a role in adherens junction organization; and CTNND1, FLNA and SH3GL1 are expressed in the cell junction.
Hierarchical clustering of the 11 proteins altered in three brain regions was performed and a heat map was generated considering their expression during disease progression in all brain areas (Fig.
Two main protein clusters were detached with opposite expression profiles during disease progression, in addition to Bcl-2-like protein 13 (BCL2L13) that was down-regulated in MTL but slightly up-regulated in the neocortex.
The cluster with augmented expression levels in late disease stages consists of 3 proteins including two well-known AD players: filamin A (FLNA) and glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP), a marker of astrocytes, while the other cluster of 7 proteins shows reduced levels in AD compared to controls.
We wondered if some proteins that were found to be altered during disease progression have already been associated with genetic risk for AD.
A comparison was done between all 737 differentially expressed proteins and a list of AD risk genes published recently
We found that 27 proteins have already been described as AD risk loci (Fig.
With the aim to better clarify the relationship between these proteins, an interactome showing protein-protein interactions was built with String (Fig.
The majority of proteins are connected, and APP appears as a central node with the highest number of interactions.
Functional enrichment analysis revealed that synaptic proteins and proteins involved in oxidative phosphorylation are overrepresented.
Additionally, some of these proteins are involved in pathways related to neurodegenerative disorders, such as Alzheimer's disease (APP, GRIN2B, GSK3β, MT-ATP8, MT-CYB), Parkinson's disease (MT-ATP8, MT-CYB, MT-ND1, MT-ND4) and Huntington's disease (GRIN2B, MT-ATP8, MT-CYB, TFAM).

Altered pathways during AD progression
In order to evaluate segregation of disease stages and to observe expression profiles, hierarchical clustering of DEPs from the four brain regions (EC, PHC, TC, and FC) was performed.
Four major protein clusters were found, which represent distinct expression patterns (earlyup, early-down, late-up and late-down) during disease progression.
The majority of altered proteins were found down-regulated in AD considering all regions (> 70% in MTL and > 60% in the neocortex) (Figs.
With the aim to clarify which pathways and processes are altered during disease progression, each cluster was further subjected to enrichment analysis.
Regarding EC, pathway analysis revealed that the mitochondrial respiratory chain complex I assembly is significantly enriched in the early-down cluster that consists of 14 proteins, indicating an impairment in oxidative phosphorylation.
The late-down cluster incorporates 189 proteins, among which proteins involved in vesicle-mediated and protein transport, translation including ribosome subunits, as well as synaptic proteins are highly enriched.
A greater impairment in oxidative phosphorylation was also observed in this cluster.
On the other hand, the early-up cluster presents 24 proteins, some of which are associated with cell-cell adhesion.
21 proteins belong to the late-up cluster, where cell adhesion and astrocyte development were found as enriched processes (Fig.
Considering PHC, 104 proteins are present in the early-down cluster, and as it was seen in EC oxidative phosphorylation is significantly enriched.
Actin filament and synapse-based processes are also present in this cluster.
PHC late-down cluster is composed of 95 proteins, which are related to oxidative phosphorylation, translation, and synapse.
Interestingly, these processes were also found in EC late-down cluster.
PHC early-up cluster harbors 26 proteins, which are related to platelet aggregation and the regulation of cell shape.
The late-up cluster has 39 proteins that are associated with extracellular matrix organization, cell adhesion and UDP-N-acetylglucosamine biosynthetic process (Fig.
Remarkably, proteins involved in cell adhesion were also present in EC early-up and late-up clusters.
Considering TC, the early-down cluster has 48 proteins that are mainly involved in synaptic processes and oxidative phosphorylation (respiratory electron transport chain).
The late-down cluster presents 48 proteins that are related to cell adhesion and to the regulation of cytoskeleton organization.
The early-up cluster consists of 62 proteins that are associated with the oxidation-reduction process, cholesterol metabolic processes and lipid transport.
Only 5 proteins compose TC late-up cluster, where extracellular matrix organization is one of the few processes found enriched (Fig.
Concerning FC, the early-down cluster contains 31 proteins, which are mainly synaptic proteins.
In total, 61 proteins form the late-down cluster of FC, where synapse and protein translation were found enriched.
FC early-up cluster presents 33 proteins, which are related to acute phase response and platelet activation.
Finally, FC late-up cluster includes 26 proteins that are involved in extracellular matrix organization (Fig.
Up and down-regulated proteins in each brain region were submitted to enrichment analysis for cellular component categories (GOCC) to unravel key cellular parts/organelles affected by the disease.
This analysis revealed a remarkable down-regulation of the

Table 1
Differentially expressed protein (DEPs) during AD progression that are shared between brain regions represented by their log2 fold changes.
Red color indicates up-regulated, blue color indicates downregulated proteins in AD. mitochondrial and ribosomal proteins in MTL regions.
In addition, a global down-regulation of synaptic, dendritic and axonal proteins occurred in all 4 regions (Fig.
Mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation impairment and translation dysregulation were evident primarily in the two MTL regions, however, a few related proteins were found altered in the neocortex as well (Table
Proteins associated with oxidative phosphorylation and translation predominantly show a decreasing expression profile in MTL during disease progression.
On the contrary, in neocortex the majority of these proteins are unaffected, and only a few proteins were found significantly down-regulated in AD (Figs.

Gene name Early B/B stages

Proteome profiling of healthy subjects in different brain regions
Currently, the matter of brain area vulnerability in neurodegenerative disorders is a highly debated and unsolved question.
Our goal was to identify distinctive proteomic signatures in the brain that can be associated with the susceptibility of some areas to present early degeneration in AD.
The comparison of the proteome from healthy individuals (controls) resulted in 648 differentially expressed proteins between the four brain areas (Table
Hierarchical clustering of all 648 DEPs was performed and the resulting dendrogram clearly separated MTL samples from neocortical samples (Fig.
DEPs were divided into 2 major clusters: one group of 238 proteins with higher levels in the neocortex compared to MTL (MTL-down) and another group of 410 proteins that are more expressed in MTL (MTL-up).
In order to clarify which pathways are more active in specific brain areas, each cluster was subjected to enrichment analysis using DAVID (Table
It is noteworthy that several overrepresented pathways in the MTL-up cluster have already known link to AD, such as energy production (oxidative phosphorylation), protein translation, proteasome (Fig.
Long-term potentiation is also significantly enriched in this cluster.
A total of 16 ribosomal proteins (RPL17, RPL27A, RPL36, RPL38, RPS4X, RPS16, RPL23, RPL9, RPS14, RPS12, RPL10, RPL5, RPS10, RPS20, RPS11, RPL4) and 10 proteins from proteasome-complex (PSMA2, PSMD12, PSMC4, PSME1, PSMC2, PSMB3, PSMC1, PSMB2, PSMD7, PSMD8) were found among the proteins significantly upregulated in MTL.
Additionally, a greater number of mitochondrial proteins was recognized in cluster MTL-up (79 proteins, 19.27%) compared to cluster MTL-down (24 proteins, 10.08%).
Regarding the cluster of proteins significantly up-regulated in the neocortex, some proteins involved in proteasome regulation (negative regulation of proteasomal ubiquitin-dependent protein catabolic process (GO:0032435)), e.g.
UBXN1, BAG6 and CCAR2 are enriched in this cluster, but none of them belongs to the proteasome complex.
Proteins involved in mRNA splicing via spliceosome (HNRNPL, SRSF1, NONO, SF3B1, SRSF7, ELAVL1, RBMX, YBX1) and in integrin-mediated signaling pathway (ADAM23, LAMA5, SEMA7A, ADAM22, ZYX, DST) are exclusively enriched in this cluster.
Cytoskeleton and synapse-related proteins are overrepresented in both clusters (Table
We further investigated whether some of these proteins that differentiate MTL and neocortex in healthy tissue were altered in AD as well.
Interestingly, 226 proteins (out of 648) showed altered levels during disease progression.
We found that proteins with higher expression level in MTL were almost exclusively down-regulated in the same brain region during AD progression, and similar behavior was observed in the neocortex, i.e. many proteins with higher abundance in healthy neocortical tissue showed reduced expression in this brain region during disease.

Comparative analysis with other proteomic studies in AD
With the aim to confirm the validity of our findings, we sought to compare our full dataset of dysregulated proteins during AD progression (737 proteins in the four brain regions) with the lists of altered proteins reported by two recently published AD proteomic studies
In total, 275 proteins were shared between at least two studies, and 24 proteins were dysregulated in AD in all three studies (Fig.
The common proteins showed similar behavior in all proteomic studies, 19 proteins (G3BP2, ABI2, ACTR3B, TWF2, SV2B, SYNGAP1, ANKS1B, CORO1A, HPCA, PCDH1, CAMK2A, ACTN2, TUBB3, PACSIN1, NCKAP1, SLC8A2, FAM162A, GNAZ, GDAP1) were found down-regulated, while 5 (TLN1, VIM, G6PD, GFAP, PLCD1) were up-regulated in AD. (Table
This is especially interesting since the previous works focused on different brain regions, e.G. hippocampus
To unravel the role of the conserved proteins, functional enrichment analysis was carried out using proteins shared between at least two studies.
Only concordant proteins (changes in their expression levels show the same direction in all studies) were evaluated in this analysis.
Among up-regulated proteins, the most significant biological process categories were extracellular matrix organization, cell adhesion, lipid metabolic processes, platelet degranulation and astrocyte development (Fig.
On the other hand, down-regulated proteins are mainly involved in microtubule-based processes, vesicle-mediated transport, and synaptic vesicle endocytosis, ephrin receptor signaling, and cytoskeleton organization (Fig.
Remarkably, 195 proteins that showed alteration during AD in the present study have already been described Additionally, the majority of these proteins (166) shows similar expression level changes to what previously reported (Table
With the aim to better assess the similarity between our results and other proteomic studies, we compared the log2 fold changes of overlapping altered proteins (Fig.
Moderate correlation (R 2 ) was found between our results and the datasets from
It is important to note that, although there are differences between the log2 fold changes of various proteins, which has an impact on the correlation, the great majority of common proteins show accordant changes across the studies.
Overall, these results reinforce the validity of our proteomic findings.

Verification of a set of differentially expressed proteins by targeted MS/ MS
To confirm the validity of our label-free quantification approach a set of differentially expressed proteins from the discovery phase were selected for PRM analysis.
75 peptides corresponding to 21 proteins were included and successfully detected in the final PRM assay panel.
By comparing controls with the AD groups 16 proteins out of the 17 DEPs showed significant differences in at least one brain region, furthermore, expression level alterations between the MTL and neocortical regions were confirmed for 5 proteins including APOE (Table
In addition to determining APOE level with the help of the isoform-specific SIS peptides we were able to identify APOE phenotypes as well, as we described it in our previous publication
We found all six different phenotypes among the samples, but we couldn't make a systematic quantitative comparison between phenotypes since > 70% of the samples were ε3 homozygotes (Table
In contrast to the discovery phase during PRM analysis Aβ level was measured separately from APP by using a peptide (LVFFAEDVGSNK), corresponding to residues 17-28 of Aβ.
Although this peptide is not suitable for differentiating between the holoprotein and its fragment, the different behavior of the Aβ peptide and the other APP peptides indicates that it is appropriate for measuring Aβ levels.
Significant increase in the Aβ level was observed in each region during AD progression, while APP was constant or slightly decreased (Fig.

Discussion

Proteomic changes during AD progression show a complex scenario with a few shared but mostly specific processes in the different brain regions
We observed 112 dysregulated proteins and a few pathways during AD course that are shared between 2 or more brain regions, possibly indicating their importance in the pathogenesis of the disease.
Strikingly, the great majority of these proteins shows concordant changes in their expression levels in AD, further reinforcing the existence of common key processes in distinct brain regions (Table
Many proteins, however, were exclusively dysregulated in specific brain areas and the majority of altered pathways during the disease course was specific to certain brain regions.
Regarding the progress of the disease, the similarities and differences found between the individual brain regions are most likely linked to the high degree of specialization of the brain.
In accordance with the endogenous specificities of various brain areas, we hypothesize that genetic and environmental triggers of AD affect individual brain regions differentially, and this is reflected in the found diversity of dysregulated protein expression.
In other words, we assume that the regionally different responses to early AD triggers are the consequences of the different proteomic background of each region.
In some regions, proteomic changes may already be observed independent of the presence of classic pathological features of AD (e.g.
tau protein aggregation).
For instance, changes of the proteome in neocortical areas were observed in early B/ B stages, suggesting that these regions have already responded to AD triggers regardless of tau seeding.
According to our proteomic data synapse loss occurred in all analyzed regions, indicating that this process is ubiquitous in AD.

Synapse loss, translation dysregulation, and oxidative phosphorylation impairment during AD progression and their implications to disease
Processes associated with synapse were found down-regulated in AD in all four brain areas (Fig.
Synapse loss is a pathological hallmark of AD and it is an early event in disease, occurring before neuron death
Synaptic degeneration presents the best correlation with cognitive impairment, even higher than NFT or Aβ plaques deposition
The alteration of synaptic proteins was observed in both neocortical regions during early B/B stages (Table
This is supported by previous studies, which reported that synapse loss occurs before tangles formation in a tauopathy mouse model
Additionally, Aβ peptide has also been shown to cause synaptic degeneration
Several proteins involved in translation were found down-regulated in AD, mostly in 3 regions (EC, PHC, and FC).
In total, 18 ribosomal subunits and 4 translation initiation factors showed reduced levels in these regions, however, in TC, only 3 proteins associated with translation were altered (1 down-and 2 up-regulated in AD) (Table
Some of the translation regulators were altered already in early B/B stages in neocortical regions, indicating dysregulated pathways before insoluble tau deposition.
In line with our findings, several studies reported altered protein synthesis and ribosomal protein expression in various brain regions from AD patients
Previous research identified a high number of translation machinery members among Aβ oligomers interacting partners
Furthermore, it was reported that tau isolated from AD patients binds to more ribosomal proteins than tau from control subjects, and tau oligomers inhibit translation process
Table
Reduced levels of proteins associated to oxidative phosphorylation were observed during early B/B stages in both MTL regions, with a higher number of proteins being affected during late stages (Fig.
In both EC and PHC, subunits of all electron transport chain complexes (I-V) were down-regulated.
Additionally, several mitochondrial proteins were down-regulated in the two MTL regions (Fig.
In contrast, in neocortical regions, only 4 proteins linked to oxidative phosphorylation were down-regulated (NDUFS6, COX6B1, and MT-ATP8 in TC, and NDUFA6 in FC).
Hypometabolism is a known feature of AD brains, occurring years before the onset of symptoms in ADvulnerable regions
Previous studies with human tissue and animal models showed that proteins involved in energy generation in mitochondria, including mitochondrial electron transport chain subunits, are dysregulated in AD
Finally, a complex regulatory mechanism underlies metabolism control, Aβ, and tau.
Aβ and tau have been implicated in the impairment of oxidative phosphorylation
Animal studies have demonstrated that tau has a new physiological function in insulin signaling regulation
Furthermore that glucose deficit induces tau phosphorylation and aggregation in a tauopathy mouse model

Relationships of AD-related differentially expressed proteins to other diseases
Because it is rather difficult to find non-demented elderly controls without tau pathology, our groups were not fully balanced with respect to age.
To overcome this issue, we removed all proteins significantly associated with age from the list of differentially expressed proteins.
Investigating the set of age-associated proteins we found that our findings were consistent with a previous report
Furthermore, in order to examine what diseases could be related to the proteins differentially expressed between AD and controls (DEPs), Ingenuity analysis was performed.
It allowed elucidating disease annotations significantly overrepresented among the DEP sets (Fig.
Interestingly, in very few cases the same disease annotations were overrepresented among DEPs for different brain regions (e.g.
Seizures).
Notably, for late disease stages and the FC region, overrepresented diseases included cancer, cardiovascular disease, and neurological disorders (e.g.
epilepsy, brain neurodegeneration).
For late B/B stages and the PHC region, most of the overrepresented disease annotations related to neuropsychiatric disorders (e.g.
epilepsy, neuromuscular disease, schizophrenia), while in the TC region, inflammatory diseases were noteworthy.
The sets of DEPs for early B/B stages were much smaller than those for late stages, consequently, fewer disease annotations were overrepresented (Table
Among these, pervasive developmental disorder (EC region) stood out.
The complex relationship between AD and other diseases is far from being fully understood as can be exemplified by the 86 differentially expressed proteins related also to melanoma according to the Ingenuity database (Fig.
This protein set includes both down-and upregulated proteins from various subcellular compartments, among them regulators such as CUL1 and CD44.

The vulnerability of brain areas to AD
An intriguing question in AD and other neurodegenerative disorders is why do some brain regions accumulate toxic protein aggregates and degenerate first.
To gain potential insights into this, we analyzed proteomic differences between EC, PHC, TC, and FC in healthy control subjects.
Hierarchical clustering resulted in clear segregation of MTL and neocortical samples (Fig.
The MTL is involved primarily in memory functions
MTL has high energy demands due to increased synaptic plasticity (memory formation and storage) and the presence of large neurons
Translation and proteasome pathways were also significantly enriched in MTL, indicating an accelerated proteostasis; as well as long-term potentiation that is consistent with EC and PHC involvement in memory formation (Fig.
Interestingly, Alzheimer's disease KEGG pathway was also found enriched in the cluster of proteins overexpressed in MTL (22 proteins, pvalue = 1.61e-7).
Remarkably, one of these AD proteins was APOE, the major genetic risk factor for late-onset AD
We found that APOE level is generally higher in MTL compared to the neocortex, however, statistically significant differences were observed only between PHC and TC in the discovery dataset, as well as between both MTL regions and FC in the PRM dataset (Table
A previous work reporting that APOE mRNA level is augmented in EC compared to other brain areas
Nevertheless, further studies are required to confirm the link between increased APOE level and AD vulnerability.
Recent studies elucidated the missing link between APOE, Aβ and tau, since it has been shown that APOE ε4 allele mediates and exacerbates tau toxic effects
Accordingly, APOE ε4 represents an increased risk for AD, while APOE ε2 is protective against AD
APOE plays a role in metabolism regulation and it is known that its isoforms differently regulate glucose pathways
It has been previously shown that APOE ε4 decreases the levels of mitochondrial respiratory complexes, further linking APOE to mitochondrial metabolism
In addition, APOE has transcriptional factor activity as it binds to the promoter of genes related to trophic support, programmed cell death, microtubule disassembly, synaptic function, aging, and insulin resistance
Considering the increased APOE level in MTL, the relevance of metabolic control in this region, as well as the relationship between APOE, Aβ, and tau, we summarize how differences in APOE expression could be related to MTL vulnerability to AD (Fig.
We believe that 1) the proteomic background, including higher APOE level together with 2) the high energy demand of MTL, impaired early in AD, make this region more susceptible to early triggers of AD.
Previous work described the correlation between AD histopathological staging and the expression pattern of proteins that co-aggregate with plaques and tangles, as well as proteins involved in Aβ and tau homeostasis
These observations collectively suggest that a sum of factors might account for brain region vulnerability to AD and the whole picture needs to be elucidated.

Comparison of proteomic studies in AD reveals overlapping proteins and pathways
A recent review of proteomic studies in AD reported low reproducibility between distinct works
However, we compared our results with two other proteomic datasets reported earlier, and 275 overlapping DEPs between at least two studies were found, furthermore, 85% of the common proteins showed concordant expression level changes across studies.
The low number of overlapping proteins (24) between the three studies might be due to the anatomical divergence between the analyzed brain regions.
Taken together, these results indicate that there is a certain degree of overlap between various proteomic studies, and most probably, the intersection denotes important proteins to AD pathology.
A recent work that compared the results from three transcriptomic studies on the human hippocampus in AD
This is in great agreement with the enrichment analysis results we got for the overlapping proteins between proteomic studies in AD (Fig.
This further strengthens the view that there are key proteins and pathways commonly identified by distinct transcriptomic/ proteomic studies which are of importance to AD etiology.

Conclusions
This work provides a description of the proteomic changes during AD progression in brain regions early and late affected by tau pathology.
We identified peculiar mechanisms to each region during AD progression, but also found processes that are shared between regions possibly representing fundamental features involved in disease etiology.
Based on the different proteomic signatures of MTL and neocortex, we contextualized brain region vulnerability to AD with the current Aβ/tau paradigm.
In summary, this work provides insights into how distinct brain regions behave in health and during the course of AD.
The results found strengthen the view that the differential proteomic background of various brain areas might be related to their implication in AD.
In addition, we reinforce that the series of events leading to AD should be investigated at the whole brain level since the inherent characteristics of each brain region might be related to specific molecular alterations during disease.
Future studies spanning more areas are needed to better clarify the cascade of events involved in AD and why particular brain regions are affected first by certain neurodegenerative diseases.
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at



Fig. 1 .
Fig. 1.
Graphical illustration of the study design.
Two approaches were employed in the study: 1) comparative proteome profiling during disease progression to unravel altered proteins/pathways in different brain regions and 2) comparative proteome profiling of different brain regions in healthy subjects to investigate brain region vulnerability to AD.



Fig. 2 .
Fig. 2. Proteins differentially expressed during AD progression.
A) Hierarchical clustering of 11 proteins that are altered in 3 brain regions.
Cluster in red: up-regulated proteins during AD course; Cluster in green: down-regulated proteins during AD course.
B) Venn diagram showing the overlap of AD risk loci with DEPs found in each brain region.
C) Protein interactome of DEPs described as AD risk genes.
Line color indicates the type of interaction evidence (yellow: textmining, purple: experiments, light blue: databases, black: co-expression, blue: cooccurrence).
(For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)



Fig. 4 .
Fig. 4. Hierarchical clustering and functional enrichment analysis of DEPs in the neocortex during AD progression.Heat maps built with DEPs found in TC and FC.
Clusters representing the four typical expression profiles are colored accordingly to the heat maps.
The 5 most significant biological processes (GOBP) are listed for each expression profile.



Fig. 5 .Fig. 6 .
Fig. 5. Key cellular parts/organelles and pathways affected by AD.
A) Representative cellular component categories (GOCC) in down-regulated protein clusters.
B) Expression profiles of proteins related to oxidative phosphorylation.
C) Expression profiles of proteins involved in translation.



Fig. 7 .
Fig. 7. Comparison of the altered proteins with independent AD proteomic datasets.
A) Venn diagram showing the overlap of DEPs between the present work and two other proteomic studies.
B) Gene ontology (GOBP) enrichment analysis for overlapping proteins between at least two proteomic datasets (n = 275).
C) Log2 fold changes of shared proteins between the current work and two other proteomic studies; the general correlation is shown (R 2 ).



Fig. 8 .
Fig. 8. Verification of a set of differentially expressed proteins by PRM.
A) Box-plot representing GFAP and CORO1A expression levels in EC and TC, respectively.
B) Box-plot representing total APOE and CD63 expression levels of control subjects in 4 different brain regions.
C) Box-plot representing ABETA and APP expressions in 4 different brain regions during AD progression.


Hierarchical clustering and functional enrichment analysis of DEPs in the MTL during AD progression.
Heat maps built with DEPs found in EC and PHC.
Clusters representing the four typical expression profiles are colored accordingly to the heat maps.
The 5 most significant biological processes (GOBP) are listed for each expression profile.