The Alzheimer's Association international guidelines for handling of cerebrospinal fluid for routine clinical measurements of amyloid β and tau
The core cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) Alzheimer's disease (AD) biomarkers amyloid beta (Aβ42 and Aβ40), total tau, and phosphorylated tau, have been extensively clinically validated, with very high diagnostic performance for AD, including the early phases of the disease.
However, between-center differences in pre-analytical procedures may contribute to variability in measurements across laboratories.
To resolve this issue, a workgroup was led by the Alzheimer's Association with experts from both academia and industry.
The aim of the group was to develop a simplified and standardized preanalytical protocol for CSF collection and handling before analysis for routine clinical use, and ultimately to ensure high diagnostic performance and minimize patient misclassification rates.
Widespread application of the protocol would help minimize variability in measurements, which would facilitate the implementation of unified cut-off levels across laboratories, and foster the use of CSF biomarkers in AD diagnostics for the benefit of the patients.

BACKGROUND
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a devastating and progressive neurodegenerative disease with symptoms that exist along a continuum composed of three stages: a lengthy preclinical phase without symptoms but with measurable changes in the brain (through imaging techniques), cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), and blood, and two subsequent phases, mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and dementia, in which symptoms vary in magnitude.
However, biomarkers, biological markers that can be measured in the brain, CSF, and blood, and evaluated as potential indicators of the disease,
AD biomarkers can be obtained from brain imaging methods such as magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) or positron emission tomography (PET), as well as CSF or blood tests.
Despite the utility of brain imaging methods, they can only identify the presence of a certain type of pathology once levels pass a certain threshold.
In contrast, biomarkers from CSF are considered a more direct readout of protein levels and are therefore a more sensitive assay.
e four core AD CSF biomarkers include two isoforms of the protein amyloid beta (Aβ), Aβ1-42 and Aβ1-40, as well as total tau (t-tau)
and phosphorylated tau (p-tau).
Aβ1-42 is the primary constituent of the amyloid plaques that are found in AD,
A large body of literature has validated that each of these core CSF biomarkers are reflective of AD brain pathology.
For example, low levels of CSF Aβ1-42 are correlated with brain Aβ levels,
3]
The 2018 National Institute on Aging (NIA)-Alzheimer's Association (AA) Research Framework, created to provide guidance on how AD imaging and CSF biomarkers should be used in research, groups them into three categories that are collectively known as the AT(N) scheme.
The Aβ (A) designation includes CSF Aβ1-42 or the Aβ1-42/Aβ1-40 ratio, the tau (T) designation includes CSF p-tau, and the neurodegeneration or neuronal injury (N) designation includes CSF neurofilament light (NfL) or t-tau.
There are several commercially available assays that measure these core CSF biomarkers and many are approved for use in the diagnosis of AD in the European Union.
0]
Despite widespread use in Europe, studies of these core CSF biomarkers have found significant inter-laboratory and batch-to-batch variability.
ere are three possible sources of variability to be considered when interpreting CSF biomarker results or when defining CSF biomarker cutoffs: (1) pre-analytical (i.e., due to differences in the collection, handling, and storage of CSF);
Initiatives to obtain standardization of Aβ1-40 and t-tau are ongoing.
In addition, a number of quality control programs have been initiated to monitor the immunoassay variability for Aβ (Aβ42, Aβ40, Aβ38) and T proteins (t-tau, p-tau) that occurs between batches and across laboratories.
3]
By the recent introduction of automated measurement of biomarkers and improved in-process quality control for critical assay components, today's commercially available immunoassays developed on random access analyzers offer higher precision, better lot-to-lot consistency, and lower between-laboratory variation such that analytic variability is much less of a problem than before.
Variability surrounding patient selection has also been sufficiently addressed due to the recently published appropriate use criteria (AUC)
for lumbar puncture (LP) and CSF testing for AD diagnosis, established by a multidisciplinary workgroup convened by the Alzheimer's Association.
wever, a large source of variability remains with respect to preanalytics.
After the integration of CRMs for Aβ1-42 in commercial assays, pre-analytics are considered the last piece of the variability puzzle that remains to be solved.
This pre-analytic variability still precludes the establishment of general biomarker cut-off values and the adoption of a standard CSF biomarker protocol, makes proper diagnosis and treatment more difficult, and presents challenges for clinical trial enrollment.
fortunately, across the landscape, the pre-analytical protocols currently in use vary considerably between centers, and such heterogeneity influences the absolute levels of biomarkers measured.
Given that different biomarkers, and indeed even isoforms of the same biomarker, exhibit distinct profiles of stability and aggregation, and thus differ in their susceptibility to pre-analytical variables, it is important to systematically evaluate best practices for the collection, storage, and processing of individual CSF samples before analysis of a specific protein biomarker.
In a systematic review of pre-analytical variables that affect CSF biomarkers in AD, Aβ1-42 was found to be especially susceptible relative to p-tau and t-tau.
For example, variables such as sample storage volume and tube surface adsorption appear to dramatically affect Aβ1-42 levels.
In the

RECOMMENDATIONS
The CSF Pre-Analytics Consortium was formed with the goal of developing a simple, easy to implement, data-driven, and consensus-based pre-analytical protocol for routine clinical use.
The consensus protocol was based on the available literature focusing on Aβ1-42 as this marker is particularly susceptible to variations in pre-analytical handling.
A B L E 1 Main findings of recent studies on the effects of pre-analytical factors on cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) Alzheimer's disease (AD) biomarkers

Main findings
Fasting has no effect on CSF Aβ concentrations
However, even when using LoB tubes all new tube types must be evaluated to determine whether extended contact between sample and tube (including the cap of the tube) affects the Aβ42 levels;
However, if a frozen CSF sample is used it should be mixed using a roller mixer after thawing to reduce variation;
Several pre-analytical factors were systematically evaluated by the CSF Pre-Analytics Consortium, including tube type, storage procedures, optimal filling volume, transportation conditions, mixing proce-dures, the need for centrifugation, and tube type.
Of these factors, tube type, tube filling volume, transfer of CSF from one tube to another, transportation conditions, and mixing procedure had the biggest impact on the measured concentrations of the core AD biomarkers (Table
Based on current evidence, we recommend the following protocol when analyzing fresh CSF samples (Figure
Fasting is not necessary when collecting CSF.
We recommend using an ordinary LP needle.
The first 1 to 2 mL of collected CSF should not be used for AD

Collection Site Testing Site
No further handling (no centrifugation, mixing /inverting or tube transfers)
* Follow manufacturer recommendaƟons of tube type and filling volume † Follow tube and assay manufacturer's instrucƟons of use
Recommended pre-analytical protocol for collection, storage, sample handling, and measurement of frozen cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) .
Aβ, amyloid beta; LoB, low-binding tapped from the patient.
Although some clinicians prefer the syringe pull method due to speed of collection, we strongly recommend the drip method for the portion of CSF to be used for AD biomarker measurements; the volume of this portion depends on which validated tube is used (see below).
This step will take < 2 minutes and thus does not significantly slow down the collection procedure, and reduces the risk that Aβ binds to the plastic of any syringe used.
The remaining CSF may be collected using the syringe pull method if more sample material is needed for additional purposes.
Using a LoB tube is recommended to minimize the loss of Aβ to adhesion; the same LoB tube should be used for collection, transport, and measurement of CSF.
The LoB tube must be validated, and the established biomarker cutoffs for Aβ42, Aβ42/40, p-tau, and t-tau only apply when using a particular validated tube with a certain filling.
Fill volume should also be specified for the LoB tube to eliminate the variability caused by CSF volume to tube surface area differences.
While we have been able to align on the handling part of the pre-analytical procedure, there are still some differences in manufacturer recommenda- Further, we recommend not mixing or centrifuging fresh CSF as there is no clear benefit to this step for core AD biomarker analysis.
As an alternative to storing and transporting fresh CSF, the validated tube filled with a predefined volume of CSF can be frozen at -20 or -80 • C during storage and transport for up to 2 weeks (Figure
Future studies are needed to determine whether longer storage of frozen CSF is adequate.
Frozen CSF protocol is identical to the fresh CSF protocol, except that gentle mixing before analyses is recommended to reduce variability.
Frozen protocol should only be used if freezing is described in the assay manufacturer's instructions of use.
For freezing at -80 • C, tubes validated for this temperature must be used.

SUMMARY
This report presents unified pre-analytical protocols for the handling and measurement of fresh and short-term frozen CSF samples for use in routine clinical diagnosis.
The protocol is designed to be easy to use and to reduce the variability of CSF AD biomarker results.
Assay manufacturers may indicate use of a specific tube type, and it is beyond the scope of this pre-analytical protocol to establish universal cut-off values or detail individual cut-off values that may change with new validation studies.
Therefore, it is important to observe individual cut-offs as determined and validated for a specific tube type.
We also want to emphasize that established biomarker cut-offs for a certain method can only be used in clinical practice when the current protocols are used together with a validated tube filled with a predefined volume of CSF.
It is important to note that forthcoming studies referencing this unified protocol will present pre-analytical study results from experiments conducted using additional LoB tubes consistent with the data presented herein.
The protocol is not intended for long-term storage of samples in clinical studies (i.e., collection of multiple aliquots, and long-term storage).
For clinical studies and/or long-term storage, please refer to the individual manufacturer's recommendations.
Data for long-term storage will be presented in a separate publication.
The protocol is applicable for only Aβ1-42, Aβ1-40, p-tau, and t-tau.
Confounding factors and sampling techniques that affect additional biomarkers, if validated, will need to be assessed and collection protocols developed separately.
The protocol is based on the drip technique for collection.
The extra time to collect this CSF volume by the drip technique is negligible.
If syringe pull is standard in some centers, this technique can be applied after the protocol for additional sampling.
Note that foreseen commercially available In Vitro Diagnostic assays will explicitly prescribe a specific CSF pre-analytical protocol that corresponds to the fresh handling protocol described in this article.
To achieve the best clinical performance (i.e., keep patient misclassification rate at a minimum), these recommendations have to be followed, given that handling differences may impact to the measured value of Aβ1-42, and may influence the biomarker result in relation to the cut-offs.
There are many benefits to a unified pre-analytical protocol, nevertheless a number of challenges and unanswered questions remain.
The most significant challenge will be getting the standardized protocol implemented by different centers and users.
While changing applied procedures across a wide range of settings may be a major hurdle, the benefits of switching to established protocols following the initial sample collection described here should facilitate broad implementation.
Furthermore, this protocol contributes to the development of universal cut-offs and is an important step to optimize patient care in AD.
as a consultant, on advisory boards, or on data monitoring committees for Abcam, Axon, Biogen, JOMDD/Shimadzu, Julius Clinical, Lilly, MagQu, Novartis, Roche Diagnostics, and Siemens Healthineers, and is a co-founder of Brain Biomarker Solutions in Gothenburg AB (BBS), which is a part of the GU Ventures Incubator Program.
Salvatore J. Salamone is a full-time employee and shareholder of Saladax Biomedical, Inc.


present communication, we report a unified, impartial approach by a workgroup, led by the Alzheimer's Association and composed of key opinion leaders in academia and industry, to develop a simplified and standardized pre-analytical protocol intended for routine clinical testing involving Aβ1-42.
The workgroup examined the impact of a number of pre-analytical factors on measured CSF biomarker concentrations: sample collection methodology, blood contamination, tube type and filling volume, tube transfer steps and pipetting, mixing, transportation, and sample stability.
The primary goal of this effort is to ensure that stakeholders in industry and academia will adopt and implement the recommended protocol in clinical routine.
The adoption of a global standard pre-analytic protocol is critical to establishing universal cutoff values for the measurement of CSF AD biomarker levels, especially Aβ1-42.
Without such standardization, variability will continue to weaken the confidence of clinicians when evaluating measured levels of biomarkers as diagnostic criteria for AD.


biomarker diagnostics.
The next CSF should be collected using the drip method, directly into a LoB tube, and should come from the first 20 mL Remove first 2mL CSF; directly collect CSF into a


tions regarding the tube type to be used.
For example, the sterile, falsebottom, low-bind polypropylene tube from Sarstedt (Cat # 63.614.699;
tube under development and not yet commercially available) is currently being validated for use with the fully automated Elecsys CSF AD biomarker assays and this tube should be filled with at least 2.5 mL CSF.
Another example is the Lumipulse platform, for which 10 mL (Cat# 62.610.018) and 1.5 mL Sarstedt tubes (Cat# 72.703.600)
have been validated for direct testing using the fresh CSF collection procedures described here.
The 1.5 mL Sarstedt tube (Cat# 72.703.600)
should be filled with 0.5 to 1.2 mL and the 10 mL Sarstedt tube (Cat# 62.610.018)
should be filled with 5 to 8 mL.
Tubes should be tested directly on the manufacturer-specific platform with no tube transfer.
Use of any other LoB tube must be compared to the already validated tube (and manufacturer-specific platform) to use previously estab-lished biomarker cut-offs.
Additional research needed to validate a new tube includes demonstrating that fresh CSF can be stored up to 48 hours at room temperature (RT), up to 14 days at 2 to 8 • C, and at -20 • C or -80 • C in the new tube, resulting in similar biomarker levels compared to analyses of fresh CSF stored in the already validated tube (maximum bias between biomarker levels within ± 5%).
Furthermore, an experiment showing effects of transport is also crucial and again the results should be compared to the validated tube (e.g., recovery in upright vs. horizontal positions during transport should be within 95% to 105%).
The same experiments are needed if there is a change in the recommended filling volume of a validated tube.


Recommended pre-analytical protocol for collection, storage, sample handling, and measurement of fresh cerebrospinal fluid (CSF).