Altered Redox State in Whole Blood Cells from Patients with Mild Cognitive Impairment and Alzheimer’s Disease
Oxidative stress plays an essential and early role in the pathophysiology of Alzheimer's disease (AD).
Alterations in the redox state in AD and in mild cognitive impairment (MCI) patients appear in the brain and at peripheral level.
Given that it is easier to study the latter, most of the research has been focused on plasma.
However, the analysis of redox parameters in whole blood cells (including erythrocytes and leukocytes) has not really been investigated.
Moreover, the association of these parameters with Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) clinical scores, has scarcely been studied.
Therefore, the aim of the present work was to analyze several redox markers in whole blood cells from male and female MCI and AD patients.
Antioxidant (superoxide dismutase, catalase (CAT), glutathione peroxidase (GPx), and reductase (GR) activities, and reduced glutathione (GSH) concentration) together with oxidant parameters (oxidized glutathione (GSSG) and thiobarbituric acid-reactive substances (TBARS)) were investigated using MCI and AD (10 women and 10 men in each group) and their age-matched control groups (15 women and 15 men).
The results show an altered redox state in whole blood cells from AD patients (higher CAT, GSSG/GSH, TBARS and lower GPx, GR, GSH).
Some of these redox parameters are already affected in MCI patients (higher TBARS and lower GPx and GR activities) in both sexes and, consequently, they could be used as markers of prodromal AD.
Since GR, GSH, GSSG, and GSSG/GSH were found to be associated with MMSE scores, they seem to be useful clinically to monitor cognitive decline in AD progression.

INTRODUCTION
Due to the increasing average lifespan, the clinical relevance of Alzheimer's disease (AD) is exponentially rising and is expected to become a pandemic and public health burden.
Thus, it is estimated that most common cause of AD (>95% of cases) has a late 31 age of onset and it is strongly associated with aging 32
One of the main obstacles of a potential AD 33 cure is that it is only diagnosed in later stages of the 34 disease, in which there is already irreversible brain It is now recognized that only a combination of biomarkers will define a patient-specific signature to diagnose AD in the future
Although the accumulation of amyloid and tau proteins is considered the core pathologic hallmark for AD, other factors such as oxidative stress and inflammation, contribute enormously to its complex pathophysiology.
In this context, it is now well established that oxidative stress plays a pivotal role in the pathophysiology and the progression of AD.
Nunomura et al.
In fact, some evidence has suggested that the A␤ deposition in certain neurons may be considered an effort to protect these cells against damage due to oxidative stress
A␤ deposition has also been associated with neuronal lipid, protein, and DNA oxidation in animal models of AD [12-14], whereas in humans, oxidative damage to biomolecules has also been reported in the brain of both AD and MCI patients
In addition, several studies have shown that the oxidative alterations in AD and in MCI patients are not only limited to the brain but they have also been detected in the blood compartment
Nevertheless, both establishing the right pattern of redox markers to analyze as well as choosing the most appropriate sample type remain a challenge in AD.
Most of the studies have been focused on the search for redox markers in plasma or serum
However, the redox status of erythrocytes is essential for adequate oxygen delivery to the whole body.
In fact, an impaired oxygen delivery to the brain causing neuronal AD dysfunction, has been considered an important factor in AD
Moreover, the redox state of immune cells has been shown to be crucial for their adequate defensive functioning
Actually, a higher oxidative stress has been linked to a premature immunosenescence in leukocytes from AD patients and to an uncontrolled higher release of pro-inflammatory mediators which also contribute to AD pathology

Glutathione peroxidase activity
GPx activity was analyzed by using a previous method
Whole blood pellets were resuspended in oxygen-free phosphate buffer (pH 7.4 50 mM).
Then, they were sonicated and after centrifugation at 3200 g at 4 • C for 20 min, supernatants were collected.
Human supernatants were diluted 1:30 prior the assay.
Cumene hydroperoxide was used as substrate (cumene-OOH; Sigma).
The activity was followed measuring the absorbance decline at 340 nm over 5 min.
Protein concentration was calculated as described above.
The results are expressed as units (U) of glutathione peroxidase activity/milligram of protein (U GPx/mg protein).

Glutathione reductase activity
GR activity was analyzed following a method previously described
Whole blood cells were resuspended in oxygenfree phosphate buffer (pH 7.4 50 mM).
Then, they were sonicated, centrifuged at 3200 g at 4 • C 20 min and supernatants were collected.
Human supernatants were diluted 1:5 prior the assay.
GSSG (80 mM) was used as substrate and, by following the absorbance decline at 340 nm over 5 min, the activity was calculated.
Protein concentration was evaluated as described above.
The results are expressed as units (U) of Glutathione reductase/per milligram of protein (U GR/mg protein).

Glutathione concentration
Both reduced GSH and GSSG were measured following a fluorometric assay
This method relies on the reaction capacity that glutathione (both GSSG and GSH)
shows with o-phthalaldehyde (OPT), at pH 12 and pH 8, respectively, forming a fluorescent compound.
Whole blood cells were resuspended in phosphate buffer (pH 8 50 mM EDTA 0.1 M).
Then, samples were sonicated, 7.5 L of HClO4 (60%) were added and they were centrifuged 10 min at 9500 g.

261

RESULTS

262
The main characteristics of the three groups of indi-263 viduals enrolled in this study are reported in Table

264
There was the same proportion of men and women in each group.
The three groups comprised subjects from the same age interval.
Compared to healthy controls, a higher proportion of patients with MCI and AD were apolipoprotein (APOE) 3/4 carriers.
The results regarding antioxidant parameters are shown in Fig.
AD patients showed higher CAT activity (p < 0.001) and lower GPx and GR activities and GSH concentration (p < 0.001) than age-matched controls, and even lower GPx activity and GSH concentration than MCI patients (p < 0.01).
MCI patients also showed higher CAT activity (p < 0.001) and lower GPx and GR activities (p < 0.001) than controls.
With respect to oxidant parameters (Fig.
MCI patients showed higher GSSG/GSH ratio (p < 0.01) and TBARS concentration (p < 0.001) than controls.
Within MCI and AD groups, subjects were further classified depending on the APOE genotype, although no non-statistically significant differences were found in any redox marker due to the presence of APOE 3/3 or 3/4 genotype.
Previous data were analyzed including total population.
Then, an additional analysis was performed subdividing groups by sex.
With respect to sexrelated differences in antioxidant parameters (Fig.
Within MCI and AD patients no significant differences in antioxidant parameters were found due to sex.
Nevertheless, AD women showed higher SOD and CAT activities (p < 0.01; p < 0.05) and lower GPx, GR, and GSH concentration (p < 0.05) than age-matched control women.
AD men showed higher CAT activity (p < 0.001) and lower GPx, GR, and GSH (p < 0.001) than age-matched control men and also lower GPx (p < 0.001) and GSH (p < 0.05) than MCI men.
With respect to individuals with MCI, MCI women showed lower GPx and GR activities (p < 0.01; p < 0.05; respectively) than control women, whereas MCI men showed higher CAT (p < 0.001) and lower GPx (p < 0.05) and GR activities (p < 0.01) than control men.
With regard to oxidant parameters (Fig.
However, both AD men and women displayed higher GSSG/GSH ratios (p < 0.05; p < 0.01; respectively) and higher TBARS (p < 0.01) than their controls.
In addition, both MCI men and women showed higher TBARS (p < 0.05;  Therefore, in the present study whole blood cells were used given that this sample type is clinically more feasible, reproducible, cost effective, easy to implement and apply, compared to purified and isolated neutrophils and mononuclear blood leukocytes
The results from the present study highlight the existence of an altered redox status in whole blood cells from AD patients and interestingly, some of the altered redox parameters are already affected in MCI patients.
Given that the regulation of the redox balance in bloodstream is complex and in order to have a wide picture, several antioxidant and oxidant parameters were investigated in the present study.
The results reveal that AD patients have higher CAT activity, GSSG and TBARS concentrations, and GSSG/GSH ratios, and lower GPx and GR activities, and GSH concentrations, compared to age-matched controls.
In addition, MCI patients have a higher CAT activity and TBARS concentration, and lower GPx and GR activities than age-matched controls.
Regarding antioxidant enzyme activities, which constitute the first line of defense against generation of free radicals, we found striking differences.
The significance of antioxidant changes upon conditions of oxidative stress is strongly under debate, since antioxidants might be induced by oxidative stress (and therefore their activity/levels may increase) or else be consumed (thus decreasing their activity and levels)
Our results demonstrate that SOD activity was similar between MCI and AD patients and control individuals, which agrees with previ-418 ous reported results
With respect to

424
CAT activity, both MCI and AD patients show higher 425 catalase activity, which has also been found in other 426 studies
This higher enzymatic activity could 427 probably be a compensatory mechanism to counter- With respect to AD prevalence, it is known that its incidence is higher in women than in men and this cannot simply be attributed to the higher longevity of women versus men, because it is also higher in young ages
Thus, there must be a specific pathogenic mechanism to explain the higher incidence of AD cases in women.
The results from the present study demonstrate that in the absence of pathology there are statistically significant differences in antioxidant activities due to sex, whereas in MCI and AD individuals, these differences were no longer noticeable.
It has been suggested that sex-related differences could be related to the role of sexual hormones.
Estrogens are known to upregulate the expression of SOD and GPx [62].
However, post-menopausal women experience a sharp fall in estrogens whereas men generally experience a more gradual age-related decline in testosterone
This difference between how rapidly and significantly the female versus male primary sex hormones decline could explain in part why women are more vulnerable to oxidative stress in the elderly and why the incidence of AD is higher in women than in men.
Despite not having found sex-related differences between MCI and AD individuals, it was observed that whereas the alterations in antioxidant defense mechanisms were more significant in AD men than in AD women in comparison to their respective controls (such as higher CAT and lower GPx and GR activities and GSH concentration), the increase in oxidant compounds was more significant in AD women than in AD men (in GSSG/GSH ratios and TBARS concentrations) compared to their respective controls.
Thus, these results suggest that the increased oxidative damaged products found in women, are not the result of an impaired antioxidant defense system but rather the consequence of the overproduction of reactive oxy-522 gen species, as has been previously suggested

523
According to this, it has been reported that mitochon-  Thus, although preliminary, these results could provide a benchmark for future work aimed at finding prognostic markers of AD.


35 damage.
However, numerous longitudinal follow-up 36 studies clearly demonstrated that AD dementia is pre-37 ceded by a long asymptomatic (preclinical) phase followed by a transitional stage with mild cogni-39 tive impairment (MCI) [4-6].
Thus, this intermediate stage offers an important opportunity for possible diagnosis, prevention and therapeutic interventions.


Therefore, in order to identify non-invasive redox markers that can be used for an early diagnosis of AD, we decided to investigate several parameters of oxidative stress in whole blood cells (containing erythrocytes and leukocytes).
Thus, antioxidant enzyme activities and compounds (superoxide dismutase (SOD), catalase (CAT), glutathione peroxidase (GPx), glutathione reductase (GR), and 93 reduced glutathione (GSH) concentrations) as well 94 as pro-oxidant compounds (oxidized glutathione 95 (GSSG) and thiobarbituric acid-reactive substances 96 (TBARS)) were investigated in whole blood cells 97 from MCI and AD patients.
In addition, differences 98 by sex were also considered.
Moreover, the relation-99 ship between each of the redox parameters studied 100 and the degree of cognitive performance assessed by 101 the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) were 102 also investigated.



164
Whole blood cells were resuspended in oxygen-free 165 phosphate buffer (pH 7.4 50 mM).
Then, they were 166 sonicated, centrifuged at 3200 g 20 min and super-167 natants were obtained.
H 2 O 2 (14 mM) was used as 168 substrate.
Supernatants were diluted 1:1000 prior the 169 assay.
The reaction was calculated by following the 170 absorbance decline at 240 nm over 80 s.
In the same 171 samples, protein concentration was calculated (BCA 172 protein assay kit (Sigma-Aldrich) and the results are expressed as units (U) of catalase activity/milligram of protein (U CAT/mg protein).


10 L from supernatants were dispensed into 96 black plates.
For GSH quantification, OPT (1 mg/mL) was dispensed into the wells.
For the quantification of GSSG, N-ethylmaleimide (NEM, 0.04 M) was dispensed into each well and after a 30 min incu-220 bation, NaOH (pH 12) and OPT were added.
After 221 15 min incubation with OPT, fluorescence was mea-222 sured at 420 nm.
Protein concentration was calculated 223 as described above.
Results are expressed as nmol of 224 GSSG/mg protein or GSH/mg protein.
In addition, 225 GSSG/GSH ratio was calculated for each sample.
226 Thiobarbituric acid-reactive substances 227 concentration 228 Quantification of TBARS was achieved using the 229 commercial kit "Lipid peroxidation (MDA) Assay 230 Kit" (Biovision, USA).
To prevent further peroxida-231 tion of lipids during the preparation of the sample 232 or during the heating step, the antioxidant butylated 233 hydroxy-toluene (BHT) was added to the lysis buffer 234 at a final concentration of 0.1 mM.
Briefly, peritoneal 235 leukocytes and whole blood cells were resuspended in 236 300 l MDA lysis buffer (containing BHT), sonicated 237 and centrifuged at 13000 g for 10 min.
Supernatants 238 were collected, mixed with thiobarbituric acid (TBA) 239 and incubated in a water bath at 95 • C for 60 min.
240 Then, after centrifugation at 13000 g 10 min, super-241 natants were obtained, added into a 96-well plate 242 and absorbance at 532 nm was measured.
Protein 243 concentrations were calculated as described above.
244 Because TBA reacts with more aldehydes than mal-245 ondialdehyde, we will refer to the results obtained 246 as TBA-reactive substances, even though the con-247 centrations were related to a standard curve using 248 malondialdehyde alone, and therefore, the results are 249 expressed as nmol MDA/mg protein.
250 Statistical analysis 251 Statistical analysis of the results was performed 252 with SPSS 21.0 (SPSS, Chicago, IL, USA) soft-253 ware.
For comparison of variables, the nonparametric 254 Kruskal-Wallis test was carried out followed by 255 Mann-Whitney U test to determine significant dif-256 ferences between groups.
The Pearson correlation 257 coefficient was used to test for correlation between 258 redox parameters and MMSE scores from MCI and 259 AD patients.
Two-sided p < 0.05 was considered the 260 minimum level of significance.



Fig. 1 .Fig. 2 .Fig. 3 .Fig. 4 .
Fig. 1.
Antioxidant parameters in blood cells from mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and Alzheimer's disease (AD) patients versus agematched controls.
A) Superoxide dismutase activity; B) Catalase activity; C) Glutathione peroxidase activity; D) Glutathione reductase activity; E) Reduced glutathione concentration.
The central rectangle spans the first to the third quartile (the interquartile range or IQR) and the horizontal bar depicts the median of data.
Error bars depict the highest and lowest point within each data set.
***p < 0.001 with respect to age-matched controls.
## p < 0.01 with respect to MCI patients.



550
TBARS concentration) and therefore, could be used 551 for early diagnosis of AD.
In addition, other redox 552 markers such as GR activity, GSH and GSSG con-553 centrations, and GSSG/GSH ratios were found to be 554 associated with cognitive decline.
Even though these 555 associations were modest due to the small sample 556 size included in the present study, our data highlight 557 the importance and the impact of peripheral redox 558 state and homeostatic systems during the early cog-559 nitive decline leading to dementia.
However, because 560 oxidative stress and damage occur in several dis-561 eases (including other types of dementia), another 562 group of demented subjects, distinct from AD, should 563 be included in future studies.
Still, given the easy 564 obtainability of the sample type used and the sim-565 plicity of the assays performed, the combination of 566 some redox whole blood cell markers, such as GPx 567 and GR activities and TBARS concentration could 568 be used to define their MCI stage.
However, oth-569 ers like GR activity, GSH and GSSG concentrations, 570 and GSSG/GSH ratios have potential to be used in 571 monitoring the progression of AD, once the pathol-572 ogy is established, in the clinical setting.
Thus, we 573 believe that the integration of several of the investigated parameters into a mathematical model could be used as a more reliable and consistent tool in the clinical setting.
Nevertheless, a longitudinal design should be performed in order to elucidate the relationship between these markers and the course of the disease.



Table 1
Demographic data and cognitive performance of control group, mild cognitive impairment (MCI) patients and Alzheimer's disease (AD) patients.
Data of age and MMSE score are reported as the first and third quartile, respectively.
All control individuals had a CDR score of 0, MCI subjects of 0.5, and AD patients of 1. F,



plasma was removed and whole 156 blood cell pellets were stored at -80ºC until used. 157 Superoxide dismutase activity