Biomarker potential of brain-secreted extracellular vesicles in blood in Alzheimer's disease
Introduction: Brain cells secrete extracellular microvesicles (EVs) that cross the bloodbrain barrier.
Involved in cell-to-cell communication, EVs contain surface markers and a biologically active cargo of molecules specific to their tissue (and cell) of origin, reflecting the tissue or cell's physiological state.
Isolation of brain-secreted EVs (BEVs) from blood provides a minimally invasive way to sample components of brain tissue in Alzheimer's disease (AD), and is considered a form of "liquid biopsy."
We performed a comprehensive review of the PubMed literature to assess the biomarker and therapeutic potential of blood-isolated BEVs in AD.
We summarize methods used for BEV isolation, validation, and novel biomarker discovery, as well as provide insights from 26 studies in humans on the biomarker potential in AD of four cell-specific BEVs isolated from blood: neuron-, neural precursor-, astrocyte-, and brain vasculature-derived BEVs.
Of these, neuron-derived BEVs has been investigated on several fronts, and these include levels of amyloid- and tau proteins, as well as synaptic proteins.
In addition, we provide a synopsis of the current landscape of BEV-based evaluation/monitoring of AD therapeutics based on two published trials and a review of registered clinical trials.
Discussion: Blood-isolated BEVs have emerged as a novel player in the study of AD, with enormous potential as a diagnostic, evaluation of therapeutics, and treatment tool.
The literature has largely concentrated on neuron-derived BEVs in the blood in AD.
Given the multifactorial pathophysiology of AD, additional studies, in neuron-derived and other brain cell-specific BEVs are warranted to establish BEVs as a robust bloodbased biomarker of AD.

INTRODUCTION
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) are diverse, nanoscale membrane vesicles released by a variety of cells into the extracellular microenvironment.
Based on their biogenesis, size, and biophysical properties, EVs can be further subtyped into categories such as exosomes, shedding microvesicles and apoptotic bodies.
Involved in cell-to-cell communication (both local and remote), EVs contain surface markers, as well as a biologically active cargo of metabolites, proteins, nucleic acids, and other molecules specific to their tissue (and cell) of origin, and reflecting the tissue or cell's physiological state.
This tissue-specificity combined with their easy accessibility from blood makes EVs extremely attractive as blood-based biomarkers of disease, prognostic indicators, and therapeutic tools.
In the last decade or so, EVs, particularly brain-secreted EVs (BEVs) isolated from blood have emerged as a novel player in Alzheimer's disease (AD) progression, with enormous potential as a diagnostic and treatment tool.
Accumulating evidence suggests that pathophysiological alterations (eg, synaptic dysfunction, brain amyloidosis) in AD might be reflected in the number and composition of BEVs.
For example, brain synaptic activity, which is altered early in AD, modulates the release of neuron-derived BEVs.
Moreover, it was recently reported that the APOE ɛ4 allele, the greatest genetic risk factor for AD, compromises BEV production.
While several questions pertaining to the biogenesis, release, and action of BEVs remains unexplored, it is well established that various components of the brain (eg, neurons, cerebral blood vessels, glia) secrete EVs that travel past the blood-brain barrier (BBB) and accumulate in the blood (and other biofluids).
Enrichment of BEVs derived from a specific brain component from blood is possible using cell-specific surface markers, and provides a minimally invasive, yet powerful, way to sample components of healthy and AD brain tissue, a form of "liquid biopsy".
A number of independent studies reported in the literature have focused on identifying biomarkers for early detection, disease stratification, and monitoring of AD from blood-isolated BEVs.
One study reported that the EV concentration was higher in blood plasma than in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF).
Classified as a connective tissue, blood consists of two main components: a liquid component, an admixture of proteins, enzymes, nutrients, wastes, hormones and gases; and a cellular component that includes mononuclear leukocytes, erythrocytes, and platelets.
BEVs are usually isolated from serum and plasma, both derived from the liquid component of blood.
Specifically, serum is the liquid that remains after the blood has clotted, while plasma is the liquid that remains when clotting is prevented with the addition of an anticoagulant.
Our overall goal was to perform a comprehensive review of the AD literature to assess the biomarker potential of blood-isolated BEVs in human.
Our specific aims were to summarize (1) the methods commonly used for blood-based BEV isolation, validation, and novel biomarker discovery, (2) the insights gained from studies investigating brain-cell-specific (e.g.
neurons, blood vessels) BEVs isolated from blood, and (3) the current landscape of blood-isolated BEV-based evaluation of AD therapeutics.

METHODS
We conducted a review of all PubMed articles published up to October 2019.
Because the study of BEVs in blood is an emergent field, there is still a lack of consistent terminology.
Therefore, to avoid missing relevant studies due to stringent use of terminology, we used relaxed and inclusive keywords, which captured all of the EV-based literature in AD.
Initial search term combinations used were as follows: (1)   Alzheimer's disease AND extracellular vesicles; (2) Alzheimer's disease AND extracellular vesicles AND blood; (3) Alzheimer's disease AND exosomes; (4) Alzheimer's disease AND exosomes AND blood; (5)   Alzheimer's disease AND therapy AND extracellular vesicles, and (

HIGHLIGHTS
• Reviewed Alzheimer's disease (AD) studies on brainsecreted extracellular microvesicles (BEVs) in blood
• Provided an overview of BEV isolation, validation, and biomarker discovery methods
• We found that BEVs demonstrate good biomarker potential, but more studies are needed

BRAIN-SECRETED EVs (BEVs) FROM BLOOD
EVs derived from various brain components are a highly attractive source for identification of novel AD biomarkers.
However, isolation of pure, highly specific BEVs from blood (serum or plasma) is challenging because they are contaminated by peripherally derived EVs and non-EV components (eg, lipoproteins of very low [VLDL], low [LDL],
and high [HDL] density).
Thus considerable caution must be taken in choosing the most appropriate method for selective isolation of BEVs and validating the purity of the preps, using existing guidelines set by the International Society for Extracellular Vesicles (ISEV, www.isev.org)
for minimal information required for EV isolation.
ISEV guidelines also include variables preceding BEV isolation, such as blood collection procedures, including time of draw and fasting status, blood tubes used and handling; processing steps such as the protocol used for separating plasma or serum; and storage-associated variable such as temperature, time in storage, and the number of subsequent freeze-thaw cycles.
0]
In addition, EV collection from plasma is usually encouraged over serum, since the latter might contain contaminating EVs from platelets released during clot formation after blood collection.
Selectively removing platelet EVs or enriching for BEVs might address some of the issues associated with serum.
The ISEV, however, has not taken a position on the use of serum because a detailed comparison of serum versus plasma isolation is lacking.
Thus serum-derived BEVs can be used for biomarker evaluation, as long as highly specific methods that can separate or differentiate BEVs from the rest of the EV population (such as immunoaffinity) are used, and proper "minimal information for studies of EVs (MISEV)" guidelines

Methods for isolation of EVs and BEVs from plasma or serum
EV isolation from serum or plasma may be achieved by a number of methods, including ultracentrifugation-based methods, polymerbased precipitation, size-exclusion chromatography, and immunoaffinity isolation.
These methods can range in the degree of their specificity, recovery, and ease of EV isolation.
Although these methods by themselves might be unable to achieve both high specificity and high recovery of EVs, a combination of multiple methods together with advanced multiplexed methods for validation can be used to achieve higher specificity and recovery.
Ultracentrifugation (UC) is usually considered a "gold standard" method for EV isolation from all sample types, and is typically the method to which all other methods are compared.
Although it usually has high specificity for EV isolation, with few non-EV components, the method can be tedious, requires large amounts of starting material, and uses relatively expensive ultracentrifuges and multiple centrifugation steps, resulting in sample loss and low EV recovery.
Density gradient methods are also UC-based and are usually superior to UCalone methods in separating non-EV components and isolating highly specific EV fractions.
However, density gradient methods require a larger amount of starting material and produce low EV recovery.
Furthermore, these methods alone would not differentiate BEVs from peripherally derived EVs.
Commercially available polymeric precipitation kits (eg, ExoQuick [www.systembio.com],
miRCURY[www.qiagen.com]),
mainly utilizing polyethylene glycol for enriching EVs from blood, are becoming more acceptable and have evolved over the years in their capability for isolating EVs from biological samples.
These kits are technically straightforward and require little hands-on time.
Although these methods recover the highest amount of extracellular materials, they significantly lack in specificity.
For example, they are heavily contaminated with blood proteins and other non-EV components.
It is, therefore, almost always recommended to combine this method with other EV-isolating methods, such as size-exclusion chromatography and immunoaffinity to remove non-EV components.
Size-exclusion chromatography (SEC) and other size-based methods (eg, ultrafiltration) separate the components of biological samples according to their size and allows for the separation of EVs from blood proteins, nucleic acids, non-EV components, and other biomolecules, while maintaining their functional and morphological integrity.
SEC is routinely used for the isolation of EVs from small volumes of biological samples such as serum/plasma and CSF.
Although SEC can produce high-specificity EVs, the recovery is typically low.
Furthermore, similar to the methods mentioned in the preceding text, SEC alone would not be able to differentiate BEVs from peripherally derived EVs.
Immunoaffinity (IA) isolation is probably the most suitable method for selective isolation of EVs and BEVs from serum and plasma.
The method relies on the presence of extracellularly exposed proteins that are characteristically unique to the surface of various EV classes and can be exploited to selectively enrich the specific EV class (immuno-enrichment) from a mixed population consisting BOX 1
• Define each preparation by a quantitative measure of the source.
For plasma and serum this would include the volume of the biofluid used.
• Characterize each preparation to estimate abundance of EVs.
This can be done using various light-scattering methods (eg, dynamic light scattering [DLS], nanoparticle tracking analysis [NTA], and standard or high-resolution flow cytometry), and/or by measurement of total amounts of protein, RNA, or lipids.
Light-scattering methods allow measurement of total particle number, as well as the size range of the EVs, which could also be useful in estimating the composition of microvesicles, nanovesicles, and other particles.
Nanovesicles (typically <150 nm) are EVs generated from the endosomal pathway (via multivesicular bodies) and microvesicles are larger EVs that are typically shed (ectosomes) from various cells.
However, it should be noted that some light-scattering methods (eg, DLS) are prone to artifacts due to contaminants, such as dust, microorganisms, and large particles, whereas other methods (eg, NTA) can easily detect these contaminants and are minimally influenced by them.
Examine each preparation for generic EV components and specific BEV components, depending on the specificity needed (positive markers).
The EV components are generic EV positive markers such as CD63, CD81, and CD82 antigens.
It is recommended that enrichment of at least three generic protein EV markers are demonstrated using western blotting, enzyme linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), mass spectrometry (MS), or other methods that allow protein sequence-specific measurements.
The BEV components are positive BEV markers such as neuron-or brain vessel-specific markers.
For BEV, it is highly recommended to demonstrate at least one of the BEV-specific components: neural cell adhesion molecule L1 or L1CAM and neural cell adhesion molecule or NCAM (neurons); sodiumdependent glutamate/aspartate transporter 1, also known as GLAST (astrocyte); glial fibrillary acidic protein or GFAP (glia/astrocyte); glucose transporter 1 or GLUT1 and claudin 5 or CLDN5 (brain endothelium).
Test each preparation for the presence of non-EV co-isolated components (negative markers).
It is recommended that depletion/significant reduction of at least one negative plasma/serum marker is demonstrated using protein sequence-specific methods (mentioned above).
Examples of plasma/serum markers include serum albumin and apolipoprotein B.
• Provide some information on the individual EVs present.
It is recommended that this includes both image-based analysis of single EVs and non-image-based analysis of a large number of single EVs. of unwanted EV classes and contaminating non-EV components.
Alternatively, the method can also be used to remove unwanted EVs (eg, platelet-derived) from the population (ie, immuno-depletion).
The IA method typically involves using antibodies to the surface proteins that are either directly conjugated to beads (eg, magnetic) or used in conjunction with a secondary antibody beads.
Examples of surface protein markers of generic EVs include CD63 and CD81, whereas the neural cell adhesion molecule L1 (L1CAM or CD171) is an example of a surface protein marker for neuron-derived BEVs.
In addition, with the availability of large single-cell RNAseq datasets now being publicly available for brain and other tissues,
Overall, although an IA-based method might produce lower recovery than some of the methods mentioned earlier, IA produces very high specificity for enriching or depleting a selective population of EVs from serum, plasma, and other biofluids.

Validation of isolated BEVs
Before isolated BEVs can be examined for discovery of novel biomarkers, it is essential that the quality of each preparation be validated.
Box 1 provides a summary of ISEV recommended points to be addressed to validate isolation of BEVs from blood plasma (or serum).
In Box 2 we first provide an idealized example of EV/BEV isolation from plasma, its characterization, followed by EV/BEV lysis and biomarker analysis (Figure
Also provided in Box 2 is a checklist of some of the mandatory criteria needed for characterization of plasma-isolated EVs (including BEVs).

Methods for discovery of novel biomarkers in BEVs
Once the isolation of BEVs has been confirmed, the BEV preparations can be explored further for additional molecular biomarkers.
Several methods can be used to examine various molecular components within the EVs, including RNAs, proteins, lipids, and metabolites.
With the advancements in next-generation RNA sequencing (RNAseq) analysis and microfluidics-based single-cell RNAseq analysis, the examination of BEVs to discover novel disease-specific RNA biomarkers is an attractive choice.
For example, several groups have demonstrated an increased EV response associated with altered miR profiles in the blood of AD patients.

BOX 2 F I G U R E 1
Workflow for immuno-isolation of EVs and BEVs from plasma.
Typical workflow involves plasma cleanup (through low centrifugation spins) followed by optional initial enrichment of EVs using commercial kits.
The isolates are then used for immuno-isolation of total EVs (using for example CD81 antibodies) and/or BEVs (using for example anti-L1CAM antibodies).
Post-isolation EVs and/or BEVs should be characterized using the below-provided MISEV2018 checklist.
Thereafter they can be lysed and biomarker analysis performed Checklist for mandatory criteria needed for characterization of EVs isolated from plasma (adapted from MISEV2018 guidelines
The high sensitivity, absolute identification, multiplexing, and quantification capabilities of advanced mass spectrometers give them an immense advantage over other methods to validate a large number of proteins (>50)
That is, these methods can basically address almost all of the recommendations of ISEV by not just identifying/quantifying many negative and positive markers of EVs and BEVs, but also by simultaneously discovering novel protein markers within a typical 2 hour run.
In addition, newly discovered brain-derived protein markers (such as those reported by
Furthermore, lipids and metabolites from EVs can also be identified and quantified by various MS-based methods to identify additional novel biomarkers in various BEVs.
Integrated approaches

EVs AND BEVs IN BLOOD IN ALZHEIMER'S DISEASE
We have identified and reviewed 26 original articles
To date, BEVs in blood plasma or serum assessed for their biomarker potential in AD stem from four main brain components: neurons, neural precursor cells, astrocytes, and the brain vasculature (the latter assessed only in a mouse model of AD) (Figure
In Sections 4.1 to 4.4, we review and synthesize findings from BEVs isolated from blood in AD from the four above-mentioned categories.
Of these, F I G U R E 2 Example workflow of BEV isolation, validation, and novel biomarker identification using mass spectrometry F I G U R E 3 Blood-isolated BEVs.
Presented is a schematic overview of BEVs derived from three brain-specific cells (neural precursor cells, neurons, and astrocytes) that have been isolated from blood in humans, and their content evaluated as potential biomarkers of Alzheimer's disease (AD).
Although cerebrovascular-derived BEVs have not yet been investigated in the context of AD, they have been successfully isolated from blood in humans via sequential immunoprecipitations and vascular endothelial-specific antibodies, demonstrating that such studies are feasible.
Given that damage to the cerebrovascular system is an early feature of AD, appearing years before clinical symptoms,
Furthermore, in Section 4.5, we review the literature on AD-associated miR cargo of blood-isolated EVs.

Neuron-derived BEVs in blood

Alterations in amyloid-𝜷 and tau levels
A and tau are well-established AD biomarkers.
In the CSF, low A42 levels is assumed to be a consequence of increased fibrillar-A deposition in the brain, whereas elevated levels of phosphorylated tau (ptau) and total tau (t-tau) indicate increased brain tau pathology (neurofibrillary tangles).
5]
Eight studies investigated A and/or tau levels in blood-isolated neuron-derived BEVs.
Neuron-derived BEVs was isolated from plasma in seven of these studies,
ix studies performed immunochemical enrichment for neuronderived BEVs using L1CAM, one study used neural cell adhesion molecule (NCAM or CD56),
Four of the five studies
we discuss some additional key findings on A42 protein levels in plasma-isolated neuron-derived BEVs reported by these studies.
Using a longitudinal cohort, Fiandaca et al.
This finding, together with the observation that A42 levels increased with time (preclinical timepoint <MCI or AD dementia timepoints) suggest that A42 levels in plasma-isolated neuron-derived BEVs have the potential to be used both as an early biomarker of AD, as well as a marker of AD progression.
Furthermore, in their 2016 study, Winston et al.
Given that all MCI individuals included in the study had CSF evidence of cerebral amyloid pathology, considered a biomarker of AD pathogenic change,
We did note, however, that the MCI to AD dementia convertors were slightly older in age (mean age: 75.35 ± 6.82 MCI convertors vs 68.70 ± 7.76 stable MCI).
Given that the incidence of AD increases with age, additional studies in larger age-matched MCI subgroups (ie, convertors vs non-convertors) are needed before a strong conclusion can be reached on this topic.
Overall, the five studies indicate that A42 levels in blood-isolated neuron-derived-BEVs have the potential to serve as a novel AD biomarker.
Whether it will make for a more sensitive biomarker than the currently used CSF A42 levels warrants additional investigations, although a recent study by Jia et al.
It should be noted that unlike the inverse relationship between CSF A42 level and brain amyloidosis, A42 level in neuron-derived BEVs directly reflects brain A load.
Although multiple lines of evidence supports this claim, the most salient ones are as follows: (1) neuronal BEVs sequester A; and (2) in the AD brain, neuronal BEVs are enriched with A and have been demonstrated to facilitate short-and long-distance spread of A species.
In addition to A, neuron-derived BEVs in plasma have been reported to contain proteins belonging to the A-generating pathway, such as soluble amyloid precursor protein  (sAPP) and  (sAPP), -site amyloid precursor protein-cleaving enzyme 1 (BACE-1), and -secretase.
To date, only levels of sAPP and sAPP have been reported as elevated in AD dementia + MCI individuals compared to CN.
Better discrimination (from amyloid-positive CN individuals) might be attained with a panel of BEV cargo proteins that in combination captures key features of the complex, multifactorial pathology of AD.
Such approaches are currently being applied in AD-associated genomics and metabolomics research.
We recommend that proposed panel(s) of BEV cargo proteins be in sync with the recently proposed AT(N) criteria,
Next we discuss seven studies investigating tau levels in plasma-
Four of the seven tau studies
Relative to CN individuals, elevated ptau levels (detected using P-S396-tau and/or P-T181-tau ELISA) was reported in AD dementia
Fiandaca et al.
In an additional three studies,
Similarly, no statistical difference in tau levels (fragments ending at amino acid 123 and 224) was found between AD dementia and CN individuals in serum-isolated neuron-derived BEVs, although it should be noted that the sample size for this comparison was extremely low (N = 4/group).
present, the association between tau levels in plasma-isolated neuron-derived BEVs and the AD continuum has yet to reach a consensus.
Two interrelated factors may be contributing to the lack of agreement.
First, the literature suggests that although tau levels in AD are increased in the brain, CSF, and blood, different fragments of tau predominate in the three compartments.
In a recent study, Chen et al.
In addition, Sato et al.
However, at present, a consensus on which tau fragment(s) dominate in neuron-derived BEVs (or BEVs in general) has not been reached,
Second, the assays being used for tau detection might also be adding to the discord.
Currently, tau detected by different assays comprises both overlapping and distinct populations of tau fragments.
For example, the P-T181-tau assay used by five studies
The full-length tau assay employs two antibodies, one directed to the extreme N-terminus of tau and the other directed to its extreme C-terminus.
Use of such varied antibodies, needless to say, complicates cross-study comparisons.
Adding to this noise, some commercially used tau assays employing mid-region-directed antibodies have been erroneously referred to as total tau assays.
Moreover, tau detection sensitivity of the commercially used ELISA assays is also being debated, with some studies reporting them as low.
Given these various facets to assessing tau levels in blood-isolated neuronderived BEVs, additional studies are clearly needed to position it as a blood-based biomarker for AD.

Reductions in synaptic protein levels
Synaptic dysfunction is an early phenomenon in AD.
All five studies enriched for neuron-derived BEVs using L1CAM.
Note that the four studies conducted in plasma were performed by members of the same group.
Neuronally derived BEV levels of the post-synaptic protein neurogranin were reported as reduced in individuals with AD dementia
Synaptic proteins synaptotagmin, synaptopodin, and synaptophysin were also reported reduced in neuron-derived BEVs in AD dementia
However, given that reductions in neurogranin, synaptotagmin, synaptopodin, and synaptophysin are not unique to AD, but have also been reported in Parkinson disease,
Reduced levels of the growth-associated protein 43 (GAP43) was observed in AD dementia,
Next we discuss synaptic proteins only interrogated by a single study.
Levels of the synaptosomal-associated protein-25 (SNAP-25)
Interactions between pre-(neuronal pentraxin 2, neurexin 2) and post-(eg, GluA4-containing glutamate receptor, neuroligin 1) synaptic proteins is crucial for proper synapse formation and function.
The above four proteins were significantly reduced in neuron-derived BEVs of AD dementia patients, with the postsynaptic proteins levels correlating with cognitive loss.
In a longitudinal cohort, with the exception of neuronal pentraxin 2, significant protein level reductions were observed in the preclinical period (6-11   years before dementia onset), relative to CN individuals.
Because levels of all four proteins in the longitudinal cohort declined significantly with the development of AD dementia, they hold promise as biomarkers of AD progression.
Overall, given that reductions in synaptic protein levels in AD (AD dementia and/or MCI) was reported across all five studies, one could comment that as a group, synaptic proteins in neuron-derived BEVs demonstrate some biomarker potential.
It should be noted, however, that only a handful of these synaptic proteins were investigated by two or more studies.
Neurogranin was investigated by three studies,
Although we realize that the field is still in its early stages, additional studies are needed to assess the blood-based biomarker potential of the synaptic protein cargo of neuron-derived BEVs in AD.

Deregulation of insulin pathway proteins
Accumulating evidence suggests that disrupted brain insulin signaling is a characteristic of AD, and insulin resistance has been put forth as a critical link between the A and tau pathologies in AD.
Two studies assessed the biomarker potential of IRS-1 in plasma-isolated, L1CAM, and/or NCAM enriched neuron-derived BEVs, both by members of the same group.
Specifically, higher pSer312-IRS-1 (ineffective insulin signaling) and lower p-panTyr-IRS-1 (effective insulin signaling) levels were found in BEVs of AD patients
Neuron-derived BEV levels of pSer312-IRS-1 and p-panTyr-IRS-1 in AD patients were found to associate with gray matter volume, with pSer312-IRS-1 negatively associated with brain volume and p-panTyr-IRS-1 positively associated.
Of interest, the volumetric pattern associated with IRS-1 variant levels in neuronderived BEVs was spatially correlated with brain regions expressing IRS-1.
Because of these encouraging findings, IRS-1 level in bloodisolated neuron-derived BEVs was recently used to monitor target engagement of intranasal insulin administration.

Differential expression of lysosomal proteins
Lysosomal protein levels in plasma-isolated, L1CAM-enriched, neuronderived BEVs were found to distinguish AD dementia patients from CN individuals, as well as predict (using step-wise discriminant modeling) AD diagnosis.
Cross-sectional investigations demonstrated that levels of cathepsin D, type-1 lysosome-associated membrane protein, and ubiquitinated proteins were significantly increased in AD dementia patients, whereas levels of heat-shock protein-70 were diminished.
ing a longitudinal cohort it was determined that levels of the abovementioned proteins were different from CN up to 10 years before clinical onset.
However, because preclinical and clinical levels of these proteins were indistinguishable, it was suggested that neuronal lysosomal dysfunction may be an early event in AD pathogenesis.
The three lysosomal proteins increased in AD were also found to be significantly lower in frontotemporal dementia.
Although additional studies are required, current findings suggest that lysosomal protein levels in neuron-derived BEVs may aid in delineating AD from other age-related dementias.

Transcription factor(s) alterations
Neuron-derived BEVs contain transcription factors that mediate cellular resistance to stress, including that caused by A and tau accumulation.
Winston et al.
REST levels in neuron-derived BEVs were significantly lower in AD dementia patients and MCI to AD converters, compared to stable MCI and CN subjects.

Neural precursor cell-derived BEVs in blood
Diffusely distributed in the brain, chondroitin sulfate proteoglycan (CSPG4) cells are a subtype of neural precursor cell that demonstrates extreme developmental plasticity, and releases neurotrophic factors important for neuronal growth, repair, and survival.
Protein levels of four assessed neurotrophic factors (hepatocyte growth factor, fibroblast growth factors 2 and 13, and type 1 insulin-like growth factor) were significantly higher in CSPG4-derived BEVs, compared to neuron-and astrocyte-derived BEVs.
All three BEV types were isolated from blood plasma.
Reductions in neurotrophic factor levels in CSPG4-derived BEVs appeared in preclinical AD, with no significant decreases later in the disease course.

Astrocyte-derived BEVs in blood
Astrocyte-derived BEVs isolated from blood plasma have the same size characteristics as neural-derived BEVs.
However, significantly fewer of them were detected in blood plasma compared to their neuralderived counterparts.
Similar to neuron-derived BEVs, astrocytederived BEVs have been reported to cargo AD hallmark proteins tau (P-T181-tau and P-S396-tau) and A42 (soluble), as well as APP pathway proteins sAPP, sAPP, BACE-1, and -secretase.
In both AD patients and CN individuals, levels of all the above-reported proteins were significantly higher in astrocyte-derived BEVs compared to neuron-derived BEVs.
However, only levels of BACE-1 and sAPP were significantly higher, and that of glial-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF) was significantly lower in astrocyte-derived BEVs of patients with AD than in CN.

Cerebrovascular-derived BEVs in blood
Cerebrovascular dysfunction is an early event in AD.
We found one non-AD study reporting on cerebrovascular-derived BEVs in human, indicating that these BEVs can be isolated from blood by sequential immunoprecipitations and vascular endothelial-specific antibodies (CD3 and CD146).
The authors found that concentrations of four cerebrovascular-derived BEV cargo proteins, GLUT1, large neutral amino acid transporter (LAT1), P-glycoprotein 1 (P-GP), and nitric oxide synthase trafficker (NOSTRIN), were significantly higher in CN adults with white matter hyperintensities (WMHs) relative to those without.
Higher levels of all four proteins associated with lower cognitive function, irrespective of WMH burden.
Moreover, LAT1 and P-GP levels were inversely associated with MRI-detected global gray matter volumes, whereas GLUT1, LAT-1, and P-GP concentrations were significantly associated with systemic interleukin 6 levels.

Alzheimer's disease-associated microRNA cargo of blood-isolated EVs
MicroRNAs (or miRs) are endogenous, short (≈22 ribonucleotide), noncoding RNAs that can act as post-transcriptional regulators of gene expression.
They typically do so by interacting with ribonucleotides via complementary base-pairs located within the 3' untranslated region (3'-UTR) of target messenger RNAs (mRNAs).
A multitude of EVassociated miRs have been registered in open-access databases such as ExoCarta and Vesiclepedia.
To date, five studies have reported a total of 39 differentially expressed plasma-5 or serum-isolated
Twenty-two of the 39 EV-associated miRs are predicted to bind to one or more mRNAs of AD-associated genes, namely, APP, PSEN1, BACE1, and several of the top 10 genes in the AlzGene database (APOE, BIN1, CLU, ABCA7, CR1, PICALM, MS4A6A, CD33, MS4A4E, CD2AP) (see Table
Only three miRs, however, were reported by at least two studies and are as follows: downregulated expression of miR-193b
Reduction in miR-193b expression was greater in AD dementia compared to MCI.
miR-342-3p is highly expressed in the human brain,

BLOOD-ISOLATED BEV-BASED EVALUATION OF AD THERAPEUTICS
To date, two published clinical trials in MCI and/or AD dementia patients have reported blood-isolated BEV-based evaluation of drug treatment.
The first trial tackled brain insulin resistance, known to contribute to AD pathogenesis.
Several studies have reported that intranasal insulin is effective in improving or preserving cognition in MCI and early AD dementia patients.
In a 4-month, phase II randomized double-blind placebo-controlled trial of intranasal insulin administration, Mustapic et al.
Levels of IRS-1 that facilitate downstream signaling upon binding of insulin to its receptor were assessed.
Levels of other key downstream proteins were also assessed.
Upon completion of treatment, change from baseline in neuron-derived BEV-associated insulin-signaling molecules was associated with a change in cognition, suggesting engagement of the insulin cascade in the brain.
The authors further noted that neuron-derived BEV cargo proteins demonstrated good intra-subject stability over time (4 months) in the placebo group.
The second clinical trial evaluated the effect of somatotropin treatment.
Cognitive changes with age have been linked to decreased expression of somatotropins (eg, growth hormone-releasing hormone [GHRH]), and pathologically decreased levels may predispose to AD.
reover, 119 registered clinical trials (clinicaltrials.gov,
searched May 31, 2019) mention EVs (primarily exosomes) in their description, highlighting the rising popularity of EV-based measurements in trial settings.
Although the majority of these trials target cancer, 16 target AD risk factors, such as heart-brain axis conditions (eg, ischemic stroke, diabetes mellitus, and hypertension) and aging itself.
Two studies investigating AD include blood-isolated EV-based assessments in their outcome measures: NCT01811381 assessing "Curcumin and yoga therapy for those at risk for Alzheimer's disease," and NCT03275363 reporting on the "The University of Hong Kong Neurocognitive Disorder Cohort."
Bidirectional BBB crossings by EVs facilitate the ferrying of biologically active molecules between the brain and the body.
Therefore, in addition to the monitoring of therapeutic effects, EVs (including BEVs) can be used as a drug delivery system to the brain.
Although not a focus of this review, studies assessing EV-based therapeutics are being carried out in animal models of AD, and might open a new horizon for therapeutic strategies in AD patients.

CONCLUSIONS
We comprehensively reviewed the published literature on the biomarker potential of blood-isolated EVs, in particular BEVs, in AD patients.
Given the relative newness of the BEV field in AD we also provided an overview of BEV isolation and validation methods that adhere to the ISEV guidelines and discussed how these methods variably balance recovery and specificity of EVs and BEVs.
In fact, it is crucial that each EV/BEV preparation be validated for quality before they are explored for AD-associated markers.
To date, neuron-derived, neural precursor cell-derived and astrocyte-derived BEVs in blood have been assessed for their biomarker potential in AD patients.
The majority of studies have been performed by a single group (or in collaboration with a member of the group) using relatively similar protocols.
Neuron-derived BEVs have been the most intensely investigated, with the majority of studies interrogating levels of A42 and tau (hallmark AD proteins), and synaptic proteins.
Elevated A42 levels in blood-isolated neuron-derived BEVs have been consistently reported in AD dementia and MCI patients, with one study further reporting elevated A42 levels early in the course of the disease (preclinical timepoints) and its continued increase with disease progression.
Although additional studies using larger sample sizes are needed, these findings indicate that A42 levels in neuron-derived BEVs have the potential to be used as a blood-based biomarker for early detection and maybe even disease progression in AD.
On the other hand, tau levels in blood-isolated neuron-derived BEVs in AD were reported increased by some studies but not others.
This lack of consensus might stem in part from the choice of tau fragments interrogated and to the limited sensitivity of certain assays employed.
Neither A42 nor tau levels were elevated in blood-isolated astrocyte-derived BEVs of AD dementia and MCI patients (relative to CN), although elevated levels of two proteins in A-generating pathway (BACE-1, APP) were reported.
Levels of A42 and tau were not interrogated in neural precursor cell-derived BEVs.
With regard to synaptic proteins, although several were assessed in neuron-derived BEVs, only five were assessed in two or more studies.
Of these, GAP43
showed some potential as a marker of AD progression.
In summary, we note that blood-isolated BEVs have emerged as a novel player in the study of AD, with enormous potential as a bloodbased biomarker.
They are starting to be used to evaluate target engagement in AD drug trials and are also being evaluated on their ability to cross the BBB and deliver drugs to the brain (the latter in animal models of AD, currently).
However, the field is still in its early stages, and much work remains to be done (larger sample sizes, independent replication, protocol standardization, and so on) before BEV proteins (or other cargo such as miRs) with reported biomarker potential can be applied clinically at the individual level.
Future work should aim to establish normative ranges for levels of BEV proteins with biomarker potential, and work to derive cutoffs indicating pathology that may eventually find clinical applications.
In addition to neurons, studies are also needed on BEVs derived from other brain components affected early in AD, such as the cerebrovasculature, which currently lacks blood-isolated BEV-based investigations in AD patients.
Such studies, will allow, for example, the development of BEV cargo proteins panel(s)
that better captures the key features of the complex, multifactorial pathology of AD, and make for more sensitive blood-based biomarkers.


Alzheimer's Dement.
2020;12:e12001.
c ○ 2020 the Alzheimer's Association



1 .
Quantification of EVs 1.1 Volume of plasma □ Plasma volume used to isolate EVs 1.2 Global quantification (check at least two methods) □ Particle number per volume of plasma (eg, nanoparticle tracking analysis) □ Protein amount per volume of plasma (eg, global protein stain on sodium dodecyl sulfate -polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis [SDS-PAGE]) □ Others as defined in MISEV2018 1.3 Ratio of the two global quantification values □ Calculate ratio (provides purity metrics) 2. Global characterization of EVs-by their protein composition 2.1 Transmembrane/Glycosylphosphatidylinositol-anchored protein localized on the plasma membrane (presence demonstrates the lipid-bilayer structure specific of EVs, check at least one) Non-tissue specific (applies to all EVs) □ Tetraspanins (eg, CD63, CD81, CD82) □ Major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I □ Integrins □ Others as defined in MISEV2018 Cell/tissue-specific proteins □ Cell/tissue-specific tetraspanins (eg, CD37, CD53) □ BEV-specific proteins (can be specific for neurons, astrocytes, etc) □ Others as defined in MISEV2018 2.2 Cytosolic protein with membrane-binding or -association capacity (demonstrates presence of lipid bilayer enclosed material, check at least one) □ Endosomal sorting complexes required for transport (ESCRT)-I, II, III protein complexes □ ALIX protein (programmed cell death 6-interacting protein, PDCD6IP) □ Flotillins, caveolins □ Heat shock proteins (HSPA8, HSP90AB1, HSPA1A) □ Others as defined in MISEV2018 2.3 Depletion of abundant serum protein contaminants-negative markers (to assess the degree of purity of the EV preparation, check at least one) □ Albumin □ Apolipoprotein APOB, APOA1, APOA2 2.4 [OPTIONAL] Proteins other than plasma membrane or endosome (for proteins localized in/on subcellular compartments, check only if applicable) □ Histones (nucleus) □ Mitochondria (cytochrome C1) □ Endoplasmic reticulum, Golgi (calnexin) □ Others as defined in MISEV2018 2.5 [OPTIONAL] EV-bound secreted proteins (check only if applicable) □ Cytokines, growth factors, extracellular matrix proteins □ Others as defined in MISEV2018 3. Single EV analysis 3.1 Image-based analysis of single EVs by wide-field and close-up (check at least one) □ Electron microscopy □ Scanning probe microscopy □ Super-resolution fluorescence microscopy □ Others as defined in MISEV2018 3.2 Non-image-based method analyzing large numbers of single EVs (check at least one) □ Nanoparticle tracking analysis (NTA) □ High-resolution flow cytometry □ Multi-angle light-scattering □ Others as defined in MISEV2018 Protein-based biomarkers are also attractive because they are stable and less prone to contamination compared to RNA-based biomarkers, and can be transferred to ligand-based assays for clinical testing.
Although western blotting and other immuno-based methods (eg, immunocyto/histochemistry) can be used to identify and validate one protein marker at a time from a known list of markers, MS-based proteomics methods are ideal for discovery of novel protein biomarkers (Figure 2).


15fferentially expressed EV-associated miRs in AD phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN) is predicted to affect tau phosphorylation and aggregation.59Blood-isolatedEV-associatedmiRshave
been reported to aid early diagnosis in AD, as well as to discriminate between dementia conditions.Using multivariate logistic regression, Yang et al.15demonstrated that a combination of three miRs (135a, 193b, and 384) known to modulate amyloidosis by regulating the expression of APP and/or BACE-1, proved better for early AD diagnosis (MCI), than each miR alone.
and 6, tumor necrosis factor , and C-reactive protein.Overall, differentially expressed miRs in blood-isolated EVs have the potential to provide additional insights into AD mechanisms and aid early diagnosis.
It should be noted, however, that the five studies discussed above did not separate the EVs based on cellular source (eg,