Proteomic signatures of neuroinflammation in Alzheimer’s disease, multiple sclerosis and ischemic stroke
Inflammation is integral in the neuropathology of both chronic and acute neurological disorders.
Knowing the inflammatory profile is important for clarification of disease mechanisms, diagnostic purposes, and ultimately treatment options.
Areas covered: A systematic review was performed on literature from PubMed using the search terms "Alzheimer's disease" (AD) or "multiple sclerosis" (MS) or "ischemic stroke" and "proteomics".
Inflammatory proteins were assessed in blood, cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), and postmortem brain tissue.
Regulated inflammatory proteins across compartments and disorders mainly consisted of innate immune proteins, acute phase proteins and oxidative stress response proteins.
In addition, immunoglobulin chains were signature proteins of MS, reflecting additional involvement of adaptive immunity.
The Chitinase 3-like protein 1 was increased in ten original articles on MS and in three on AD supporting its implication in these diseases.
Furthermore, CNS/CSF AD inflammatory proteins were matched to a CNS myeloid cell proteome implicating Alpha-2-Macroglobulin and Annexin A1 in AD pathogenesis.
Proteomics is an excellent technique for profiling inflammatory proteins in tissues and cells, but still targeted approaches are required for profiling of very low abundance proteins and peptides.
Knowing the inflammatory signature of brain tissue, CSF, blood, and CNS myeloid cells holds the potential to point to novel mechanistic aspects of neurological diseases.

Article highlights
• Neuroinflammation is an integral part of the pathology of Alzheimer's disease (AD), multiple sclerosis (MS), and ischemic stroke.
• A unique presence of immunoglobulin chains in CSF in MS reflects the involvement of adaptive immunity.
• Increased levels of CHI3L1 in CSF of MS and AD likely reflect astrocyte involvement.
• The risk genes A2M, CHGA, CLU, and SIRT2 was increased in AD CSF
• A2M was increased across compartments in AD and in disease-associated CNS myeloid cells from APP swe /PS1 E9 mice.
• Cytokines and chemokines are underrepresented in mass spectrometry-based original articles due to their small size and low abundance.
• Proteomics studies of blood and CSF is complicated by a large dynamic concentration range of proteins in these compartments.
• The post-mortem interval influences the proteomics outcome when analyzing brains from deceased human subjects.
• A high biological variability when working with human samples emphasizes the need for larger cohorts and standardized reference proteomes.
• Merging information about signature proteins of CNS tissues and cells holds great potential in identifying novel mechanistic aspects of AD, MS, and ischemic stroke.
A c c e p t e d M a n u s c r i p t

Introduction
The immune system is essential for survival during infection or injury as well as for the maintenance of tissue homeostasis under harmful conditions
Despite the beneficial effects of an immune -or inflammatory -response it comes at the cost of a decline in tissue function, which is most often transient but can become chronic and contribute to disease progression.
Inflammation is an integral part of the neuropathology of chronic and acute central nervous system (CNS) disorders, such as Alzheimer's disease (AD) and ischemic stroke, and is in the case of multiple sclerosis (MS) the cause of disease.
Although inherently different, the inflammatory responses in AD and IS are mainly those of the innate immune system.
In AD, the specialized CNS tissue macrophages, the microglia, are the main drivers of the inflammatory response
while in ischemic stroke it is characterized by activated microglia as well as infiltrating, bloodderived macrophages and polymorphonuclear leukocytes
In comparison, the inflammatory response in MS is orchestrated by infiltrating autoreactive lymphocytes, which in combination with co-migrating, blood-derived macrophages and activated microglia form inflammatory foci, especially in the white matter tracts of the CNS
While microglia were traditionally thought to aggravate neuropathology, there is increasing evidence that these cells are homeostatic cells that also have protective functions in the diseased CNS.
Such functions involve controlling cell and tissue damage through phagocytosis, complement and cytokine/chemokine pathways to maintain or bring back the CNS to its homeostatic state
However, while this may be so in acute disorders, such as ischemic stroke
Interestingly, in mouse models of AD and MS, microglia have been shown to segregate into specific disease-associated phenotypes characterized by the expression of specific genes
Importantly, it appears that microglia also segregates into specific disease-associated phenotypes in the diseased human CNS
This makes it highly relevant to know the inflammatory protein profile of AD, MS and ischemic stroke, both at a cellular and tissue level, to understand disease mechanisms and thereby also for the development of new treatment options.
Additionally, knowing whether and how the inflammatory CNS tissue and cell protein signature is mirrored in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and blood, which are more easily accessible compared to CNS tissue, can be important for early diagnosis, and monitoring of treatment efficacy.

Alzheimer's disease, multiple sclerosis, and ischemic stroke
AD is the main cause of dementia in the elderly
The neuropathological hallmarks of AD include the deposition of misfolded amyloid beta (Aβ) in plaques and hyperphosphorylated tau in A c c e p t e d M a n u s c r i p t 5 Information Classification: General neurofibrillary tangles, neuroinflammation, and synaptic and neuronal degeneration, leading to brain atrophy
Neuroinflammation visualized by the PET-ligand PK11195 is observed not only in AD cases but also in people with mild cognitive impairment (MCI)
The majority of AD cases (95%) are sporadic or late-onset AD (LOAD), which is considered to be due to reduced clearance of Aβ from the neural tissue into the CSF
In comparison, the rare cases of familial or early-onset AD which are caused by mutations in the amyloid precursor protein (APP) or the presenilin (PS1) genes, leading to an overproduction of Aβ
Next to age, the major risk factor of LOAD is to be a carrier of the isoform 4 of apolipoprotein E gene (ApoE), which functions in cholesterol transport, followed by single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the microglial-expressed triggering receptor myeloid 2 (TREM2)
MS typically has its onset in young adulthood and is the leading cause of neurological disease in young people.
The disease course can be relapsing-remitting or progressive
MS symptoms are heterogeneous correlating with the spatiotemporal dissemination of the MS lesions in the CNS
Patients with progressive MS may also experience cognitive deficits due to the disease spreading to the cerebral cortex.
MS lesions can be classified according to the presence/absence and distribution of macrophages and activated microglia (inflammatory activity) and ongoing demyelination (demyelinating activity)
MS lesions also contain immunoglobulins, which may either be attributed to intrathecal production or breakdown of the blood-brain brain (BBB).
The major histocompatibility complex confers the individual major risk for developing MS
As observed in AD, SNPs increasing the risk of developing MS have been identified in a wide range of immune genes, including chemokine and cytokine receptors
Ischemic stroke is a leading cause of death and permanent disability among the elderly
The majority of ischemic stroke incidents are caused by thromboembolic occlusion of a major cerebral artery, leading to ischemic infarction within minutes unless reperfusion is re-established
Outside the infarct core, where the brain tissue remains perfused by collaterals, the survival of the neurons is threatened due to uncontrollable release of excitatory neurotransmitters from dying neurons and of free radicals and inflammatory molecules.
The first immune cells to sense an ischemic stroke are the microglia, which increase their expression of cytokines such as interleukin-1β (IL-1β), thereby exacerbating the ischemic damage, but also of the neuro-protective IL-1 receptor antagonist (IL1RN)
Along with infiltrating macrophages, which remain in the infarcted tissue for weeks to months after a stroke, the microglia perform phagocytic functions and thereby contribute to the resolution of the infarct
Polymorphonuclear leukocytes infiltrate acutely and are only transiently present after an ischemic stroke
Although, the inflammatory response contributes to restore tissue homeostasis, which is beneficial, it clearly also has the potential to increase the ischemic damage
The extent by which disease processes in the CNS tissue is mirrored in the blood and CSF is largely determined by the barrier systems of the CNS including the BBB, the blood-CSF barrier and the CNS-CSF barrier (Fig.
The BBB restricts the exchange of molecules between blood and CNS in both directions whereas the blood-CSF barrier mainly restricts transport of molecules from the blood into the CSF.
In contrast, the CNS-CSF border that lines the inside of the ventricles consists of ependymal cells not connected by tight junctions
The physical properties of these barriers explain why CSF more accurately mirrors changes in the CNS milieu than blood

Considerations about sample composition and methodology
A major challenge in studying the CNS proteome in AD, MS, and ischemic stroke lies in the limited access to high-quality post-mortem CNS tissue.
Tissue quality is affected by post-mortem interval, tissue storage, pH
Since post-mortem brain tissue provides a reflection of the end-stage of the disease, additional critical factors are, in the case of AD and MS, the disease stage at the time of death, while the acuteness of ischemic stroke makes the time from stroke onset to tissue sampling critical.
Obviously, the choice of brain region relative to the site of pathology is critical for all three disorders.
A challenge of studying plasma is the complex protein profile consisting of what can be considered pure plasma proteins that are secreted from the liver or intestines in high concentrations, immunoglobulins, and proteins leaked from other tissues
Under normal circumstances, the plasma proteome has a large dynamic range with the albumin concentration being up to 10-12-fold higher than the rarest proteins, including proteins secreted or leaked from the CNS
Due to proteomics workflows that combine antibody-depletion steps of both high and medium abundant proteins as well as extensive sample fractionation steps, it is now possible to identify thousands of proteins in plasma, but the reproducibility still presents technical difficulties
Although CSF has insignificant amounts of plasma proteins compared to blood, the albumin concentration is still nine-fold higher than the lowest abundant protein
Furthermore, CSF is A c c e p t e d M a n u s c r i p t
Information Classification: General cleared of metabolites up to four times daily
Several CSF proteomes have been published, where most have used antibody-depletion of high abundant proteins (albumin and immunoglobulin), twodimensional gel separation, and then mass spectrometry resulting in the identification of hundreds of proteins
More recently, gel-free methods employing LC-MS/MS strategies have substantially increased the number of identified proteins to above 3000 in pools of CSF from healthy subjects
Here, we performed a systematic literature review of the proteome in blood, CSF, and CNS tissue from AD, MS, and ischemic stroke patients that were obtained by use of proteomics methods.
The reason for selecting these disorders was to better understand the underlying disease mechanisms, by extracting the key inflammatory proteins that are consistently increased or decreased within and between these diseases.
The reason for focusing on proteomics methods was that they might highlight a different set of inflammatory proteins than identified when using the targeted, antibodybased approaches, which, amongst others, are used for detection of cytokines and chemokines.
Original articles that met the inclusion criteria were used to extract protein data, and proteins that could be designated 'regulated' and 'inflammatory proteins' were selected, thereby defining the inflammatory proteome signature across AD, MS and ischemic stroke.

Text box 1. Proteome and inflammation definition
The proteome refers to the total protein complement resulting from a genome at a given time
In contrast to the genome, the proteome is dynamic, and the protein expression varies between different cell and tissue types as well as being affected by external factors including environment, disease status, diet, and drugs
Further enhancing the complexity, and making the proteome highly dynamic, is the occurrence of posttranslational modifications (PTMs), such as glycosylations and phosphorylations, that provides an extra layer of protein regulation
Due to its dynamic nature, the protein profile/proteome of a biological compartment may be used for disease diagnostics.
Inflammation is a cellular response to a harmful stimulus and involves immune cells and inflammatory mediators.
Here we refer to inflammation as a process initiated by a trigger (not necessarily known), which induces cells to produce inflammatory proteins eliciting a response in protein production from the surrounding cells.
Thus inflammatory proteins both include the "classic" inflammatory mediators such as cytokines and chemokines, immunoglobulins, and acute phase proteins and proteins changing in response to these.

Methods
A systematic literature review was performed following the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analysis (PRISMA) guidelines
Our inclusion criteria were English peer-reviewed original articles that used proteomics methodologies to quantitatively study protein levels in blood, CSF, or brain tissue from AD, MS, and ischemic stroke patients relative to healthy subjects.
The inclusion criterion of a healthy control group was used to obtain a better reflection of disease-associated changes in the proteome.
Proteomics methods include quantitative mass spectrometry techniques (label-free or applying isobaric labels), targeted mass spectrometry and gel-based methods.
A PubMed (
MeSH (Medical Subject Headings) database search was performed using the MeSH search terms "Alzheimer's disease" or "multiple sclerosis" or "stroke" and "proteomics" to find original articles on proteomics experiments performed on blood, CSF, or brain tissue samples from AD, MS, and ischemic stroke patients compared to healthy subjects.
General inclusion criteria were that original articles on CSF, blood, or brain tissue, should contain quantitative protein data collected by the use of proteomics methods, should compare diseased versus healthy human samples, and should be original articles.
Disease-specific inclusion criteria were that AD should be LOAD or MCI; MS should be relapsing/remitting MS or progressive MS; and stroke should be ischemic stroke.
The PubMed search resulted in a list of original articles published between 2004 and 2018, with the last search being performed in December 2018 (Fig.
All original articles were screened, and proteins that were identified as regulated in diseased versus healthy human samples (using the authors' chosen statistical tests in the individual papers) were extracted, and the protein names were converted to UniProt accession numbers for comparison.
Proteins were only designated 'regulated' if they were either found up-or downregulated in the published proteins profiles in two or more original articles.
Using the Venny v.2.1 software (
The DAVID v.6.8 (
database was used to analyze regulated proteins based on Gene Ontology (GO) terms and enrichment of Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathways for their involvement in innate and adaptive immunity.

Results
A total of 459 AD articles, 173 MS articles, and 139 ischemic stroke articles were collected during the initial search.
Excluding reviews, articles using animal models, and articles not using proteomics methods, we screened 80 AD, 51 MS, and 35 ischemic stroke original articles against the inclusion criteria where after additional 47 AD, 21 MS, and 21 ischemic stroke articles were excluded.
Most of the excluded articles either had no quantitative protein data or no healthy control group.
We thereby included 33 AD, 30 MS, and 14 ischemic stroke original articles for data extraction (Fig.
As the earliest published article meeting the inclusion criteria was published in 2004, this review considers original articles published over a 14-year period from 2004 to December 2018.
This review only reports on the proteins that were designated 'regulated' and 'inflammatory proteins', and listed in Table
All other regulated proteins are listed in Suppl.
Table

The inflammatory blood protein profile in AD, MS, and ischemic stroke
Using our search criteria, we were able to extract blood proteome data from ten original articles on AD patients, ten original articles on MS patients and ten original articles on ischemic stroke patients (Suppl.
Table
We extracted proteins that were related to inflammatory reactions, response to reactive oxygen species (ROS) and innate/adaptive immune-regulating pathways, referred to as inflammatory proteins.
Within these original articles, four inflammatory proteins were regulated in AD compared to healthy subjects in two or more original articles (Table
Table
Alpha-2-macroglobulin (A2M), immunoglobulin heavy constant mu (IGM) and gelsolin (GSN) were increased and complement factor B (CFB) was decreased in AD.
In the case of MS, no inflammatory proteins were regulated in two or more original articles (Table
Table
Increased inflammatory proteins in ischemic stroke included the C-reactive protein (CRP), complement factor H (CFH), the astrocytic protein S-100Beta (S100B) and serum amyloid A-1 protein (SAA1) as well as the blood proteins coagulation factor IX (F9), fibrinogen alpha chain (FGA) and beta chain (FGB), alpha-1-antichymotrypsin (SERPINA3) and heparin cofactor 2 (SERPIND1) (Table
In addition, the cytokine interleukin-6 (IL6) was increased in ischemic stroke across several original articles.
(For full list of regulated proteins, see Table
Table
Inflammatory proteins found decreased included complement 4B (C4B), hemopexin (HPX), lactotransferrin (LTF) and E-selectin (SELE).
Matching regulated blood proteins between diseases, no inflammatory proteins were shared between AD and ischemic stroke.

The inflammatory CSF protein profile in AD, MS, and ischemic stroke
Using our search criteria, we were able to extract CSF data from 11 original articles on AD patients, 17 original articles on MS patients, and one original article on ischemic stroke patients (Suppl.
Table
From these original articles, we identified 12 inflammatory proteins that were regulated in CSF samples from AD cases compared to cognitively healthy controls.
From these only kininogen-1 (KNG) was decreased whereas 11 inflammatory proteins were increased including A2M, CD44 antigen (CD44), C4B, chitinase-3-like protein (CHI3L1), haptoglobin (HP), histidine-rich glycoprotein (HRG), osteopontin (SPP1) and integral membrane protein 2 (ITM2B) (Table
The articles on MS identified 29 regulated inflammatory proteins compared to control cases (Table
From these mainly immunoglobulin chains were found increased in MS (IGHG1, IGHV3-13, IGHM, IGKC, IGKV1-5, IGKV3-11, IGKV3-20, IGKV4-1, IGLC1, IGLC2, IGLL5) but also beta-2 microglobulin (B2M), complement 1Q (C1Q), complement 1R (C1R), and CHI3L1 were increased in MS.
Inflammatory proteins found decreased in MS included amyloid precursor protein (APP), neurosecretory protein VGF (VGF), GSN and alpha-1 acid glycoprotein 1 (ORM1) (Table
Analyzing original articles on CSF samples from ischemic stroke patients showed that no inflammatory proteins were regulated consistently in two or more articles, reflecting the low number of original articles performed on CSF from this patient group.
After matching the regulated proteins in CSF samples from patients with AD and MS, only the CHI3L1 protein was shared and found in increased levels in one-third and one-tenth of articles on MS and AD, respectively.

The inflammatory protein profile of brain tissue in AD, MS, and ischemic stroke
Post-mortem brain tissue enables detection of end-stage protein changes caused by disease.
We were able to include 14 original articles using proteomics to study tissue samples from AD patients and cognitively healthy controls, three original articles on MS patients, and three original articles on ischemic stroke (Suppl.
Table
Combining the datasets from these articles resulted in 49 inflammatory proteins in AD compared to cognitively healthy controls (Table
Enriched GOterms of these inflammatory proteins included, besides the previously mentioned categories in Table
Inflammatory proteins found increased in AD included the innate immune response proteins annexin a1 (ANXA1), APP, chromogranin-A (CHGA), clusterin (CLU), NAD-dependent protein deacetylase sirtuin-2 (SIRT2) and GSN.
Increased inflammatory proteins involved in ROS response included catalase (CAT), glutathione s-transferase P (GSTP1) and peroxiredoxin 2 and 6 (PRDX2, PRDX6).
Inflammatory proteins found decreased in AD included the phagocytosis proteins actin-related protein 2/3 complex subunit 1a (ARPC1A), cell division control protein 42 homolog (CDC42), serine/threonine-protein kinase PAK 1 (PAK1), A c c e p t e d M a n u s c r i p t 11 Information Classification: General phosphatidylinositol 4-phosphate 5-kinase type-1 gamma (PIP5K1C) and protein kinase C gamma type (PRKCG).
In addition, proteins related to antigen presentation were decreased in AD including AP-2 complex subunit alpha-1 (AP2A1), AP-3 complex subunit delta-1 (AP3D1) and AP-2 complex subunit mu (AP2M1).
Analyzing the datasets on MS and ischemic stroke resulted in 0 regulated inflammatory proteins, reflecting that only a few original articles have been published comparing healthy to diseased brain tissue in MS and ischemic stroke (Table
Table

Overlap of protein profiles between blood, CSF, and brain tissue and between diseases
Regulated inflammatory proteins from brain, blood, and CSF from AD patients were matched to identify proteins regulated in all three compartments.
This showed that A2M was increased in all biological compartments.
Additionally, GSN was increased in blood and brain samples from AD patients.
No inflammatory proteins were found shared between compartments when analyzing MS and ischemic stroke datasets.
Analyzing inflammatory proteins across the three diseases we found that CHI3L1 was increased in some AD and one-third of MS CSF samples.

The AD CNS and CSF proteome matched to a CNS myeloid cell proteome
The consistently regulated CNS and CSF proteomes from AD patients were matched to a CNS myeloid cell proteome recently published by our group
Here we found that the CNS/CSF proteins A2M, APP, CLU, SERPINC1, ANXA1, GSN, GSTP1, PKM, PRDX2, PRDX6, reticulon-3 (RTN3) and CAT were also identified in murine CNS myeloid cells and that APP, CLU, SERPINC1, A2M and ANXA1 were also regulated in the CNS myeloid cells isolated from the APP swe /PS1 E9 transgenic mouse model of AD

Discussion
With the aim to define the inflammatory protein profile of AD, MS, and ischemic stroke, we have systematically reviewed the proteomics literature on blood, CSF, and brain tissue for these three diseases.
From the proteins that could be designated regulated proteins we extracted the inflammatory proteins based on their GO-terms.
The inflammatory proteins in AD consisted, amongst others of the acute phase proteins A2M, proteins involved in innate immune responses including ANXA1 and 5, C4B as well as the oxidative stress proteins PRDX2 and PRDX6, emphasizing the involvement of innate immunity in the CNS, but also systemically, as well as increased oxidative stress in AD.
In comparison, the predominant group of inflammatory proteins in the CSF of MS cases comprised mainly immunoglobulin chains reflecting the additional involvement of adaptive immunity in MS.
Finally, a comparison of the brain tissue and CSF

A c c e p t e d M a n u s c r i p t
Information Classification: General proteome with the CNS myeloid cell proteome in the APP swe /PS1 E9 mouse model of AD suggested that microglia could be an important contributor to the increased protein levels of CLU, A2M and ANXA1 in AD.

Considerations regarding proteomics profiling in neurological diseases
We found that the majority of the proteomics original articles were performed in blood, CSF, or brain tissue collected from patients with AD (n=8/11/14, respectively) or MS (n=10/17/3, respectively).
The fewest proteomics original articles were performed on ischemic stroke samples (n=10/1/3, respectively).
The inflammatory protein profiles in CSF and brain was therefore mainly described for AD and MS, where CSF analysis is part of the routine diagnostic procedure, in contrast to the diagnosis of ischemic stroke.
In addition, the proteomic methods used in the most recent articles have the highest sensitivity, partly due to advancements in instrument sensitivity and scan speed as well as improvements in methods which includes moving from gel-based to liquid chromatography peptide separation approaches, thereby resulting in more protein identifications
To increase the strength of our analysis, only proteins increased or decreased in two or more original articles were designated 'regulated' and included.
This resulted in almost no overlap in regulated inflammatory proteins between diseases and across biological compartments.
For both AD and MS, a number of proteins regulated in CSF could be described as blood-specific proteins (such as coagulation factors, HP, HPX, KNG1, ORM1), indicating that blood contamination during CSF collection could be an issue although the method sections of the original articles contained information about cell numbers, protein content, color, and turbidity.
Sample collection should thus be performed with care, and the blood proteins regulated in CSF should be further validated.
Other factors complicating the study of protein profiles in AD, MS, and ischemic stroke, are the heterogeneity of each of these diseases (e.g.
MCI or LOAD, relapsing/remitting or progressive MS, and embolic or thrombotic ischemic stroke) and the influence of the sampling approach (outlined in 3.2), which also applies to the different cohorts of non-diseased controls
In this review, we included all original articles meeting the inclusion criteria, and we did not stratify for e.g.
age, sex, brain region, type or stage of disease, or comorbidities (e.g.
cardiovascular disease in ischemic stroke).
Together with the fact that proteomics data have high dimensionality, meaning that the number of features measured per subject vastly exceeds the number of subjects studied, which increases the biological variation and the likelihood of outliers.
The way to increase reproducibility, and thereby strengthen human proteomics original articles, is to increase the number of subjects studied

Inflammatory proteins of AD, MS, and IS

Alzheimer's disease
Inflammatory proteins found regulated in brain tissue and in CSF samples from AD patients included the A2M protein, which is an acute phase plasma protein that functions as a pan-protease with chaperone activities
Based on RNA sequencing data (
A2M is mainly produced by microglia/macrophages and endothelial cells and is known to be able to bind Aβ and accumulate in Aβ plaques
Variations in the A2M gene have in several original articles been associated with an increased risk of developing AD, although consensus has not yet been reached
Recently, an association between serum concentration of A2M and CSF markers of neuronal injury was reported in preclinical AD, thereby suggesting serum A2M as a predictor of the development of AD
If confirmed through larger studies, this might allow for A2M to be used as a biomarker in AD prevention.
Proteins involved in the innate immune system response, found uniquely regulated in the AD brain, included among other ANXA1 and ANXA5.
Annexins are a family of calcium dependent phospholipid-binding proteins that have anti-inflammatory properties.
Under normal conditions, macrophages, including microglia, constitutively express ANXA1 and upon cell "activation" ANXA1 is mobilized to the cell membrane and secreted
In the human brain, ANXA1 has been localized to microglia clustering at Aβ sites
In addition, ANXA1 has been suggested to play a role in the maintenance of the BBB integrity by co-localizing to actin-filaments present at tight junctions
Thus the increased expression of ANXA1 could be a response to the chronic inflammation present in AD and possibly to a compromised BBB integrity in AD.
The function of ANXA5 is less well studied but has been investigated for its biomarker ability in discriminating between AD and dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) as well as cognitively healthy controls
ANXA5 was increased in sera from AD and DLB compared to controls, but could not distinguish AD and DLB.
In addition, ANXA5 is used as a marker of cellular apoptosis using flow cytometry.
Here ANXA5 binds to phosphatidylserine which is aberrantly exposed on the outer surface of plasma membrane of apoptotic cells
Additional proteins found regulated in AD included complement protein C4B, CFB and an activator of the complement system, SERPINA1.
Evidence for the involvement of the complement system in AD consists of the accumulation of complement proteins in Aβ plaques
Complement proteins can be produced locally in the brain by glial cells and neurons, or enter the neural tissue across a leaky BBB
SERPINA1 is a serine protease inhibitor that mainly inhibits the chymotrypsin family.
It is considered an acute phase A c c e p t e d M a n u s c r i p t 14 Information Classification: General protein involved in immunity and inflammation
Despite its functions as an acute phase protein, SERPINA1 has been investigated with regard to its anti-inflammatory effect on primary microglia
SERINA1 treatment reduced the inflammatory profile of LPS treated primary microglia and reduced the Aβ 42 uptake by the microglia
The ITM2B protein (also known as BRI2) was increased in CSF from AD patients and mutations in this gene is known to cause familial forms of dementia including British and Danish dementia
The ITM2B protein is suggested to regulate the processing of APP by binding and thereby blocking cleavage sites of the secretases involved in generating Aβ 42 peptides, thereby protecting APP from amyloidogenic processing
Its increased expression in AD could be a damage response or an attempt to hinder further APP processing.

Multiple sclerosis
Most original articles on MS are performed on CSF samples, where especially immunoglobulin chains were found in increased levels in MS patients (IGHG1, IGHV3-13, IHGM, IGKC, IGKV3-11, IGKV4-1, IGKV1-5, IGKV3-20, IGLC1, IGLC2, IGLL5) emphasizing MS as an immune-mediated disease involving adaptive immunity, with immunoglobulin chains and immunoglobulin receptors present in CSF.
Inflammatory molecules found increased in MS CSF included ANG, B2M, CHI3L1, C1Q and C1R.
The B2M protein is a component of the class I major histocompatibility complex (MHC) and is thereby involved in the presentation of peptide antigens to the immune system.
It is primarily expressed on lymphocytes and macrophages and used as a marker of an activation of the cellular immune system
Interestingly, also the C1Q and the C1R proteins, the first step of classical complement system activation, were consistently increased in CSF reflecting the involvement of the complement system in MS pathology.
The complement system is known to be involved in MS as visualized by deposition of complement proteins in white and grey matter lesions
CHI3L1, also known as YKL40, is produced by microglia, macrophages, neutrophils and astrocytes in the inflamed CNS
CHI3L1 has been shown to predict development of cognitive and physical disability in MS
CHI3L1 was in our review found increased in ten original articles on CSF samples all from RRMS patients or patients with clinically isolated syndrome shown to convert into RRMS, strengthening the implication of CHI3L1 in disease mechanisms of RRMS as well as its possible use as a diagnostic/prognostic marker.

Ischemic stroke
Most original articles in ischemic stroke are performed on blood samples, and many of the uniquely regulated proteins were involved in blood coagulation processes (Table
As serine proteases are important in the coagulation process, the identification of regulated serpins (serine protease inhibitors) is interesting, both from diagnostic and therapeutic points of view
In addition, two acute phase proteins CRP and SAA1 were increased across original articles.
Both CRP and SAA1 expression is increased dramatically during inflammation and are used as measures of a multitude of inflammatory conditions.
Both proteins seem to partially depend on the IL6 secretion by macrophages and T-cells
Here, as one of the only cytokines observed with mass spectrometry techniques in this review, IL6 was found increased across studies.
IL6 has earlier been suggested to correlate with the severity and clinical outcome of ischemic stroke, additionally serving as a potential therapeutic target

Cytokines and chemokines
Cytokines function as signaling molecules which via auto-and paracrine mechanisms activates pro-and anti-inflammatory pathways under both homeostatic and disease conditions
Over 300 bona fide cytokines are known with complex signaling networks, and several excellent reviews on the involvement of specific cytokines and cytokine networks already exist
In neurodegenerative diseases, such as AD, cytokines are in particular produced by CNS-resident cells such as microglia, whereas the cytokines in MS are mainly produced by infiltrating immune cells
Chemokines, another group of secreted signaling molecules with both pro-and antiinflammatory pathways, are constitutively expressed in the CNS by glial cells and neurons
Their expression can be increased under inflammatory conditions, where they can induce infiltration of peripheral immune cells such as macrophages and T-lymphocytes as seen in MS
In general, mass spectrometry-based proteomics has difficulties in identifying most cytokines and chemokines due to their small size
As predicted, this limitation also became clear during our review process, where only a small number of cytokines were identified in the proteomics literature reviewed.

Conclusion
In this review, we show that most proteomics original articles have been performed on samples from AD and MS patients, with the exception of the use of blood samples.
By extracting protein data from all included original articles, we identified very small overlap in protein profiles, consistent with the different pathophysiology of AD, MS and ischemic stroke.
This indicates the need for larger research cohorts to cope with the heterogeneity of the diseases as well as the high biological variation in humans.
Still, the review points to groups of signature proteins in AD, MS and ischemic stroke, likely involved in the pathophysiology of each of the diseases and with potential use in diagnostics or as therapeutic targets.

Expert opinion
A natural limitation of neuroproteomics articles is the limited availability of human brain tissue, except in the case of LOAD, in which patients die at an older age and post-mortem tissue likely reflects end-stage disease.
To try to overcome this issue, we reviewed the literature on inflammatory proteins/pathways affected across diseases and CNS compartments, including blood, CSF, and brain tissue.
The review of the neuroproteomics articles on AD demonstrates the strength of having access to larger numbers of samples from all three compartments.
This would allow prediction of proteins/pathways involved in the pathophysiology of AD that can be validated through studies of brain tissue samples and supported by functional studies (see below).
This type of information is important to propel studies aiming to understand the mechanism of disease progression, just as it raises the possibility to use specific proteins/pathways in CSF as biomarkers for disease stage and for monitoring treatment effects.
During the review process it became clear that reproducing findings of regulated proteins between original articles was an issue, probably reflecting technical differences as well as biological variation in disease and control cohorts.
Technical optimization (including sample preparation techniques and instrumental sensitivity)
To further increase method sensitivity, combining antibodies and mass spectrometry by the "Stable Isotope Standards with Capture by Anti-peptide Antibodies" (SISCAPA) method is advantageous for the analysis of small and low abundance proteins such as cytokines
In  In recent years, attention has been given to single-cell transcriptomics to identify specific diseaseassociated phenotypes of microglia in AD, MS, and ischemic stroke.
However, obtaining the proteome information from individual cells has proven to be a substantial technical challenge due to the pico-gram range of protein material in a single mammalian cell
With advancements of sample preparation methods for minimizing sample loss as well as increasing sensitivity of mass spectrometers, the single-cell proteomes are within our reach, expanding from the ability to determine the most abundant proteins
A plethora of transgenic animal models, human cell lines, and primary cells are available for the study of the CNS and its diseases.
Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) are also very promising and allow the study of specific genes in distinct cell types (such as microglia, oligodendrocytes, astroglia and neurons) and the formation of novel model systems such as brain organoids, modeling the complexity of the neural tissue.
Human iPSCs are already being used to investigate certain disease aspects and for large-scale drug testing.
An additional strength is that they can also be patient-derived and thereby provide a platform for the testing of therapeutic drugs on a specific human genetic background
Patient-derived iPSCs combined with CRISPR-CAS9 generation of isogenic controls improve the conditions for studying genetically based neurological diseases with mass spectrometry.
Approximately 500 ml CSF fluid is produced per day in the human.
Most of the CSF is produced by the choroid plexus in the ventricles and circulates via the ventricles to the subarachnoid space bathing the CNS; from here the CSF is re-absorbed to the venous sinuses or drained via dural and nasal lymphatics to the deep cervical lymph nodes.
CSF is also drained via lymphatics associated with nerve roots.
3) The CNS-CSF border is formed by the ependymal cells lining the inside of the ventricles.
Unlike the BBB and the blood-CSF barrier, the ependymal cells bordering the ventricles are not connected by tight junctions.
Therefore, a small amount of interstitial fluid (ISF) is continuously drained into the CSF, whereby the CSF to some extent reflects the extracellular environment of the brain.
In the human, the total ISF volume is 280 mL and the total CSF volume is 140 mL


addition, a reference proteome, based on healthy, non-diseased samples of different biological compartments/fluids, and how this change with age would be highly valuable for studies on disease mechanisms and for diagnostics.
Global collaborative projects like the Human Proteome Project (HPP) organized by the Human Proteome Organization (HUPO) and initiatives for open



A
c c e p t e d M a n u s c r i p tInformation Classification: General access to proteomics raw data through public databases like the PRIDE archive



Fig. 1 .
Fig.1.
The CNS is physically guarded by three barriers: 1) The blood-CNS or blood-brain barrier (BBB) restricts transport of molecules (and cells) between the blood and the neural tissue.
2) The blood-CSF barrier restricts transport of molecules (and cells) from blood into the CSF.
Approximately 500 ml CSF fluid is produced per day in the human.
Most of the CSF is produced by the choroid plexus in the ventricles and circulates via the ventricles to the subarachnoid space bathing the CNS; from here the CSF is re-absorbed to the venous sinuses or drained via dural and nasal lymphatics to the deep cervical lymph nodes.
CSF is also drained via lymphatics associated with nerve roots.
3) The CNS-CSF border is formed by the ependymal cells lining the inside of the ventricles.
Unlike the BBB and the blood-CSF barrier, the ependymal cells bordering the ventricles are not connected by tight junctions.
Therefore, a small amount of interstitial fluid (ISF) is continuously drained into the CSF, whereby the CSF to some extent reflects the extracellular environment of the brain.
In the human, the total ISF volume is 280 mL and the total CSF volume is 140 mL



Fig 2 :
Fig 2: Overview of the literature screening process using PubMed to search using the MeSH terms "Alzheimer's Disease" or "Multiple sclerosis" or "Ischemic stroke" and "proteomics".
Papers were limited to original research (OR) articles in English with available quantitative proteomics data performed on blood, CSF or CNS tissue from humans.



Fig 1 A
Fig 1



Fig 2
Fig 2



Table 2 : Publications on Alzheimer's disease (AD)



Table 3 : Publications on multiple sclerosis (MS)



Table 4 : Publications on ischemic stroke



Table 1 .
Regulated inflammatory proteins.