Amyloid-β-independent regulators of tau pathology in Alzheimer disease
Alzheimer disease (AD) pathology is characterized by cerebral plaques containing aggregates of various amyloid-β (Aβ) peptides derived from amyloid precursor protein (APP), as well as by neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs) containing hyperphosphorylated and aggregated tau.
No approved drugs can either revert or arrest the progression of AD.
The amyloid-cascade hypothesis has, since its introduction in 1991 (refs 1,2  ), provided the dominant framework for understanding the pathogenesis of AD.
The foundation of this hypothesis was the discovery of autosomal dominant mutations in three genes -APP, PSEN1 and PSEN2 (the latter two encoding presenilin 1 and 2, respectively) -that cause pathogenic aggregation of Aβ peptides into neuritic plaques 1,2 .
In familial AD mutation carriers, this process inevitably leads to early onset of cognitive deficits and dementia, presumably through complex age-dependent cellular and molecular changes, including the deposition and spread of NFTs.
Although mutations in APP, PSEN1 and PSEN2 do not occur in sporadic AD, similar neuropathological changes in Aβ and tau are observed in both familial and sporadic AD
This similarity has led to the view that the amyloidcascade hypothesis also captures the pathogenesis of sporadic AD.
The amyloid-cascade hypothesis has evolved over the years from a linear pathway that involved only Aβ, tau and neurodegeneration to an integrative model that also includes other disease mechanisms, including microgliosis, immunoreactivity, oxidative stress and dysregulation of protein homeostasis (proteostasis)
The basic premise of the amyloid-cascade hypothesis, however, is still intact and states that first Aβ becomes abnormal, and that this change is the driving force behind cortical tau pathology and tau-mediated neurodegeneration (Box 1; fig.
This hypothesis has also guided most drug discovery efforts in both familial and sporadic AD, which have focused on the removal of various forms of cerebral Aβ.
Unfortunately, although a number of Aβ-targeted therapies tested in phase III clinical trials (bapineuzumab 9 , gantenerumab 10 , solanezumab 11 , crenezumab 12 , lanabecestat 13 , atabecestat 14 , verubecestat 15 and elenbecestat
Two phase III trials of another Aβ-targeted therapy, aducanumab, were also halted prematurely after a futility analysis predicted that the trials would not meet their primary end point 18 .
However, after conducting a new analysis of a larger data set, the study sponsors later announced that high doses of aducanumab did slow cognitive decline in one of the
two trials and that filing of an application for regulatory approval was planned
At time of publication of this Review, no further details were available.
The lack of positive effects on cognitive outcome measures in most of these trials could be due to the timing of the interventions, as the studies involved patients in clinically advanced stages of AD ('too late'), insufficient dosing ('too little') or the wrong Aβ species being targeted
Alternatively, the failure of these trials could indicate that removing Aβ from the brain does not halt cognitive decline because tau pathology and tau-mediated neurodegeneration in AD can be driven by Aβ-independent pathways
In this Review, we critically evaluate the evidence that Aβ is the driving force behind tau pathology, focusing on data from positron emission tomography (PET) studies describing the regional distribution of Aβ and tau pathology.
We also review emerging preclinical data suggesting that tau pathology is not driven solely by Aβ, but rather that the biological pathways associated with sporadic AD induce Aβ and tau pathology through correlated yet independent pathways.
Finally, we discuss how the design of clinical trials can be improved so as to generate new insights into the relationship between Aβ and tau pathology, as well as how novel therapies could be designed to target sporadic AD via biological pathways upstream of both Aβ and tau.
Tau and Aβ pathology in human AD In addition to the neuropathological evaluation of AD stages, PET functional neuroimaging enables the evaluation of Aβ and tau accumulation -the two neuropathological hallmarks of AD -in the living human brain.
PET-based assessment of the spatiotemporal progression of both Aβ and tau pathologies throughout the entire brain has revealed fairly consistent patterns across individuals with sporadic AD (fig.
Aβ preferentially accumulates in brain regions with high metabolic demand (such as association cortices) and spreads from neocortex to allocortex to brainstem, eventually reaching the cerebellum
Tau pathology, by contrast, first becomes evident in the (trans)entorhinal cortex (although the locus coeruleus has also been proposed as an initial site of tau accumulation
The finding that Aβ and tau pathologies initially start in different brain regions, referred to as the 'spatial paradox'
Apart from these topographical differences, Aβ and tau pathologies also follow distinct temporal sequences.
Widespread Aβ involvement of the neocortex is already present 10-20 years before the emergence of clinical AD symptoms
Furthermore, the extent and locations of Aβ deposition are only modestly correlated with the brain areas affected by neurodegeneration
Both spatially and temporally, tau pathology correlates much more strongly than Aβ pathology with neurodegeneration and cognitive impairment.
Cross-sectional tau PET studies have shown a gradual increase in tau pathology with advancing disease stages, from cognitively normal, through MCI, to AD dementia
Increased tau PET signal is associated with worse cognitive performance in both cognitively normal individuals and patients with clinical AD
Thus, in contrast to Aβ, tau pathology correlates with cognitive function and shows good regional correspondence with sites of neurodegeneration.
Not only are Aβ accumulation and tau pathology spatially separated in the early stages of AD, PET studies indicate that cortical tau pathology can also, albeit rarely, occur in the absence of widespread Aβ plaques
In the neuropathology literature, the finding of NFTs in the medial temporal lobe, basal forebrain and olfactory areas in the absence of Aβ plaques in cognitively normal elderly individuals and in those showing only mild cognitive deficits has been termed primary age-related tauopathy (PART)
Interestingly, however, NFTs in these regions rarely spread to neocortical regions in the absence of Aβ pathology
The tau PET signal does not consistently increase over time in Aβ-negative, cognitively normal individuals
annually in cognitively normal persons who are Aβ-positive
in Aβ-positive patients with clinical AD

Aβ immunoclearance
Pharmaceutical intervention aimed at clearing amyloidβ plaques and/or oligomerized peptides from the brains of patients with Alzheimer disease.
Has been the major focus for the development of treatments for Alzheimer disease.
Box 1 | Animal models of AD much of our knowledge of the molecular pathways underlying alzheimer disease (aD) is based on transgenic mouse models, in which combinations of human mutant APP, PSEN1, PSEN2 and/or tau are overexpressed in order to drive aD pathology.
Whether such systems recapitulate early disease processes in human aD, especially sporadic aD, is unclear.
nonetheless, a number of landmark studies in mouse models have helped establish the paradigm that amyloidβ (aβ) directly contributes to tau pathology in aD.
For example, tau pathology develops faster in triple-transgenic mice (which overexpress mutant human APP or PSEN1 as well as overexpressing human tau) than it does in single-transgenic mice that overexpress human tau only
However, it is unclear whether these accelerating effects of APP and PSEN1 mutations on tau pathology are mediated solely by aβ or whether other amyloid precursor protein (aPP) fragmentsparticularly the β-secretase C-terminal fragment of aPP (βCTF) -also contribute to the observed phenotypes.
βCTF is produced at equimolar concentrations with aβ and has been shown to drive both the accumulation of phosphorylated tau (p-tau)
Interestingly, BrI2-aβ42 mice, in which aβ42 plaque deposition is driven by a BrI2-aβ42 fusion construct that does not generate βCTF or other aPP fragments, do not develop overt memory deficits 198 , although the relationship with tau has not been examined.
another finding that supports a role of aβ as a driver of tau pathology is that the injection of aβ peptides 199 or aβ-containing brain extracts 200 into the brains of tau-transgenic mice hastens tau pathology.
It remains unclear, however, whether acute injection of exogenous aβ recapitulates the gradual increase of aβ that occurs over decades in the brains of patients with aD.
The most striking finding that supports the development of aβ-targeted therapeutics is that Aβ immunoclearance efficiently reduces both aβ load and tau accumulation in young triple-transgenic (APP/PSEN1/MAPT) mice
In aged triple-transgenic mice, aβ immunoclearance does not reduce neurofibrillary tangles (nFTs), but this treatment does rescue behavioural phenotypes and decreases levels of soluble tau 202 .
The interactions between aβ and tau and the rationale for the amyloidcascade hypothesis have been reviewed in detail elsewhere
Despite encouraging effects of aβ-targeted immunotherapy in mouse models of familial aD, even in animals in late symptomatic stages of the disease, to date aβ immunoclearance has not been successful in halting or reversing cognitive decline in human patients with sporadic aD, possibly because factors other than aβ contribute to the development of tau pathology in these patients.
tau pathology above a critical threshold for 'tau positivity' , used to distinguish patients with AD from both patients with non-AD neurodegenerative disorders and cognitively normal individuals) is more often observed in Aβ-positive cognitively normal persons than in Aβ-negative cognitively normal individuals
These findings have led to the hypothesis that AD is an Aβ-facilitated tauopathy
Although this hypothesis does not address how or why tau pathology initially occurs in the temporal lobe, it suggests that a poorly understood interaction between Aβ and tau facilitates the spread of tau pathology to the neocortex in patients with AD, possibly via connected white matter tracts such as the hippocampal cingulum bundle
An alternative explanation is that shared upstream processes simultaneously drive both tau and Aβ pathology independently in the neocortex, which is known as the dual-cascade hypothesis
Although the idea that Aβ drives tau pathology in AD has been the major framework for understanding this disease and for the development of targeted therapeutic agents, the emerging preclinical work discussed later in this Review is inconsistent with this idea, and instead supports the notion that the biological pathways associated with sporadic AD, including cholesterol metabolism, endocytic trafficking and microglial immune activation, as well as specific proteins such as apolipoprotein E (ApoE) and the βsecretase C-terminal fragment of APP (βCTF; also known as C99), drive tau pathology in an Aβ-independent manner.
These pathways and proteins are addressed in more detail in the next sections.

Aβ-independent regulators of tau in AD

Cholesterol metabolism
Lipids, particularly cholesterol, are heavily implicated in the pathogenesis of AD
A number of prevalent polymorphisms associated with the risk of developing sporadic AD occur in genes associated with the regulation of lipid metabolism, including APOE (which encodes ApoE, the major lipid transporter in the brain
In addition, cholesteryl esters, the storage product of excess cholesterol, abnormally accumulate in the AD brain
Cholesteryl esters also enhance the accumulation of phosphorylated tau (p-tau)
Importantly, this effect of cholesteryl esters on p-tau is independent of both APP and Aβ, as reducing cholesteryl ester levels also reduces p-tau levels in human induced pluripotent stem cell (hiPSC)-derived APP null neurons
Additional evidence for a direct relationship between cholesteryl esters and tau comes from the observation that inhibition of cholesterol synthesis reduces tau pathology in tau transgenic mice
These mice develop tau pathology despite the absence of overt Aβ pathology, and cholesterol-targeting drugs that reduce the tau pathology load in these mice are therefore likely to act in an Aβ-independent manner.
Readers should note, however, that although these mice lack Aβ pathology, APP is endogenously expressed, and thus a role of APP cannot be completely excluded.
However, in combination with the results of experiments in APP null hiPSC-derived neurons, these data strongly indicate that cholesteryl esters regulate both Aβ and tau through correlated but independent pathways (fig.
The notion that alterations in lipid metabolism can drive Aβ and tau pathology through shared but independent mechanisms has been corroborated by the results of a combined tau PET and Aβ PET study in cognitively normal individuals
In this study, distinct as well as shared genetic pathways underlying spatiotemporal propagation of Aβ and tau through the brain were investigated

Proteasomal degradation
The process by which cells recycle unneeded or damaged cytosolic proteins.
such proteins are first ubiquitylated, which targets them for degradation by the proteasome (a proteolytic multisubunit protein complex).
naTure revIeWS | NeuroScieNce by correlating the propagation patterns of Aβ and tau pathology with the transcriptome of the brain areas occupied by these pathologies
The spread of tau pathology was associated with a specific gene-expression profile of 'axon-related' genes, whereas the spread of Aβ was linked to a different profile of 'dendrite-related' genes.
A third subset of 'lipid metabolism-related' genes was linked to increased spread of both Aβ and tau pathology.
This third gene-expression profile was enriched in genes (including APOE) involved in cholesterol biosynthesis and lipoprotein and/or cholesterol transport
Similar to the emerging preclinical evidence, these findings support the notion that Aβ pathology and tau pathology are driven by alterations in lipid metabolism (and particularly in cholesterol homeostasis) through correlated but independent pathways (fig.
Tau pathology first develops in the (trans)entorhinal cortex and spreads to limbic areas in patients with mild cognitive impairment (MCI) due to Alzheimer disease (AD), and finally to the neocortex during progression to AD dementia.
By contrast, Aβ pathology starts in association cortices and spreads from neocortex to allocortex.
Extensive Aβ pathology can already be observed in individuals with preclinical AD, and the extent of Aβ pathology changes relatively little in symptomatic stages of the disease.
The fact that Aβ pathology is widespread in early disease stages, whereas tau pathology develops considerably later, is in line with the amyloid-cascade hypothesis, which predicts that changes in Aβ are the initial insult driving tau pathology.
b | If Aβ truly drives tau pathology , we might expect these pathologies to start in the same brain regions, albeit at different times.
However, Aβ and tau pathology initially develop in very different brain regions, which seems inconsistent with the amyloid-cascade hypothesis.
This observation has been termed the 'spatial paradox'.
c | Isolated tau pathology is present in cognitively normal Aβ-negative elderly individuals with primary age-related tauopathy (PART).
Tau pathology in PART typically does not spread to neocortical areas.
d | AD-related tau pathology , by contrast, does spread extensively to the neocortex.
Because tau spread to the neocortex is normally not seen in Aβ-negative individuals, AD has been described as an 'Aβ-facilitated tau pathology': although the initial tau pathology in AD is thought to be independent of Aβ, the eventual spread of tau to the neocortex is hypothesized to be driven by Aβ.

Spatial paradox

The endocytic system
The endocytic system is another key biological pathway associated with sporadic AD that independently regulates both Aβ and tau.
Proteolytic processing of APP is controlled by endocytosis and trafficking through the endolysosomal system
After synthesis in the endoplasmic reticulum, APP is transported to the plasma membrane, where it is cleaved to non-amyloidogenic fragments by the α-secretase complex
Full-length APP can also be internalized from the plasma membrane and trafficked to early endosomes (fig.
In these endosomes, the N terminus of APP is cleaved by β-secretase 1 (BACE1) to generate βCTF
A number of genes associated with increased risk of sporadic AD encode proteins that regulate endocytosis, such as BIN1 (which encodes MYC box-dependent interacting protein 1, also known as bridging integrator 1), PICALM (which encodes phosphatidylinositol-binding clathrin assembly protein) and SORL1 (fig.
For example, PICALM enhances amyloidogenic processing of APP by regulating trafficking of both APP and γ-secretase
Conversely, BIN1 reduces amyloidogenic processing of APP by preventing the trafficking of BACE1 to APPcontaining endocytic compartments
SORLA (dysfunction of which is also implicated in familial AD
Interestingly, PICALM, BIN1 and the SORLAinteracting retromer complex also regulate tau in an Aβ-independent manner (fig.
BIN1 directly interacts with tau
In Drosophila melanogaster, reduced expression of Amph, the orthologue of human BIN1, alleviates tau neurotoxicity
BIN1 levels are dysregulated in the AD brain, with both upregulation and downregulation being reported, depending on which BIN1 isoforms were examined
Thus, although the directionality of the effects of BIN1 on tau pathology and tau-mediated neurodegeneration is not yet clear, BIN1 affects tau pathology in models that lack Aβ pathology.
Furthermore, although BIN1 regulates the processing of APP, it does not seem to affect Aβ deposition or Aβ toxicity in APP-transgenic mice or in Aβ42-transgenic Drosophila
In cognitively unimpaired individuals as well as in patients with AD, risk polymorphisms in BIN1 are associated with increased cerebral tau load but not with increased Aβ load
Together, these findings indicate that BIN1 regulates both Aβ and tau, but that the effects of BIN1 risk polymorphisms in sporadic AD are mostly mediated by tau.
In addition to regulating APP processing, as already discussed, PICALM regulates autophagosomal degradation of tau in tau-transgenic Drosophila and zebrafish models
In zebrafish, overexpression of PICALM increases both tau load and tau-mediated neurotoxicity in the absence of Aβ pathology
These in vivo experiments strongly indicate that the effects of sporadic-AD risk genes related to endocytosis (such as PICALM and BIN1) on tau are Aβ-independent.
However, the results of these studies might be confounded by endogenous expression of APP in the selected models, and similar experiments in APP null model systems are desirable to confirm that the effects of these risk genes on tau are completely independent of both APP and Aβ.
A good example of such a study showed that retromer-stabilizing drugs reduce both the amyloidogenic processing of APP
Interestingly, the same retromer-stabilizing drugs also reduce p-tau levels in APP null hiPSC-derived neurons, indicating that the effect of retromer stabilization on p-tau is independent of APP and Aβ
Together, these findings indicate that the sporadic-AD risk genes and pathways that regulate endocytosis might act independently and upstream of both Aβ and tau (fig.

APOE*4
ApoE is a lipid transporter that regulates reverse cholesterol transport from peripheral cells to the liver for secretion.
In the brain, ApoE bidirectionally transports lipids such as cholesterol between neurons and glia
ApoE also binds to Aβ and might have a role in glial uptake and degradation of Aβ
Single-nucleotide polymorphisms in APOE are the major genetic risk factor for sporadic AD
The three major alleles of APOE, APOE*2, APOE*3 and APOE*4, encode the ApoEε2, ApoEε3 and ApoEε4 protein isoforms, respectively.
ApoEε4 is present in 15-20% of the healthy population, but its prevalence increases to 67% in Aβ-positive patients with AD dementia
Compared with homozygous APOE*3 carriers, heterozygous APOE*3/APOE*4 allele carriers have an up to 3-4-fold increase in risk of AD, compared with the 10-15-fold increase in risk of AD seen in homozygous APOE*4 allele carriers
Amino acid substitutions in ApoEε4 cause this protein to fold differently from ApoEε2 and ApoEε3.
These changes render ApoEε4 more prone to degradation and less potent in transport of lipids and Aβ than the other two isoforms
When hiPSC-derived AD neurons are treated with purified ApoEε4, they produce more APP transcripts and generate higher levels of Aβ than do similar neurons treated with purified ApoEε2 or ApoEε3
Similarly, exposure to reconstituted ApoEε4 lipoprotein complexes increases BACE1 expression and Aβ levels in cultured neuroblastoma cells
However, how well the addition of (supraphysiologic) levels of purified ApoEε4 particles to monocultures of neurons recapitulates the in vivo situation is not clear, and this uncertainty limits the interpretation of these studies.
In cognitively normal individuals, the cerebral Aβ plaque load is ApoE isoform-dependent -that is, highest in APOE*4 allele carriers, intermediate in APOE*3 carriers and lowest in APOE*2 carriers
Whether increased transcription of APP also contributes to an increased Aβ load in human APOE*4 carriers remains to be established.
HiPSC-derived AD neurons from APOE*4 carriers produced more Aβ and had higher levels of p-tau

Endocytic system
An interconnected network of membranous vesicles that internalize molecules from the plasma membrane and transport them through the cell.
Depending on the specific route of transport, molecules can be degraded in lysosomes or recycled back to the surface.

Retromer
A multiprotein sorting complex on early endosomes that redirects cargo molecules (such as amyloid precursor protein) from the endosome to the trans-golgi network or the plasma membrane, which prevents their trafficking into the late endocytic system where they can be degraded.
naTure revIeWS | NeuroScieNce than did neurons in which APOE*4 was converted to APOE*3 using gene-editing techniques
However, the effect of the APOE*4 genotype on p-tau accumulation was independent of the increased levels of Aβ, as treatment with inhibitors of BACE1 or γ-secretase strongly decreased Aβ but not p-tau levels in these neurons
Similarly, in tau-transgenic mice lacking Aβ pathology, tau accumulates faster in APOE*4 carriers than in APOE*3 carriers 100 .
In APOE*4-transgenic mice, the accumulation of p-tau was also found in somatodendritic compartments 100 , a pathological event that has also been observed in the human AD brain 101 .
How a neuronal APOE*4 genotype might exacerbate neuronal tau pathology in an Aβ-independent manner
Impairment of neuronal lipid metabolism could be further exacerbated by a glial APOE*4 genotype, as these cells are major producers of brain lipids
Alternatively, ApoEε4 cleavage fragments could directly affect tau phosphorylation in neurons
Microglia could also mediate some of the as is discussed in more detail below.

Endocytosis
As already mentioned in relation to cholesterol metabolism, the simultaneous spread of Aβ pathology and tau pathology (but not their individual spread) in the AD brain is associated with a transcriptomic profile predominantly reflecting lipid metabolism and transport
A central gene in this profile is APOE, which provides further evidence that ApoE regulates both Aβ pathology and tau pathology, albeit through separate pathways, in humans.
From these findings we can predict that ApoEε4-driven tau pathology and Aβ pathology will always occur together in APOE*4 carriers.
Indeed, carriage of APOE*4 is a risk factor for sporadic AD (in which Aβ pathology and tau pathology co-occur) but not for PART
Although tau pathology and Aβ pathology coexist in patients with AD, an important matter to note is that Aβ pathology is not required in order to drive tau pathology downstream of ApoEε4
Therefore, ApoEε4 could continue to drive both tau pathology and tau-mediated neurodegeneration in patients with AD who are APOE*4 carriers, even after Aβ is removed from the brain.
This conclusion has major implications for the development of therapeutic agents that solely target Aβ in sporadic AD, as is discussed later in this Review.

Activated microglia
The role of neuroinflammation and microglia in the pathogenesis of AD is increasingly being appreciated.
Microglia are the resident immune cells of the brain, and a number of risk polymorphisms and rare variants associated with sporadic AD are in genes primarily expressed in microglia (such as TREM2, PLCG2 and CD33)
Other risk genes, such as APOE, become highly upregulated in disease-associated microglia during the progression of AD
Furthermore, lipoprotein carriers such as ApoE and clusterin interact with microglia through binding to the microglia-specific TREM2 receptor
ApoE-TREM2 interactions regulate microglial activation status and gene-expression signatures
Because microglia phagocytose and clear Aβ from the brain, they have been heavily implicated in the pathogenesis of AD 117 .
In the past 10 years, microglia have been shown to directly contribute to tau pathology in an Aβ-independent manner.
For example, microglia can contribute to the spread of tau pathology after tau is released from neurons
Microglial activation might also contribute to the development of tau pathology, as has been shown by the finding that genetically activated microglia accelerate tau pathology in tau-transgenic mice
Mechanistically, activated microglia release high levels of the pro-inflammatory cytokine IL-1β, which binds to the IL-1 receptor on neurons, thereby activating p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (p38 MAPK) and driving tau hyperphosphorylation 120,121 (fig.
A number of other cytokines and factors secreted by activated microglia could affect tau hyperphosphorylation in neurons in a similar manner
Aβ could be one of the triggers that induces microglial activation and cytokine release in the AD brain
However, the proteins encoded by sporadic-AD risk genes, such as APOE and TREM2, also regulate microglial activation in an Aβ-independent manner (fig.
Human hiPSC-derived AD microglia homozygous for APOE*4, and purified microglia from APOE*4/APOE*4 targeted-replacement mice (in which the native ApoE gene is replaced by human APOE, either APOE*3 or APOE*4), are highly reactive and express increased levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines
In line with this finding, microglial activation is increased in patients with AD who are APOE*4 carriers 108 .
The increase in microglial activation was not correlated with Aβ load, indicating that the effect of ApoEε4 on microglial activation is Aβ-independent 108 .
TREM2 also affects

Disease-associated microglia
A subset of activated microglia found at sites of neurodegeneration.
Fig.
a | Overview of interactions between cholesterol metabolism, amyloidβ (Aβ) and phosphorylated tau (p-tau) implicated in sporadic Alzheimer disease (AD).
Exogenous cholesterol is internalized through the uptake of apolipoprotein E (ApoE)-lipoprotein particles (which contain cholesterol and cholesteryl esters) from the extracellular environment.
In endosomes, cholesterol is released from these lipoprotein particles by lipases.
Cholesterol is then transported from the endosome to the endoplasmic reticulum (ER).
Cholesterol can also be synthesized de novo in the ER , where 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme A reductase (HMGCR) is the rate-limiting enzyme.
In the ER , excess cholesterol is ligated to a fatty acid by cholesterol O-acyl transferases (ACAT) to produce cholesteryl esters.
The accumulation of cholesteryl esters inhibits proteasomal degradation of p-tau.
In addition, cholesteryl esters enhance amyloidogenic processing of Aβ precursor protein (APP).
The effect of cholesteryl esters on APP is mediated by a lipid-binding domain in APP
Interactions of APP with cholesteryl esters might affect APP processing by promoting secretory trafficking of newly synthesized APP to the plasma membrane 216 , by increasing APP internalization from the plasma membrane or by increasing cleavage of APP by β-secretase 1 (BACE1) or γ-secretase.
Small-molecule inhibitors of HMGCR (step 1) and ACAT (step 2) prevent the generation of cholesteryl esters, reducing amyloidogenic processing of APP and enhancing proteasomal degradation of p-tau.
In the ER , conversion of cholesterol to 24-hydroxycholesterol by cholesterol 24-hydroxylase (also known as cytochrome P450 46A1 (CYP46A1)) also prevents the esterification of cholesterol by ACAT; hence, smallmolecule activators of CYP46A1 (step 3) also reduce levels of cholesteryl esters, Aβ and p-tau.
b | Overview of the role of endocytic regulators that might act through parallel and independent pathways upstream of both Aβ and p-tau in sporadic AD.
APP and BACE1 are internalized in separate vesicles from the plasma membrane and converge in the early endosome, where APP is cleaved first by BACE1 and then by γ-secretase to generate the β-secretase C-terminal fragment of APP (βCTF) and Aβ, respectively (amyloidogenic processing route).
Phosphatidylinositol-binding clathrin assembly protein (PICALM) stimulates APP internalization and Aβ generation, whereas MYC box-dependent interacting protein 1 (BIN1; also known as bridging integrator 1) prevents trafficking of BACE1 to APP-containing endosomes.
APP can also be sorted away from BACE1 in the early endosome by a sorting complex containing retromer and sortilinrelated receptor A (SORL A).
Retromer-stabilizing drugs (step 4) promote this step and thereby decrease amyloidogenic processing of APP.
Retromer, BIN1 and PICALM also regulate tau in a poorly understood, but seemingly Aβ-independent, manner that might involve autophagy
c | Schematic overview of the role of microglia in the regulation of Aβ and tau.
ApoE and clusterin (also known as ApoJ) bind to the microglial triggering receptor expressed on myeloid cells 2 (TREM2) to regulate microglial activation.
Activated microglia release cytokines that bind to neuronal cytokine receptors, activating p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (p38 MAPK) and increasing tau (hyper)phosphorylation. p38 MAPK inhibitors (step 5) might directly reduce microglia-dependent tau hyperphosphorylation in neurons.
In addition, p38 MAPK inhibitors decrease cytokine release from activated microglia.
Microglia also phagocytose complexes of ApoE and Aβ, and ApoEε4 is less efficient than other isoforms in clearing Aβ.
Treatment with ApoEε4 structure correctors, which stabilize ApoEε4 proteins (step 6), might increase microglial Aβ uptake and concomitantly prevent microglial activation upstream of tau pathology.
d | Detailed schematic overview of the risk pathways associated with the dual-cascade hypothesis of sporadic AD.
The sporadic-AD risk genes in bold encode proteins that are already known to be independent, upstream regulators of both tau and Aβ.
microglial function and microglia-mediated neuronal tau pathology in an Aβ-independent manner.
TREM2 overexpression reduces both microglial activation and tau pathology in tau-transgenic mice 124 , whereas knockdown of TREM2 in these mice exacerbates tau pathology
Another report did not identify any effect of modulating TREM2 expression on tau levels, but did show that TREM2 deficiency attenuated brain atrophy in tau-transgenic mice 127 .
To exclude any confounding effect of endogenous APP and/or Aβ in these mice, these experiments would ideally be repeated in APP null model systems.
However, the current findings in tautransgenic mice (which do not develop Aβ pathology) and the observation that microglial activation correlates with APOE genotype but not with amyloid levels in patients with AD strongly suggest that microglial activation could act downstream of risk genes for sporadic AD to independently drive both Aβ pathology and tau pathology (fig.

Familial AD
Unlike in sporadic AD, in which alterations in cholesterol metabolism, endocytic function and microglial activity seem to drive both Aβ and tau pathology in parallel (that is, concurrently), as already discussed (fig.
However, emerging evidence indicates that the effect of these APP mutations on tau could be mediated by non-Aβ fragments of APP, such as βCTF.
For example, Aβ and p-tau accumulate in hiPSC-derived neurons from patients with familial AD caused by duplications or mutations of APP
In these neurons, γ-secretase inhibition reduced Aβ production and secretion but did Box 2 | Human model systems of AD Drug discovery and modelling of alzheimer disease (aD) has been hampered by the lack of suitable human model systems.
using human induced pluripotent stem cell (hiPSC) technology, it is now possible to collect blood or skin biopsy samples from patients with aD and to reprogram the cells to develop into functional neurons, astrocytes and microglia that express aD-related proteins (such as tau in neurons) at endogenous levels.
Compared with brain cells derived from patients with aD, hiPSC-derived aD brain cells recapitulate many known early aD phenotypes, such as endosomal enlargement
hiPSC-derived aD cells can also be used for drug discovery
a further advance is the use of CrISPr-Cas9 gene editing to introduce into hiPSCs specific genetic variants associated with an increased risk of sporadic aD, to generate an 'isogenic' set of hiPSC-derived brain cells that only differ at a desired position in the genome (see the figure).
These isogenic hiPSCs can be used to study the phenotypic effects of single risk polymorphisms or rare genetic variants.
CrISPr-Cas9 gene editing can be used to introduce sporadic-aD risk polymorphisms into APP null hiPSCs, to test whether the pathways associated with the risk of sporadic aD affect tau in an amyloid precursor protein (aPP)-dependent, aβ-dependent or aβ-independent manner
as with any other disease model, hiPSC-derived neurons have some limitations.
The exact neuronal subtype generated from hiPSCs is often poorly controlled, and hiPSC-derived neurons are immature compared with those in human aD brains.
Induced differentiation of hiPSCs by the expression of specific neuronal transcription factors can drive hiPSCs to develop into better-defined and more-mature subtypes (such as glutamatergic or GaBaergic neurons)
yet, with hiPSC culture times ranging from weeks to months, these models are best suited to the study of early pathological events in aD (such as the accumulation of soluble p-tau), rather than of very late events, such as neurofibrillary tangle (nFT) deposition, which is not typically observed in these models.
In addition, monocultures of hiPSCderived aD neurons might not recapitulate the full complexity of intercellular and environmental interactions (such as those involving circulating hormones and three-dimensional architecture) in the brain.
To overcome this limitation, more-extensive hiPSC models of sporadic aD can be generated by combining populations of hiPSC-derived neurons, astrocytes and microglia, in either three-dimensional cultures 214 or brain organoids 102 .
alternatively, human hiPSC-derived neuronal precursors can be transplanted into the brains of mice, where they are functionally incorporated into the brain while retaining characteristics relevant to the pathogenesis of human aD 215 .
R e v i e w s not reduce p-tau levels
By contrast, BACE1 inhibition (which reduces not only Aβ but also βCTF) did decrease p-tau levels in these neurons
The reader should note that in most mouse models of familial AD, Aβ overproduction is driven by the overexpression of human mutant APP.
Hence, in mouse models of familial AD, overexpression of APP also causes overproduction of βCTF, at equimolar concentrations to Aβ.
Thus, although these double (that is, both APPtransgenic and tau-transgenic) mouse models are very useful for studying the effect of APP on tau pathology, the resulting phenotype cannot discriminate between Aβ-driven and βCTF-driven effects on tau pathology 132 .
βCTF is a regulator of endosomal trafficking, and the accumulation of βCTF causes a number of trafficking and recycling defects
Importantly, these findings could indicate that interventions that reduce tau pathology by means of endosomal manipulation could be developed as treatments for familial as well as sporadic AD.

Implications for Aβ-targeted therapies

Use of tau PET in clinical trials
The hypothesis that Aβ drives neocortical tau pathology in AD has been the major framework for the development of therapies for AD.
Several therapies that effectively reduce Aβ load in humans have been developed and tested in clinical trials
Postmortem examination of patients included in immunotherapy trials showed that treatment with the Aβ-targeted vaccine AN-1792 resulted in a strong reduction in Aβ plaque load but had relatively minor effects on tau pathology
Unfortunately, most current and past clinical trials of Aβ-targeted therapeutics have lacked suitable measures of cerebral tau pathology.
In general, the outcome measures used in AD trials included measures of Aβ load, cognitive performance (such as the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) or a delayed episodic memory task) and neurodegeneration (that is, either whole-brain or hippocampal atrophy).
Some past and current trials have included p-tau levels in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) as a secondary outcome measure.
However, CSF p-tau levels peak during the preclinical stage of AD and remain relatively stable during its clinical stages 141 , and do not correlate well with NFT load 142 .
Therefore, CSF p-tau level is a suboptimal marker for tau pathology in AD clinical trials.
Tau PET measures, on the other hand, are strongly correlated with NFT load 143 and show that tau pathology progressively accumulates (by 3-8% annually) in patients with clinical AD
Such an annual increase in detectable tau pathology translates to a 4.5-12.0%
increase in tau PET signal during the course of a typical 18-month clinical trial.
In view of the excellent reliability of tau PET measurements (test-retest variability 1.5-3.0%)
, tau PET has great potential as an additional outcome measure in clinical trials of Aβ-targeted therapies, although several technical limitations require further attention (such as changes in cerebral blood flow during the trial, off-target binding and selection of the optimal reference region).
Inclusion of an accurate measure of tau pathology in clinical trials of Aβ-targeted agents (such as the A4 study 146 ) will provide a unique opportunity to validate or falsify the hypothesis that tau pathology in patients with AD is driven by Aβ (fig.
The finding that Aβ-clearing agents also reduce tau pathology or prevent its further accumulation would support the notion that Aβ is the primary driver of tau pathology
By contrast, the finding that effective removal of Aβ does not prevent the spread of tau pathology to widespread neocortical regions in patients with MCI due to AD would support a model in which factors other than Aβ drive tau pathology in AD (fig.
.
In light of the previously discussed clinical and preclinical data, strong evidence suggests that changes in AD-associated molecules and pathways such as cholesterol metabolism, endosomal trafficking, ApoE and microglial activation drive tau pathology even when Aβ is removed from the brain (fig.
Accordingly, Aβ-targeted treatments could be combined with tau-targeted immuno therapies 147 .
Alternatively, novel therapeutics could be designed to target the dysregulated biologi cal processes upstream of both Aβ and tau pathology, as discussed below.

Diversifying the drug portfolio
ApoE.
This important AD target acts upstream and independently of both Aβ and tau pathology.
However, a major problem with targeting ApoE in AD is that it is unclear whether ApoEε4 results in a loss or gain of function of ApoE 148 .
Thus, interventions that increase levels of ApoEε4 might either confer protection against AD or worsen AD-related pathology.
In APOE*4 carriers, ApoE protein levels are decreased 149 , and in mice with familial AD causative mutations, upregulation of ApoE levels (by the small molecule bexarotene) has been shown to reduce Aβ levels and improve cognitive function
Although other groups have confirmed that bexarotene improves cognitive function and reduces levels of soluble Aβ species 152-154 , they were not able to confirm that this treatment results in a reduction in Aβ plaques
The results from the BEAT-AD phase II clinical trial of bexarotene were similarly mixed, with no observed effect of bexarotene on brain Aβ load in the overall treatment group 155 .
However, subgroup analysis showed that bexarotene did reduce Aβ load in individuals who were not APOE*4 carriers, although this group was very small (four patients in the bexarotene treatment arm and three in the placebo group)
The researchers did not evaluate the effect of bexarotene on ApoE levels and/or ApoE lipidation in either CSF or plasma as a measure of target engagement, nor did they study the effect of this treatment on tau.
A novel emerging strategy to prevent ApoEε4-induced tau and Aβ pathology is the use of small-molecule structure correctors, such as GIND25
These compounds correct the folding of the ApoEε4 protein, which stabilizes the full-length protein and decreases proteolytic cleavage of ApoE in APOE*4-expressing mice (fig.
PH002 treatment naTure revIeWS | NeuroScieNce increases levels of full-length ApoE, decreases levels of cleaved ApoE and reduces levels of both Aβ and p-tau in APOE*4/APOE*4 hiPSC-derived AD neurons
ApoEε4 structure correctors are currently being developed for clinical use 158 .
Other emerging strategies include the use of ApoE mimetic peptides that might take over some ApoEε4 functions, or gene therapy approaches using adeno-associated virus (AAV) to deliver APOE*2 into APOE*4 carriers 148 .
Endocytic system.
Disruption of the endosomal system in the brain occurs not only in AD but also in other neurodegenerative diseases
However, drugs that efficiently target the endocytic system have not yet been extensively explored.
Accordingly, the discovery of two small molecules (R55 and R33) that stabilize the retromer complex and thereby reduce levels of both Aβ and p-tau in cultured AD neurons represents a major breakthrough
R33 also effectively reduced Aβ and p-tau levels in hiPSC-derived neurons with genetically decreased expression of retromer subunits
However, the retromer-targeted drugs that have been developed so far seem not to be well suited for in vivo use (S.
Small, personal communication).
For example, the poor stability of these drugs in blood must be addressed before these compounds can be tested as treatments for AD.
Another strategy to boost retromer function is the AAV-mediated delivery of plasmids containing genes encoding retromer subunits 161 into the brains of patients with AD.
Adeno-associated virus (AAV).
A small virus that infects humans without causing disease and that can be engineered to deliver target genes into humans (gene therapy).
Fig.
Over the past decade, several effective strategies have been developed to remove amyloidβ (Aβ) from the brains of patients with Alzheimer disease (AD).
Combined with positron emission tomography (PET) imaging tracers that can track the progression of Aβ (blue) and tau (red) pathology over time, clinical trials can now be designed to test the amyloid-cascade hypothesis in human patients.
Such trials would preferentially start during mild cognitive impairment (MCI) due to AD or during the preclinical stage of the disease, in which Aβ pathology is already widespread but tau pathology has not yet spread to neocortical areas.
Tau pathology has been shown to progress by 3-8% annually , as measured by tau PET.
The duration of AD clinical trials is typically around 18 months, meaning that an increase in the tau PET signal of 4.5-12.0%
is expected in the placebo group.
Assuming that Aβ clearance therapies successfully reduce cerebral Aβ pathology , four possible outcomes of interventions with Aβ-targeted drugs on tau pathology can be predicted that will help validate or falsify the amyloid-cascade hypothesis: (1) Aβ clearance therapy reduces or stabilizes tau pathology , which subsequently leads to slowing of neurodegenerative processes and cognitive deterioration.
This scenario might be the ultimate proof of the Aβ cascade hypothesis.
(2) Aβ clearance therapy reduces or stabilizes tau pathology but does not prevent the progression of neurodegeneration (such as brain atrophy) and/or cognitive impairment.
Although such a clinical trial would be considered to have failed to meet its primary endpoint, this result would provide evidence that Aβ is the main driver of tau pathology.
(3) Aβ clearance therapy does not reduce tau pathology , but substantial beneficial effects are observed on measures of neurodegeneration and/or cognitive function.
This result supports the dual-cascade hypothesis, which posits that Aβ and tau share upstream regulators and that each exerts independent effects on downstream processes.
In these circumstances, initiation of tau-targeted therapy in addition to Aβ-targeted therapy might result in improved outcomes.
(
This outcome fits the dual-cascade hypothesis and indicates that Aβ-independent pathways drive both tau pathology and tau-mediated neurodegeneration in AD.
Most clinical trials do not currently include tau PET imaging, but information about treatment-related changes in tau load are essential to interpret the outcomes described above.
Albeit a relatively new approach in AD treatment, AAVmediated gene therapies have been approved for other indications and are the leading platform for in vivo delivery of gene therapies 162 .
Microglia.
The brain contains a very heterogeneous popu lation of microglia, which have roles in many crucial processes, including synaptic maintenance, phagocytosis of apoptotic cells and defence against infectious agents
Although activated microglia are heavily implicated in the pathogenesis of AD, exactly how they affect AD pathology is incompletely understood.
For example, microglial activation reduces Aβ load in APP-transgenic mice
Similarly, a reduction in TREM2 levels is neuroprotective in some reports 127 but increases tau pathology in other reports
Furthermore, the effects of rare coding variants in TREM2 differ in mice and humans 166 .
These inconsistencies complicate the development of potential therapies for AD that target microglia and/or TREM2.
As the exact effects of TREM2 variants linked to AD risk on microglial activation remain to be established, an alternative microglia-targeting approach might be modulation of ApoE.
Expression of ApoE is highly increased in activated microglia, and ApoE interacts directly with TREM2 to regulate microglial function
Therefore, ApoEε4-targeted approaches (such as the structure correctors previously discussed) might also normalize microglial function in patients with AD.
Because the effect of microglial activation on tau is (at least partly) mediated by neuronal p38 MAPK signalling
Neflamapimod is a p38 MAPK inhibitor that is currently being evaluated as a treatment for AD in a phase IIb clinical trial
An additional possible advantage of p38 MAPK inhibitors is that they reduce cytokine release from activated microglia 169 (fig.
Phospholipase C γ2 (PLCG2, also known as 1-phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate phosphodiesterase γ2) is another interesting drug development target in AD.
PLCG2 is highly expressed in microglia, and rare coding variants in the PLCG2 gene protect against AD and promote longevity
However, to date, no specific PLCG2-targeted therapeutics have been developed.

Cholesterol metabolism.
A large number of cholesteroltargeted drugs have been developed to treat hypercholesterolaemia and atherosclerosis.
Such drugs could therefore be repurposed for the treatment of AD without requiring the lengthy preclinical optimization and safety evaluations necessary for the development of completely new drugs.
For example, statins are widely used cholesterol synthesis inhibitors (fig.
In addition, epidemiological studies suggest that statins modestly reduce the risk of AD
Despite this evidence, statins have so far failed to slow cognitive decline in patients with AD in randomized controlled trials.
This lack of success could be explained by a number of methodological issues, including the ability of a particular statin to cross the blood-brain barrier, dosing, the time and disease stage at which treatment is given and whether vascular risk factors, such as hypercholesterolaemia, were adequately controlled (reviewed in depth elsewhere
A large phase IV trial of simvastatin is currently ongoing 176 and will evaluate the cognitive outcomes of patients with MCI and high circulating levels of low-density lipoprotein (LDL).
Results are expected from this study at the end of 2020.
The choice of agent in this trial seems appropriate, as simvastatin is one of the more brain-penetrant statins.
Simvastatin has previously been shown to affect brain cholesterol metabolism in humans, as measured by a decrease in levels of the brain-specific cholesterol metabolite 24-hydroxycholesterol in plasma and CSF
Furthermore, simvastatin is already known to reduce CSF levels of p-tau in healthy individuals, as well as in patients with AD
The neuron-specific enzyme cholesterol 24-hydroxylase (also known as cytochrome P450 46A1 (CYP46A1)), which converts cholesterol to 24-hydroxycholesterol, can also be exploited as a therapeutic target (fig.
Smallmolecule modulators of CYP46A1
At low doses, efavirenz acts as an allosteric activator of CYP46A1 in a manner apparently unrelated to its antiretroviral properties
Pharmacological activation of neuronal CYP46A1 by efavirenz induces the conversion of cholesterol to
This metabolite is subsequently released from neurons, thereby limiting the pool of neuronal cholesterol available for conversion to cholesteryl esters
Efavirenz treatment reduces Aβ plaque burden in young APP-transgenic mice, rescues behavioural impairments in both young and aged APP-transgenic mice
Besides its regulatory approval, another major advantage of efavirenz is its high capacity to cross the blood-brain barrier.
A phase I clinical trial to test the safety and efficacy of efavirenz as a strategy to increase brain 24-hydroxycholesterol production in patients with MCI is currently ongoing 186 .
Another potential clinical approach to targeting brain cholesterol metabolism is AAV-mediated delivery of a plasmid containing the CYP46A1 gene into the brain.
This gene therapy approach has been shown to prevent memory defects in a mouse model of tauopathy, even though overall tau levels in the brain were not substantially reduced 187 .
Another promising approach to targeting brain cholesterol metabolism in AD -currently in (pre)clinical development -is the inhibition of cholesterol esterification by small-molecule inhibitors of cholesterol O-acyl transferases (ACATs) 188 (fig.

Prevention, retention or reversal
Many of the therapeutic approaches for AD discussed in this Review target cellular processes upstream of Aβ and tau accumulation.
These therapeutic approaches could have promise as preventative treatments in asymptomatic individuals at risk of AD or in those with symptoms naTure revIeWS | NeuroScieNce of early AD, such as MCI.
Over the past decade, clinical trials of potential treatments for AD have shifted towards the inclusion of individuals with early AD or MCI.
Although Aβ-positive individuals with MCI often show substantial tau pathology in the medial temporal lobe and inferior temporal cortex, they have much less tau pathology throughout the neocortex than is seen in patients with AD dementia
Candidate treatments that reduce tau levels by targeting the pathways associated with risk of AD discussed above could perhaps be used to prevent the spread of tau pathology to neocortical areas in these patients, with the aim of preventing further neurodegeneration and cognitive decline.
Interestingly, preclinical work in aged, symptomatic tau-transgenic mice has indicated that tau-mediated neurodegeneration can be reversed even in late stages of the disease by reducing the levels of soluble tau
The rescue of memory and cognitive function in these aged tau-transgenic mice was not associated with a reduction in NFTs, which remained stable in some studies even after soluble tau levels had decreased substantially
This observation led to the notion that high levels of soluble tau, rather than high levels of NFTs, cause neuro degeneration
Although the lowering of soluble tau levels in these studies was performed genetically, these data indicate that AD-related neurodegeneration and memory loss could be reversed by reducing levels of soluble p-tau, even in late (symptomatic) stages of the disease.
Accordingly, the therapeutic approaches known to lower levels of soluble p-tau in human AD model systems (namely, those targeting cholesterol metabolism, retromer stability and ApoE function) might similarly have therapeutic effects even in late stages of the disease.

Conclusions
Despite considerable effort invested in the development of Aβ-targeted therapeutics, these therapies have not yet been successful in halting or reversing cognitive decline in completed phase III clinical trials.
Emerging preclinical and clinical findings indicate that AD-associated biological pathways can drive tau pathology in an Aβ-independent manner.
These findings suggest that Aβ-reducing therapies alone might not suffice to stop the progression of tau pathology and tau-mediated neuro degeneration in patients with AD.
We also highlight the need for tau PET imaging to be routinely included in clinical trials of Aβ-targeted therapeutics, to determine whether Aβ accumulation suffices to drive tau pathology or whether tau pathology is mainly driven by Aβ-independent processes.
In this Review, we have described a number of emerging therapeutic strategies that independently target cellular components and events upstream of both Aβ and tau pathology, such as cholesterol metabolism, endosomal transport, ApoE and microglial activation.
Small molecules that target these cellular pathways potently reduce endogenous soluble p-tau in human AD neurons



Fig. 2 |
Fig. 2 | Progression of Aβ and tau pathology in AD. a | A simplified overview of data from positron emission tomography (PET) and neuropathology studies showing the spatiotemporal patterns of amyloidβ (Aβ) and tau pathologies.
Red and blue shaded areas indicate the areas affected by tau and Aβ pathology , respectively.Tau pathology first develops in the (trans)entorhinal cortex and spreads to limbic areas in patients with mild cognitive impairment (MCI) due to Alzheimer disease (AD), and finally to the neocortex during progression to AD dementia.
By contrast, Aβ pathology starts in association cortices and spreads from neocortex to allocortex.
Extensive Aβ pathology can already be observed in individuals with preclinical AD, and the extent of Aβ pathology changes relatively little in symptomatic stages of the disease.
The fact that Aβ pathology is widespread in early disease stages, whereas tau pathology develops considerably later, is in line with the amyloid-cascade hypothesis, which predicts that changes in Aβ are the initial insult driving tau pathology.
b | If Aβ truly drives tau pathology , we might expect these pathologies to start in the same brain regions, albeit at different times.
However, Aβ and tau pathology initially develop in very different brain regions, which seems inconsistent with the amyloid-cascade hypothesis.
This observation has been termed the 'spatial paradox'.
c | Isolated tau pathology is present in cognitively normal Aβ-negative elderly individuals with primary age-related tauopathy (PART).
Tau pathology in PART typically does not spread to neocortical areas.
d | AD-related tau pathology , by contrast, does spread extensively to the neocortex.
Because tau spread to the neocortex is normally not seen in Aβ-negative individuals, AD has been described as an 'Aβ-facilitated tau pathology': although the initial tau pathology in AD is thought to be independent of Aβ, the eventual spread of tau to the neocortex is hypothesized to be driven by Aβ.


effects of APOE*4 genotype on neuronal tau accumulation in a non-cell-autonomous manner 102,107,108 (fig.3c),


. In addition, suprathreshold cortical tau pathology (that is,



-cascade hypothesis Dual-cascade hypothesis Fig. 1 | The amyloid-cascade hypothesis and the dual-cascade hypothesis of AD. a
Although mutations in APP or its processing enzymes are absent in patients with sporadic AD, the neuropathology of sporadic AD closely mirrors that of familial AD.
Therefore, the amyloid-cascade hypothesis is suggested to also be applicable to sporadic AD.
Polymorphisms in genes that regulate microglial immune activation, lipid metabolism and endocytosis are risk factors for sporadic AD. c | The dual-cascade hypothesis offers an alternative model to explain the pathogenesis of sporadic AD.
This hypothesis predicts that the polymorphisms associated with the risk of sporadic AD contribute to Aβ and tau pathology through correlated but independent cellular pathways.