Sex-specific hippocampal metabolic signatures at the onset of systemic inflammation with lipopolysaccharide in the APPswe/PS1dE9 mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease
Systemic inflammation enhances the risk and progression of Alzheimer's disease (AD).
Lipopolysaccharide (LPS), a potent pro-inflammatory endotoxin produced by the gut, is found in excess levels in AD where it associates with neurological hallmarks of pathology.
Sex differences in susceptibility to inflammation and AD progression have been reported, but how this impacts on LPS responses remains under investigated.
We previously reported in an APP/PS1 model of AD that systemic LPS administration rapidly altered hippocampal metabolism in males.
Here, we used untargeted metabolomics to comprehensively identify hippocampal metabolic processes occurring at onset of systemic inflammation with LPS (100 µg/kg, i.v.) in APP/PS1 mice, at an early pathological stage, and investigated the sexual dimorphism in this response.
Four hours after LPS administration, pathways regulating energy metabolism, immune and oxidative stress responses were simultaneously recruited in the hippocampi of 4.5-month-old mice with a more protective response in females despite their pro-inflammatory and pro-oxidant metabolic signature in the absence of immune stimulation.
LPS induced comparable behavioural sickness responses in male and female wild-type and APP/PS1 mice and comparable activation of both the serotonin and nicotinamide pathways of tryptophan metabolism in their hippocampi.
Elevations in N-methyl-2-pyridone-5carboxamide, a major toxic metabolite of nicotinamide, correlated with behavioural sickness regardless of sex, as well as with the LPS-induced hypothermia seen in males.
Males also exhibited a pro-inflammatory-like downregulation of pyruvate metabolism, exacerbated in APP/PS1 males, and methionine metabolism whereas females showed a greater cytokine response and anti-inflammatory-like downregulation of hippocampal methylglyoxal and methionine metabolism.
Metabolic changes were not associated with morphological markers of immune cell activation suggesting that they constitute an early event in the development of LPS-induced neuroinflammation and AD exacerbation.
These data suggest that the female hippocampus is more tolerant to acute systemic inflammation.

Introduction
Alzheimer's disease (AD), the most common senile dementia, is characterised by a progressive cognitive decline accompanied by the accumulation of aggregated amyloid beta (Aβ) plaques, neurofibrillary tangles made of hyperphosphorylated tau protein, severe brain atrophy and neuroinflammation.
The causes of AD are far from being understood, but systemic infection and inflammation have emerged as key modulators of its risk and progression.
A number of genes conferring susceptibility to inflammatory conditions have indeed been found to be associated with a predisposition to AD
Infection-induced systemic inflammation has been proposed as a mechanistic driver of AD pathogenesis
Altogether, this suggests that AD patients and people at risk of developing the disease are more susceptible to inflammatory conditions, and that such vulnerability contributes to the development of clinical features of AD.
The incidence and prevalence of AD are generally higher in women, and although this may be due to their longer life expectancy, they exhibit faster cognitive decline and brain atrophy than men
Some sex differences in the association between specific pro-inflammatory mediators and clinical outcomes have been noted
Systemic inflammation is thought to be the mechanism whereby acute, accumulative or chronic infections can trigger AD pathogenesis
In preclinical mouse models, lipopolysaccharide (LPS), mimicking gram-negative bacterial infection, and other acute systemic inflammatory stimuli have been found to exacerbate cognitive dysfunction, Aβ plaque load and tau phosphorylation
While the use of LPS to model systemic inflammation has been debated, in part because of the high doses used which are more relevant to sepsis than to the chronic low grade inflammation associated with ageing, MCI and AD
But importantly, this endotoxin is produced by the gut microbiota in response to systemic infections, and its subsequent release in the systemic circulation plays a key role in the development and persistence of systemic inflammation
Circulating LPS levels are elevated in AD patients
This has led to the proposal that endogenous LPS accumulation could play a critical role in the pathophysiology of the common, sporadic form of AD
To the best of our knowledge, endogenous LPS levels have not been quantified in AD models.
Differences in gut microbiota composition between genetic models of AD and their wild type control, consistent with endotoxemia and susceptibility to LPS, have been reported and found associated with the progression of cerebral amyloidosis
Removal of microbiota from a humanized AD model delayed substantially Aβ plaque deposition, while colonisation of these mice with gut microbiota from a conventional AD model, but not from their wild type control, accelerated Aβ deposition
There is, therefore, a need to better understand the mechanisms whereby systemic LPS affects the brain and contributes to AD progression.
LPS, is an agonist of the toll-like receptor 4, which in the brain, is almost exclusively expressed by microglia
Microglia play a critical role in the clearance of Aβ and tau aggregates, and their dysfunction is associated with the genetic risk of developing AD
At low doses able to induce physiologically relevant low grade inflammation, penetration of LPS in the mouse brain is limited in the absence of blood brain barrier dysfunction
However, pro-inflammatory changes in microglia can be seen as early as 4 h postinoculation depending on the disease status
Using magnetic resonance spectroscopy, we previously observed that mild systemic inflammation, induced with the low 100 µg/kg dose of LPS, rapidly altered hippocampal metabolism in the APPswe/PS1dE9 (APP/PS1) mouse model of amyloidosis and its wild-type (WT) littermates at early to advanced pathological stages
The metabolic changes occurring within 4 h of immune stimulation also discriminated the microglial response of WT and APP/PS1 mice
Variations in brain metabolism and substrate availability are thought to influence microglial function, although the mechanisms involved are not clear
In the same APP/PS1 mouse model of amyloidosis used in our previous study, age-and region-specific metabolic perturbations have been reported in the brain of males and females, but sex differences have not been systematically tested
Preclinical data from genetically altered mouse models of AD indeed confirm that cerebral amyloidosis develops faster in females than in males
Thus, metabolic responses to systemic inflammation could mediate exacerbation of AD-like pathology and the impact of sex on disease progression.
In this context, we aimed, in the present study, to gain further understanding of the metabolic processes occurring at onset of systemic inflammation with LPS, and used untargeted metabolomics to comprehensively identify pathways that rapidly respond to immune stimulation in WT and APP/PS1 mice of both sexes.
We tested the hypothesis that APP/PS1 mice would be more susceptible to the metabolic effects of LPS, and postulated a sexual dimorphism in the hippocampal metabolic response to systemic inflammation.
As reviewed above, systemic inflammation is expected to be an early event in the pathogenesis of AD; we therefore used 4.5-month-old mice, an age characterised by the appearance of the first plaques and subtle cognitive deficits
Our results indicate that pathways regulating energy metabolism, immune and oxidative stress responses are simultaneously recruited 4 h after systemic LPS, and comparably in the hippocampus of both WT and APP/PS1 mice, whose hippocampal metabolism was similar in the absence of immune stimulation.
While unchallenged females exhibited a pro-inflammatory and pro-oxidant hippocampal metabolic signature compared to males, the recruitment of some pathways at onset of systemic inflammation was sex-dependent with the metabolic response of females shifting towards a more pronounced anti-inflammatory and neuroprotective component than males, which also showed more severe sickness symptoms at this time point.

Material and methods

Ethics statement
All procedures were carried out in accordance with the UK Animals (Scientific Procedures) Act of 1986 under project license 40/3601, approved by the University of Nottingham Ethical Review Committee and are reported according to the ARRIVE guidelines
All analyses were performed in blind.

Animals
Forty-four 4.5-month-old male and female APPswe/PS1dE9 (APP/ PS1,
All experimental animals were bred and maintained in the University of Nottingham Biomedical Service Unit as previously described
Genotyping was performed by Transnetyx (Cordova, TN, USA).
Mice were maintained group-housed in individually vented cages (3-4 per cage) under standard husbandry conditions with ad libitum access to food and water, and were provided with nesting material and a play tube.
The room was on a 12/12 h light cycle with lights on at 07:00 h; temperature, relative humidity and air exchange were automatically controlled.

Drug treatment
Lipopolysaccharide (LPS, Escherichia coli serotype Sigma0111:B4, Sigma Aldrich) was dissolved in phosphate buffered saline (PBS, Sigma Aldrich) at a concentration of 200 μg/ml, and stored in aliquots at -20 °C until use.
On the day of the experiment, LPS was further diluted 1:2 in PBS to a final concentration of 100 μg/ml.
Mice were injected intravenously (i.v.) in the lateral tail vein with 100 μg/kg of LPS, or an equivalent volume of its vehicle PBS, as previously described

Study design
The timeline of the experiment is represented in Fig.
4.5-monthold male and female APP/PS1 and WT mice were randomly allocated to the LPS or PBS treatment groups (n = 5-6).
Baseline behavioural assessment was carried out on days 1 & 2. Mice were first tested for spatial working memory performance and exploratory drive in the spontaneous alternation test (Day 1).
They were then trained to burrow food in groups overnight in their home cage
On Day 3, mice were challenged with LPS (100 μg/kg i.v.) or PBS (1 μl/g of body weight).
Post-treatment sickness effects were assessed 4 h after injection in the food burrowing and spontaneous alternation tests, by monitoring changes in body weight and assessing body temperature taken using a rectal probe at the time of culling.
Immediately after the spontaneous alternation task, mice were culled by cervical dislocation and trunk blood was collected.
Their brains were removed; the hippocampi were dissected from one hemisphere, snap frozen and stored at -80 °C until use for metabolomics.
The second hemisphere was post-fixed by immersion in 4% paraformaldehyde, stored at 4-8 °C for a minimum of 24 h, and then embedded in paraffin wax on a tissue embedding station (Leica TP1020).

Behavioural assessment

Food burrowing
Food burrowing is a species-specific behaviour, largely dependent of the integrity of the hippocampus
The protocol was adapted from one previously described
A glass jar containing 30 g of food pellets broken into small pieces was added to the home cage overnight for training in groups, or in individual cages for the two test sessions, with ad libitum access to food and water.
The amount of food displaced from the jar was recorded, expressed as a percentage from the 30 g provided, and used as a measure of food burrowing performance.
To assess sickness effects, the difference between pre-and post-injection burrowing performance was calculated.

Spontaneous alternation
Spontaneous alternation was used as previously described
The latter is suppressed in response to LPS-induced sickness and is a potential confounding factor for the assessment of cognitive effects
The Y-shaped maze comprised three identical transparent Plexiglas® arms at a 120°a ngle from each other (41.5 cm in length and 6 cm in width surrounded by 15 cm high transparent Perspex walls).
The start point (6 cm × 7.5 cm) was located in the center of the maze, and the mice were allowed to freely explore the three arms over five minutes.
The number of alternations was recorded manually and expressed as a percentage of alternations to estimate spatial working memory performance, while the number of arms visited was used as an indication of exploratory drive.
To assess sickness effects, the difference between preand post-injection performance was calculated.
Mice that entered only one arm after the LPS challenge (1 wt female, 1 wt male and 2 APP/PS1 males) were excluded from sickness data as their alternation rate postinjection could not be calculated, but remained included in the analysis of baseline performance.
2.6.
Immunohistochemical analyses 2.6.1.
Immunohistochemistry 7 μm-thick coronal sections were cut throughout the hippocampus using a microtome (Microtome Slee Cut 4060), mounted on APEScoated slides and dried overnight at 40 °C.
Immunostaining of the microglial marker Ionized calcium binding adaptor molecule 1 (Iba1) and the astrocyte marker glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) was carried out using standard protocols as previously described
Incubation with rabbit anti-Iba1
nr.
AM020-5 M, 1:4000 in PBS-T) antibodies was carried out for 1 h at room temperature.
Biotinylated secondary antibody (Vectastain Elite ABC Kit, Rabbit IgG, Vector Labs, Burlingame, CA cat.
nr.
PK-6101, 1:200 in PBS-T) was applied for 30 min.
Tissue was washed, exposed to ABC-HRP (Vectastain Elite ABC Kit R.T.U, Vector Labs, cat.
nr.
PK-7100), labelled with DAB peroxidase substrate (Vector Labs cat.
SK-4100) according to manufacturer's instructions, and counterstained using a haematoxylin and eosin protocol.
Digital focused photo-scanning images were then acquired using a Hamamatsu NanoZoomer-XR 2.0-RS C10730 digital scanning system with TDI camera technology a NanoZoomer (Hamamatsu Photonics K.K. Systems, Japan) at 20 × magnification and visualised using NDP.view2 (NanoZoomer Digital Photography).

Semi-automated quantification of Iba1 and GFAP immunostaining
For segmentation of microglia and astrocytes, and extraction of microglial morphometric features, we used custom made software (Matlab) adapted from our previous studies
Examples of the semi-automated extraction of regions of interest selection are shown in Suppl.
Fig.
This provided the percentage area occupied by glial cells, the number of Iba1-and GFAPpositive cells, used as a measure of microglial and astrocyte density, respectively, and the size of microglial soma, used as a morphometric marker of microglia activation and known to be sensitive to LPS

Multiplex
Plasma levels of interleukin 1 beta (IL-1β), IL-6, IL-10, interferon gamma (IFN-γ) and tumour necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α) were determined using the Bio-Plex ProTM Mouse Cytokine 23-Plex, Group I assay and Bio-Plex array reader, and analysed using the Bio-Plex Manager Software (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Berkeley, CA, USA) according to the manufacturer's instructions.
The cytokine panel was designed to provide a measure of key cytokines known to respond to LPS and to play a role in AD.
IL-1β data were deemed unreliable and are excluded from the results section.

Mass spectrometry

Metabolomic profiling by LC-MS
Hippocampal tissues were weighed and then homogenised with chloroform/methanol/water (1:3:1, 10 µl/mg) using Retsch MM301 ball mill equipment for 3 min.
The extraction solvent and sample rack for the ball mill were pre-cooled at -20 °C.
The homogenised tissues were mixed vigorously for 1 h at 4 °C and then centrifuged at 15,000g for 10 min at 4 °C.
After centrifugation, the supernatant was collected and stored at -80 °C prior to LC-MS analysis.
A quality control sample was prepared by mixing an equal volume of all samples in order to assess instrument performance
Chromatographic separation was performed using a ZIC-pHILIC column (150 mm × 4.6 mm, 5 µm, Merck Sequant).
The column was maintained at 45 °C with a flow rate of 300 µl/min as previously described
Briefly, the mobile phase consisted of 20 mM ammonium carbonate in water (A) and 100% acetonitrile (B), and the tissue extracts were eluted with a linear gradient over 24 min as follows: 80% B (0 min) to 5% B over 15 min to 5% B with a 2 min linear gradient, followed by re-equilibration with 80% B. A 10 µl injection of each extract was employed for LC-MS analysis.
An Exactive MS (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Hemel Hempstead, UK) was used to acquire spectral data in full scan (m/z 70-1400, resolution 50 000) and both positive and negative electrospray ion modes.
The capillary temperature and probe temperature were maintained at 275 and 150 °C, respectively as previously described

LC-MS data processing
XCMS was used to pre-process raw LC-MS data for untargeted peakpicking
The processed data was then imported into IDEOM for noise filtering and Fig.
LPS-induced behavioural suppression at 4 h post-injection is independent of sex or genotype.
A) Timeline of the experiment.
4.5-month-old male and female APP/ PS1 mice and their wild-type (WT) littermates (n = 5-6) were subjected to baseline assessment of spatial working memory performance and exploratory drive in the spontaneous test as well as food burrowing behaviour prior to receiving a tail vein injection of lipopolysaccharide (LPS, 100 μg/ kg) or its vehicle (phosphate buffer saline, PBS).
Induced sickness effects were tested at 4 h post-injection in the same tests, prior to blood and tissue collection.
At this time point, a significant decrease in core body temperature was observed in males, regardless of their genotype (B).
LPS also suppressed food burrowing activity (C) and exploratory drive in the spontaneous alternation test, assessed through the number of arms visits (E), regardless of sex and genotype, but baseline performance for these behavioural measures did not differ between groups (C, D).
Female mice overall exhibited lower spontaneous alternation performance than their male counterparts at baseline (F), but LPS had no significant impact on this measure (G).
Parametric data are expressed as Means ± SEM.
Dots represent individual animals.
Post-hoc tests: *p < 0.05; **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.0001 vs PBS or baseline.
Food burrowing data were rank-transformed for statistical analysis but represented as non-normalised responses and expressed as Median ± interquartile range.
Sickness scores are represented as the difference between pre-and post-injection performance.
Within-subjects pairwise comparisons following 3-way ANOVAs: # p < 0.05; ## p < 0.01, ### p < 0.0001 compared to baseline performance (E).
putative metabolite identification
Metabolite identification was carried out by matching accurate masses and retention times of authentic standards but when standards were not available, accurate masses and predicted retention times were used
Metabolites were filtered in IDEOM to have retention time errors of below 35% and mass errors below three parts per million

Data analysis
Data are presented as mean ± SEM (standard error of the mean) and were analysed using InVivoStat
Baseline behavioural and body weight data, sickness scores, histological and cytokine data were all subjected to 3-way ANOVAs with genotype, sex and treatment, followed, where appropriate, by planned comparisons.
To assess the effect of the PBS and LPS challenges on behavioural data and to compare baseline and post-injection data, we used 3-way ANOVAs with genotype, sex and treatment, and repeated measure over time, followed, when appropriate, by planned comparisons.
The following pairwise comparisons were decided a priori: i) PBS-treated WT vs APP/PS1 mice within each sex to test for genotype differences; ii) PBS-treated males vs females within each genotype to test for sex differences; iii) PBS-vs LPS-treated mice within each sex and genotype condition to test for differences caused by systemic inflammation with LPS and, where appropriate, iv) baseline vs post-injection data within each experimental group to test for the effect of the PBS or LPS challenge.
Cytokine and food burrowing data were rank-transformed to normalise the distribution, but presented as nonnormalised responses
The number of arm entries was used as a covariate for the analysis of spontaneous alternation performance, in order to control for confounding effects of LPS-induced behavioural suppression.
For LC-MS data, variable selection was performed as a by-product of a classification model.
Data were first subjected to multivariate analyses by principal component analysis-class (PCA) and orthogonal partial least squares-discriminant analysis (OPLS-DA), using SIMCA-P version 15.02 (Umetrics AB, Umea, Sweden), in order to detect global metabolic differences between experimental conditions.
This was followed by OPLS-DAs applied to models including 2 classes: i) WT vs APP/PS1 PBS-treated mice, to identify potential metabolic differences due to the genotype in the absence of immune stimulation, ii) male vs female PBS-treated mice, to identify sex-dependent metabolic differences; iii) LPS vs PBS for all mice to identify effects global effects of LPS; iv) LPS vs PBS for each sex separately to identify sex-dependent metabolic responses to LPS.
Mass ions which contributed to separations and clusters were selected according to the variable importance in projection (VIP), a weighted sum of the PLS weight which indicates the importance of the model.
VIP values greater than 1.5 were first considered indicative of significant differences between groups.
Next, these metabolites were subjected to three-way ANOVAs with genotype, sex and treatment as between subject factors, to confirm the statistical significance of these factors and test for significant interactions between them.
Metabolites from this list for which significant overall effects of treatment, or sex X treatment interaction were found, were also considered as potential discriminant of the LPS response within each sex if VIP values from the OPLS-DA models testing the effect of LPS within each sex were greater than 1.
This was followed, where appropriate, by planned comparisons, as defined above.
Relationships between behavioural, cytokine, glial and metabolic data, and whether these associations were dependent upon the genotype, sex or treatment, were tested using the Pearson correlation coefficient, for which statistically significant values above 0.7 were considered as strong associations.
P ≤ 0.05 was considered statistically significant for all analyses.
3. Results

Systemic LPS-induced sickness
To assess whether APP/PS1 mice responded more strongly to LPS in the early hours after systemic injection than their WT littermates, and to explore the sex dependency of this response, we assessed LPS-induced sickness using physiological measures and by monitoring behavioural suppression from baseline pre-injection performance in two tasks.
Results of the three-way ANOVAs on these measures are presented in Suppl.
Table

Body mass and rectal temperature
Body mass was overall lower in females regardless of their genotype (F (1,36) = 152.67,
p = 0.005; Suppl.
Fig.
Within APP/PS1 mice, females (p < 0.0001), but not males (p = 0.87), weighed less than their WT littermates (Genotype × Sex: F (1,36) = 12.22, p = 0.0013) but none of the experimental groups showed significant weight loss 4 h after the LPS or PBS challenge (Suppl.
Fig.
Rectal body temperature was overall reduced by LPS (F (1,34) = 17.09, p = 0.0002), but partial comparisons showed that this decrease was only significant in males (minus ∼1.2-1.5 °C, p < 0.05 for both WT and APP/PS1 males compared to PBS-treated males, Fig.

LPS suppressed food burrowing activity
Food borrowing behaviour was overall suppressed by systemic LPS (p < 0.0001) but unaffected by PBS (p = 0.52; Treatment × Time: F (1,36) = 9.47, p = 0.004, Fig.
Significant reductions in food burrowing behaviour 4 h after injection of LPS were seen in WT males (p = 0.008), WT females (p = 0.002) and APP/PS1 females (p = 0.04), but not in APP/PS1 males (p = 0.10) whose baseline performance was lower than of WT males females and more variable than of APP/PS1 females (Fig.

LPS suppressed exploratory drive without altering spatial working memory performance
Exploration of the Y maze, assessed through the number of arm visits, did not differ between any experimental groups at baseline (Fig.
Fig.
p < 0.0001).
All PBS-treated groups, but female APP/ PS1, also showed a milder reduction in Y maze exploration 4 h after injection (p < 0.05 in all cases, Fig.
p < 0.0001), reflecting habituation to the apparatus.
Spontaneous alternation performance was overall lower in females compared to males (F (1,35) = 4.25, p = 0.048, Fig.
Fig.

Systemic LPS-induced circulating cytokines
We assessed systemic inflammation 4 h after inoculation with LPS by quantifying plasma levels of 5 pro-or anti-inflammatory cytokines.
Results of the three-way ANOVAs applied to circulating cytokine levels are presented in Suppl.
Table
We found that, regardless of sex and genotype, LPS led to significant increases in plasma levels of IL-6 (F (1,30) = 116.2,
p < 0.0001, posthoc tests: p < 0.0002 compared to PBS-treated mice in all cases, Fig.
Elevated levels of the pro-inflammatory cytokine TNF-α after LPS (F (1,30) = 7.82, p = 0.009) were only significant in WT females (p = 0.02 compared to PBS-treated mice, Fig.
Circulating INF-γ (F (1,30) = 2.70, p = 0.11, Fig.

Hippocampal metabolic profiles

Identification of discriminant metabolites
To investigate LPS-induced metabolic changes in the hippocampus, and whether this was dependent upon the genotype and/or and sex of the mice, we used LC-MS analysis.
Metabolic data from all hippocampal extracts were first subjected to PCA, to identify trends, and OPLS-DA to detect global metabolic differences between experimental conditions.
Then, OPLS-DAs applied to models including 2 classes were carried out in order to identify metabolites differentially expressed in response to LPS or as a function of sex or genotype.
The quality of these models was assessed by the R 2 and Q 2 parameters which indicate the variance explained by the model and predicted variance after crossvalidation, respectively, and range between 0 and 1, with Q2 values above 0.5 (50% of variance predicted) revealing good separation between the classes tested.
Metabolites were considered to contribute to the separations and clusters associated with each experimental condition when their VIP values from OPLS-DA models was greater than 1.5 if subsequent 3-way ANOVAs confirmed their ability to discriminate genotypes, sexes, treatment conditions and/or interactions between these factors.
As shown in Table
Their function in the brain and potential implication in sex differences in brain function, AD progression and/or inflammatory processes, when known, is presented in Suppl.
Table
Global metabolic differences reveal distinct clustering between PBSand LPS treated mice.
PCA analysis preformed on all animals gave 6 components explaining 59.6% of the variance.
The plots pertaining to the first two components revealed, as the major trend, a separation between LPS-treated males and females (Fig.
This was confirmed by the global OPLS-DA which gave 5 components (1 predictive and 4 orthogonal) with a variance explained (R2) of 99.4% and predictive variance (Q2) of 88.6%.
As shown on Fig.
Within LPS-treated mice, some separation between sexes was also seen, regardless of genotype (Fig.
Metabolic differences between genotypes were not apparent.
Thirty-seven metabolites with VIP values above 1.5 were identified from the global OPLS-DA model.
Thirty-two of them showed statistically significant overall effects of treatment, revealing major changes in amino acids, carbohydrate, nucleotide, lipid and energy metabolism in response to LPS, regardless of sex and genotype (Table
Subsequent 2-class OPLS-DAs between PBS-and LPS-treated mice within each sex, also gave strong models with a variance explained of 100% and a predicted variance above 85%.
Five components were identified in males (1 predictive + 4 orthogonal; R 2 = 1.00,
Q 2 = 0.857) and 7 in females (1 predictive and 6 orthogonal; R 2 = 1.00,
Q 2 = 0.863).
Loading plots of predictive vs first orthogonal Fig.
4.5-month-old male and female APP/PS1 mice and their wild-type (WT) littermates were challenged with LPS (100µ/kg i.v.) or its vehicle PBS.
Their plasma was collected 4 h later, immediately after behavioural assessment, for measurement of induced levels of pro-and anti-inflammatory cytokines.
At this time point, a significant increase in circulating Interleukin 6 (IL-6, A), which has both pro-and anti-inflammatory effects, was observed regardless of sex and genotype (A).
Levels of the pro-inflammatory cytokine tumour necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α) were increased by LPS in females, particularly WT females (B), but the levels of the other pro-inflammatory mediator, interferon gamma (IFN-γ), were unaltered (C).
A significant increase in circulating levels of the anti-inflammatory cytokine IL-10, was also observed in females, regardless of genotype (E).
Data were rank-transformed for statistical analyses but are expressed as Median ± interquartile range of non-normalised responses.
Dots represent individual animals.
Pairwise comparisons: *p < 0.05; **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.0001 vs PBS.

Table 1
Metabolites differently expressed between males and females and in response to LPS.
Statistical significance from 3-way ANOVAs followed by pairwise comparisons testing the effect of LPS within each sex, when appropriate.
When significant genotype, sex and/or their interaction with treatment were observed, metabolites with VIP values below 1.5 were considered discriminant if pairwise comparisons confirmed genotype or sex differences in PBS-treated mice and/or a sexually dimorphic LPS response.
components revealed a clear separation between treatment groups, regardless of genotype, in both sexes (Fig.
The hippocampal metabolic response of males to LPS was characterised by significant changes in 53 metabolites (Table
Thirtysix discriminant metabolites with VIP values above 1.5 were identified from the 2-class OPLS-DA between PBS-and LPS-treated males, and confirmed with ANOVAs.
Statistical significance between these groups was also confirmed for another 13 metabolites identified from the global OPLS-DA model, and for 4 the 11 metabolites with confirmed Sex × Treatment interaction effects.
The hippocampal metabolic response to LPS in females was characterised by statistically significant changes in 50 metabolites (Table
Twenty discriminant metabolites with VIP values above 1.5 were identified from the 2-class OPLS-DA model, and confirmed with ANOVAs.
Statistical significance between PBS-and LPS-treated females was also confirmed for another 20 metabolites identified from the global OPLS-DA model, and for 9 of the 11 metabolites showing sexually dimorphic responses to LPS.
3.3.1.2.
Discriminant metabolites between sexes in PBS-treated mice.
Since the metabolic response to LPS was found to be, at least in part, sexdependent, a 2-class OPLS-DA was also carried out between PBS-treated males and females in order to identify whether the hippocampal metabolic profile of males and females differs in the absence of immune stimulation.
This gave a strong model with 1 predictive and 2 orthogonal components (R 2 = 0.985, Q 2 = 0.809) and clear separation between sexes, regardless of genotype (Fig.
Sex differences in hippocampal metabolism were characterised by significant changes in the levels of 40 metabolites, showing major differences in amino acids, carbohydrate and fatty acyls metabolism (Table
While forty-three metabolites with VIP values above 1.5 were identified from the 2-class OPLS-DA model, 36 were confirmed with statistically significant sex effects in PBS-treated mice.
Sex differences in PBS-treated mice were also confirmed for another 4 metabolites for which significant effects of sex or sex × treatment interaction were revealed by individual ANOVAs.
3.3.1.3.
Lack of major metabolic perturbations in the hippocampus of 4.5month-old APP/PS1 mice.
Next we carried out a 2-class OPLS-DA between genotypes in PBS-treated mice to confirm the lack of apparent differences in the hippocampal metabolic profile of WT and APP/PS1 mice.
This gave a weak model explaining 24.4% of the variance between genotypes (3 predictive, 0 orthogonal components; R 2 = 0.697, Q 2 = 0.244), revealing a lack of complete separation between WT and APP/PS1 mice (Fig.
This indicates that the metabolic profile of PBS-treated WT and APP/PS1 mice was not strongly influenced by the disease status, consistent with our previous study in males showing a lack of clear differences in hippocampal metabolism between WT and APP/PS1 mice at 4 and 8 months of age
Accordingly, only 2 metabolites with VIP values above 1.5 could be Global OPLS-DA model (R 2 = 0.994, Q2 = 0.886) revealing clear separations between PBS-and LPS-treated mice (X axis: predictive component), but also some separation between LPS-treated male and female mice (Y axis: first orthogonal component), regardless of genotype.
C) Accordingly, the class OPLS-DA model comparing genotypes in PBS-treated mice confirmed the lack of clear separation between WT and APP/PS1 mice (R 2 = 0.697, Q 2 = 0.244).
Predictive component 1 (X axis) vs 2 (Y axis).
2-class OPLS-DA models confirmed the strong differences in hippocampal metabolism due to sex in the absence of immune stimulation, (R 2 = 0.985, Q 2 = 0.809; D) as well as the excellent separation between PBS-and LPS-treated mice males (R 2 = 1.00,
Q 2 = 0.857; E) and females (R 2 = 1.00,
Q2 = 0.863, F).
D-F: Predictive (X axis) vs 1st orthogonal (Y axis) component.
identified with this 2-class OPLS-DA model and confirmed with ANOVAs.
Significant genotype effects were also found for another 3 out of the 98 validated metabolites, with confirmed statistical significance within PBS-treated mice (Table
Although some separation in hippocampal metabolism appear to be emerging between 4.5-monthsold WT and APP/PS1 males (Fig.
metabolomics results and Suppl.
Fig.
This apparent distinct clustering, which Fig.
4.5-month-old male and female APP/PS1 mice and their wild-type (WT) littermates were challenged with LPS (100µ/kg i.v.) or its vehicle PBS.
Schematic representation of the anti-inflammatory serotonin, and pro-inflammatory kynurenine, pathways of tryptophan metabolism.
At 4 h post-injection, LPS-treated mice showed significant upregulation of L-tryptophan (A) as well as of 5-Hydroxylindoleacetic acid (B) and N1-Methyl-2-pyridone-5-carboxamide (2PY, C), the end metabolites of the serotonin and kynurenine pathways, respectively.
Changes in 2PY levels were negatively correlated to D) rectal temperature in males (r = -0.718,
p = 0.0004) which exhibited an hypothermic response to LPS but not females 9r = -0.21,
p = 0.37); E) the number of arms visited in the spontaneous alternation test 4 h after the injection in both males (r = -0.837,
p < 0.0001) and females (r = -0.791,
p < 0.0001); and F) sickness scores for arm visits in both males (r = -0.741,
p < 0.0001) and females (r = -0.824,
p < 0.0001), suggesting that increased 2PY levels is associated with the severity of LPS-induced sickness.
Data are expressed as Means ± SEM.
Dots represent individual animals.
Discriminant metabolites are highlighted by grey text boxes.
Pairwise comparisons following 3-way ANOVAs: *, p < 0.05; **, p < 0.01; **, p < 0.0001 compared to PBS-treated mice of same sex and genotype.
cannot be explained by orthogonal variation within males, may be due to a combination of borderline differences that are not sufficiently severe to reach statistical significance in individual ANOVAs.
Indeed, 59 additional metabolites showed VIP values comprised between 1 and 1.5 (Table1).

Metabolic pathways with sex differences and responsive to systemic LPS
The analyses revealed that regardless of sex and disease status, LPS predominantly affected the activity of four metabolic pathways: tryptophan (Fig.
4.5-month-old male and female APP/PS1 mice and their wild-type (WT) littermates were challenged with LPS (100 µ/kg i.v.) or its vehicle PBS.
Schematic representation of methionine metabolism showing downregulation of 4 key metabolites from this pathway in LPS-treated mice, at 4 h post-injection, regardless of sex or genotype (A-D).
Two of these metabolites, L-methionine-S-Oxide (B) and 5′-Methylthioadenosine (D), as well as 2 methionine derivatives involved in taurine metabolism, L-Cystathionine (E) and hypotaurine (F), were also found in significantly reduced levels in females compared to males.
Data are expressed as Means ± SEM.
Dots represent individual animals.
Discriminant metabolites are highlighted by grey text boxes.
Pairwise comparisons following 3-way ANOVAs: *, p < 0.05; **, p < 0.01; **, p < 0.0001 compared to PBS-treated mice of same sex and genotype; ++ , p < 0.01, +++ , p < 0.0001 compared to males.
# , p < 0.05; ## , p < 0.01; ### , p < 0.0001; compared to PBS-treated males of same genotype.
while sex differences were also found in the absence of immune stimulation within the methionine (Fig.
Changes in other metabolites as well as their role in brain function and implications in sex differences, AD progression and immune processes, are reported in Suppl.
metabolomics results, Suppl.
Fig.
Table
3.3.2.1.
LPS-induced tryptophan metabolism regardless of sex and disease status.
Tryptophan metabolic pathways are represented Fig.
It is the precursor of the monoaminergic neurotransmitter serotonin which plays a critical beneficial role in modulating behaviour, cognition, mood, stress and inflammatory responses
The majority of Fig.
Reduced pyruvate metabolism in the hippocampus of APP/PS1 male 4 h after systemic LPS administration.
4.5-month-old male and female APP/PS1 mice and their wild-type (WT) littermates were challenged with LPS (100 µ/kg i.v.) or its vehicle PBS.
Schematic representation of the pyruvate metabolic pathway and its links with the sorbitol and glycolate pathways.
At 4 h post-injection, LPS-treated APP/PS1 male mice failed to show a reduction in D-sorbitol levels (A), but in contrast, exhibited downregulation of 4 key metabolites of the pyruvate metabolic pathway: 3-Phospho-D-glycerate (B), 2-phosphoglycolate (C), phosphoenolpyruvate (D) and pyruvate (E).
Data are expressed as Means ± SEM.
Dots represent individual animals.
Discriminant metabolites are highlighted by grey text boxes.
Pairwise comparisons following 3-way ANOVAs: *, p < 0.05; **, p < 0.01; compared to PBS-treated mice of same sex and genotype.
# , p < 0.05; ## , p < 0.01; ### , p < 0.0001; compared to PBS-treated males of same genotype.
tryptophan is, however, catabolised by the kynurenine pathway, the first part of the tryptophan nicotinamide pathway
Kynurenine metabolism leads to activation of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD) metabolism, an important regulator of various energy metabolism pathways and cellular homeostasis, via the biosynthesis of quinolinic acid, forming the second part of the tryptophan-nicotinamide pathway
Both the serotonin and nicotinamide pathways of tryptophan metabolism, illustrated Fig.
This was reflected by elevated L-trypto- phan levels (Fig.
Correlation analyses indicated that fluctuations in 2PY levels were associated with a number of parameters related to the sickness response to LPS.
We found negative associations between 2PY levels and i) rectal temperature (Fig.
p = 0.0004; females: r = -0.21,
p = 0.37); ii) the number of arms visited in the spontaneous alternation test 4 h after the injection (r = -0.80,
p < 0.0001; Fig.
p < 0.0001) and females (r = -0.791,
p < 0.0001); and iii) sickness scores for arm visits (r = -0.773,
p < 0.0001; Fig.
p < 0.0001) and females (r = -0.824,
p < 0.0001).
3.3.2.2.
LPS-induced alterations in methionine metabolism are in part sexdependent.
Methionine is an essential amino acid involved in protein synthesis and required for growth and tissue repair, immune responses, protection against oxidative stress as well as epigenetic regulation in the brain
It is also a substrate for other key amino acids, such as taurine and cysteine, as well as the antioxidant molecule glutathione (Fig.
Significant reductions in L-methionine (Fig.
Levels of S-adenosy-L-homocysteine, an intermediate in methionine biosynthesis and degradation by the recycling and transsulfuration pathways, respectively, were increased by LPS in APP/PS1 males with opposite effects seen in APP/PS1 females (Genotype × Sex × Treatment: F (1,34) = 4.13, p = 0.49; Fig.
Methionine is a substrate for the anti-oxidant molecule glutathione whose toxic oxidation product glutathione disulfide
Effects of LPS were more pronounced in females which also showed downregulation of other metabolites involved in the synthesis of methionine via both the salvage and recycling pathways.
LPS-treated females exhibited reduced hippocampal levels of S-adenosy-L-methionine (Fig.
In the absence of immune stimulation, females also presented with reduced levels of L-5′-methylthioadenosine (Fig.

LPS lowers pyruvate metabolism in APP/PS1males
. Pyruvate is a key metabolite in several metabolic pathways important for glucose and energy homeostasis, with potent anti-oxidant and anti-inflammatory properties
It is made from glucose and is the end-product of glycolysis (Fig.
In males, and more specifically APP/PS1 males, LPS rapidly lowered pyruvate metabolism by downregulating several intermediates in the glycolysis pathway.
D-fructose 1,6-bisphosphate (Fig.
A baseline, however, there was a trend for these metabolites to be more abundant in the hippocampi of APP/PS1 males, explaining the greater effect of LPS, but post-LPS levels of these intermediates in pyruvate metabolism were similar in males from both genotypes.
This was associated with reduced levels of 2-phosphoglycolate (Sex × Treatment: F (1,34) = 7.63, p = 0.009, Fig.
Conversion of glucose into fructose is a two-step process in which glucose is reduced to sorbitol, which is then converted to fructose.
LPS-treated APP/PS1 males also failed to show the decreased in D-sorbitol contents observed in all other LPS-treated groups (WT males, WT and APP/PS1 females, Fig.
In females of both genotypes, LPS also reduced the levels of Smalate (Sex × Treatment: F (1,34) = 11.62,
p = 0.0017, Fig.

LPS lowers methylglyoxal metabolism in females.
Methylglyoxal is a neurotoxic by-product of glycolysis, fructose, fatty acid and protein metabolism and potent inducer of inflammation and oxidative stress which can be detoxified by degradation in D-lactate via conversion into D-S-lactoylglutathione
In females, LPS induced a downregulation of a number of metabolites upstream and downstream of methylglyoxal production.
This includes D-sorbitol, which is involved in fructose metabolism (Fig.
p = 0.002), Fig.
p = 0.0018, Fig.
p = 0.002, Fig.
This was associated with reduced levels of its degradation product (D)-S-lactoylglutathione and (D)-lactate (Sex × Treatment: F (1,34) = 6.17, p = 0.02 & F (1,34) = 5.62, p = 0.02; Fig.

Lack of glial response to LPS at 4 h post-injection
We used immunohistochemistry to detect Iba-1 positive cells, quantify their number, the area they occupied and the size of their soma (used as a morphological marker of microglial activation) and to determine the area occupied by GFAP-positive astrocytes, in the hippocampus of 4.5-month-old male and female WT and APP/PS1 mice 4 h after LPS or PBS administration.
Results of the three-way ANOVAs applied to these measures are presented in Suppl.
Table
We report that the area occupied by Iba-1 positive microglia was lower in the hippocampus of WT female mice compared to WT males and APP/PS1 females (Genotype × Sex: F (1,35) = 4.14, p = 0.049, Fig.
The smaller area covered by microglia seen in WT females was particularly evident in PBS-treated mice for both the whole hippocampus (p = 0.02 vs WT males and APP/PS1 females, Fig.
LPS caused nonsignificant reductions in the area covered by Iba-1 throughout the hippocampus of APP/PS1 females, as well as of males from both genotypes (Fig.
We also found a lower number of Iba1 positive cells in the DG of PBS-treated females compared to PBS-treated WT males (p = 0.008, Fig.
The area of microglial somas did not differ between the sex, genotype and treatment conditions in any of the hippocampal subfields (Suppl.
Fig.
p = 0.003; Suppl.
Fig.
Fig.
We did not detect differences in the area occupied by GFAP after LPS in discrete hippocampal regions of 4.5-month-old male and female WT and APP/PS1 mice and there was no genotype or sex dependency in this measure (Suppl.
Fig.

Discussion
Given the role of systemic inflammation in AD pathogenesis and known sex differences in the risk of AD and immune responses, we tested whether the behavioural and hippocampal metabolic responses to a systemic challenge with LPS would be exacerbated in young APP/ PS1 female in the early hours post-inoculation.
Here, we first show that the hippocampal metabolic signature of APP/PS1 mice, in the absence of immune stimulation, did not clearly differ from that of WT mice, at this early pathological stage, revealing only subtle differences, but predominantly in females.
This is consistent with our previous study in males
Differences in hippocampal metabolism have been previously reported in this model at 6 months of age, and in comparison to C57BL/6j mice rather than WT littermates, but without testing for potential sex differences although both males and females were included in that study
Second, we also show in the absence of immune stimulation, a sexual dimorphism in the hippocampal metabolic profile of 4.5-month-old mice, particularly affecting methionine and pyruvate metabolism, but independent of the genotype.
The major finding, however, was that 4 h after onset of systemic inflammation, several aspects of the LPS response were also sex-dependent.
Importantly, we found at this time point that males and females exhibited comparable behavioural responses to LPS, regardless of the genotype, but the temperature change was greater in males and the cytokine response, particularly the Fig.
4.5-month-old male and female APP/PS1 mice and their wild-type (WT) littermates were challenged with LPS (100 µ/kg i.v.) or its vehicle PBS.
Their brain were collected 4 h later, immediately after behavioural assessment, and one hemisphere was processed for immunostaining of Iba1 positive microglia.
Representative images of Iba1 immunostaining in the whole hippocampus (A), CA1 (B), CA2 (C), CA3 (D), and dentate gyrus (DG, E) subfields extracted and analysed using a Matlab tool.
LPS had no significant effects on microglial density in any hippocampal areas, estimated through the quantification of the percentage area covered by Iba1 positive microglia (F-J) and number of microglial cells per mm 2 (K-O).
The area covered by microglia, was, however, significantly lower in the hippocampus of WT females (F), particularly in the CA2 (H) and CA3 (G) subfields, but lower microglial numbers were only observed in the dentate gyrus (O).
Data are expressed as Means ± SEM.
Dots represent individual animals.
Pairwise comparisons: *p < 0.05; **p < 0.01.
secretion of IL-10, was greater in females.
Metabolic data indicated that LPS induced a comparable activation of both the serotonin and nicotinamide pathways of tryptophan metabolism in the hippocampus of WT and APP/PS1 mice of both sexes, with hippocampal levels of the toxic nicotinamide metabolite 2PY being positively associated with the severity of the sickness response.
And while all LPS-treated mice exhibited a downregulation in methionine levels, reversible oxidation and salvage, sex-differences were observed in the response of the recycling and transsulfuration pathways of methionine metabolism.
Males also exhibited a downregulation of pyruvate metabolism after LPS, exacerbated in APP/PS1 males, while females showed downregulation of methylglyoxal metabolism.

Sex differences in hippocampal metabolism in the absence of immune stimulation
Spontaneous alternation was preserved in APP/PS1 mice regardless of sex, in agreement with our previous findings in both males and females at the same pathological stage
In the present study, however, we observed an overall reduction in spontaneous alternation performance in females, suggesting a lower spatial working memory ability as was also previously reported in C57BL/6j mice
Males are indeed generally found to outperform females for spatial working memory, and this has been related to differences in hippocampal morphology and function
Accordingly, we have also shown that the hippocampal metabolic profile of females differed from that of males for 41 metabolites, but similarly in WT and APP/PS1 mice.
The most significant changes affected the metabolism of methionine, an essential amino acid for protein synthesis and epigenetic regulation in the brain, and key regulator of antioxidant protection and immune responses at physiological levels
Sex differences were seen in the salvage and transsulfuration pathways of methionine metabolism, with robustly downregulated levels of 5′-methylthioadenosine and hypotaurine, respectively.
Methionine levels are in part regulated by the salvage pathway which recycles 5′-methylthioadenosine back into methionine
Reduced levels of 5′-methylthioadenosine in females were not associated with altered methionine levels, suggesting that they could be maintained via an alternative biosynthetic route and/or through reduced catabolism.
The latter hypothesis is supported by the associated reduced levels of L-cystathionine and hypotaurine in females, two key intermediates in the synthesis of taurine from the methionine derivative homocysteine, during their degradation via the transsulfuration pathway
While methionine levels were preserved in females, the specific changes observed in downstream metabolites in females may predispose them to immune dysfunction and cell damage.
5′-Methylthioadenosine, is indeed now seen as a key regulator of immune responses to inflammation and systemic infections
Furthermore, hypotaurine which has well established antioxidant properties
Taurine and hypotaurine are present in elevated levels in the brain of the long-lived Snell Dwarf mouse
Taurine also plays a protective role against age-related cognitive decline
Increased abundance in members of the glycolytic metabolic pathway, which provides energy for cellular metabolism in the form of pyruvate and ATP, was also observed in female hippocampi with particularly elevated levels of 3-phosphoglycerate and phosphoenolpyruvate in WT females.
This was accompanied by unaltered pyruvate and ATP levels, but reduced levels of 2-phosphoglycolate, regardless of the genotype, possibly reflecting a metabolic shift towards enhanced regeneration of 3-phosphoglycerate from 2-phosphoglycolate, at the expense of glyoxylate metabolism, as suggested by the associated downregulation in 3-oxalomalate levels.
Glycolate and glyoxylate metabolism have been linked to oxidative stress in peroxisomes
2-phosphoglycolate is produced as a by-product of oxidative DNA damage
Conversion of glycolate into glyoxylate, a precursor of 3-oxalomate
This may lead to adverse effects as oxalomalate is known to prevent LPSinduced production of nitric oxide by activated macrophages
Peroxisome-associated oxidative stress is a mechanism thought to contribute to neurotoxicity, inflammation, cognitive dysfunction, and accelerated brain aging
In PBS-treated mice, metabolic differences were not associated with significant sex differences in the number of astrocytes and microglia, or microglial soma size, a morphological activation marker.
The area covered by microglia was, however, lower in the hippocampus of WT females, which could reflect reduced ramification per cell, as previously reported in females
This reduction was not seen in APP/PS1 female mice, consistent with recent observations.
Microglia of APP/PS1 mice was indeed found to develop ramifications in the presence of Aβ plaques, regardless of sex, but this response occurs earlier in females than in males
APP/PS1 female mice also slightly differed from WT mice in their hippocampal metabolic profile, as well as with their reduced body weight and lack of habituation to repeated exposure to the Y-maze.
But, while sex differences in brain metabolism seen in the ageing WT mouse brain have been hypothesised to contribute to the greater susceptibility of females to AD-like pathology
The implication of the few metabolites found to be less abundant in the hippocampus of female APP/PS1 mice in Aβ plaques deposition is currently unknown.
In contrast, global differences in hippocampal metabolism appeared to be emerging at 4.5 months of age between WT and APP/PS1 males, expected to develop the pathology at a slower rate than female, but in the absence of behavioural and/or physiological changes.
Furthermore, the role of the metabolites found altered in female APP/PS1 mice in microglial morphology or function is also unknown, and we did not found any association between metabolite levels and microglial density and/or activation.
4.2.
Metabolic effects of LPS independent of sex and disease status 4.5-month-old WT and APP/PS1 mice, regardless of their sex, exhibited a robust behavioural suppression 4 h after inoculation with a low systemic LPS dose of 100ug/kg, without concomitant changes in the number and morphology of glial cells in the hippocampus.
This is consistent with findings in 4-month-old C57BL/6J females
Indeed, morphological activation of microglia would generally occur 6 h after systemic administration of higher doses of LPS in the healthy brain
Thus, the fact that we did not find differences in microglial number and morphology between sexes and genotypes is consistent with the lack of microglial response at 4 h post-LPS, and published reports showing that changes in microglial phenotypes, occurring with the progression of amyloidosis in this APP/ PS1 model, manifest after the age of 5 months
A subset of microglia, however, shows signs of activated morphology and phenotype prior to that, when clustering around Aβ plaques
As consistently reported with a range of systemic LPS doses, hippocampal tryptophan levels rapidly increased in the hippocampus of LPS-treated mice, independently of sex and disease status.
This was associated with elevated levels of degradation products of both the serotonin and nicotinamide pathways of tryptophan metabolism, suggesting their co-activation, as seen previously
A shift in the balance of brain tryptophan metabolism towards the kynurenine pathway is thought to be a major mediator of pro-inflammatory changes following systemic inflammation, and to ultimately cause serotonin deficiency
Although serotonin levels were not measured here, as this would require the optimisation of a single LC/MS method specifically designed to address behavioural and structural differences between tryptophan metabolites and related monoamines
Several studies have shown that elevated hippocampal 5-HIAA levels occurring in the first 24 h after inoculation with systemic LPS were associated with stable serotonin levels
Transient region-specific increases in the activity of enzymes involved in serotonin synthesis were indeed seen 2 h after systemic LPS in the frontal cortex and midbrain of rats challenged with the same 100ug/kg dose, but returning to baseline levels by the 6th hour post-inoculation
In agreement with this, a time course microdialysis study showed that systemic LPS-induced a gradual increase in extracellular hippocampal tryptophan and 5-HIAA levels over 8 h, which was associated with a transient increase in serotonin levels, peaking 3-4 h after administration
Interestingly, the subsequent decline towards baseline serotonin levels was associated with a downregulation of the serotonin/tryptophan ratio and concomitant upregulation of the kynurenine/tryptophan ratio, indicating a metabolic shift towards kynurenine metabolism
Increased 2PY levels, reflecting the amount of nicotinamide biosynthesized from tryptophan
We can, therefore, hypothesise that the elevated hippocampal 2PY levels we saw 4 h after LPS administration would reflect an activation of the tryptophan-nicotinamide pathway, but whether or not its association with elevated hippocampal 5-HIAA levels predict a metabolic shift towards kynurenine metabolism will need to be determined in future studies, by measuring the levels of serotonin and key intermediates of the kynurenine pathway at later points.
This is particularly important because activation of the serotonin pathway of tryptophan metabolism is protective to the brain, whereas activation of the kynurenine pathway leads to detrimental effects, the former being antiinflammatory
This is also consistent with our observed association between 2PY levels and the severity of the behavioural and temperature response to LPS.
The time course of changes in tryptophan metabolic pathways also has implication for our understanding of the mechanisms underlying the precipitating influence of systemic infection and inflammation in AD.
Recent findings indeed suggest that reduced serotonin neurotransmission contributes to the development of early cognitive symptoms of AD
We also showed, for the first time, that systemic LPS rapidly inhibited the synthesis and metabolism of methionine in the hippocampus, illustrated by the lowering of both L-methionine and its downstream metabolites.
Regardless of sex, LPS altered methionine reversible oxidation and salvage.
Methionine reversible oxidation, the process whereby methionine is oxidized into methionine sulfoxide, which is then reduced back to methionine, is thought to play a key regulatory role in mediating activity-dependent plastic changes in cellular excitability
The reduction in the levels of the methionine oxidation product L-methionine S-oxide by LPS could be seen as a protective response since reversible methionine oxidation becomes impaired in ageing and related diseases, leading to the accumulation of toxic methionine oxidation products, oxidative damage to cells
Methionine sulfoxide reductase, the antioxidant enzyme which reduces methionine sulfoxide back to methionine, is also known to alleviate LPS-induced inflammation in microglia
However, we found here that this was associated with reduced abundance of L-methionine, suggesting that the lack of Lmethionine availability, rather than enhanced reversible oxidation, caused the lowering of L-methionine S-oxide levels.
The salvage pathway plays a critical role in maintaining optimal methionine levels as proven by the ability of 5′-methylthioadenosine to replenish the cellular methionine pool within 24 h of methionine deprivation
Reduced levels of both S-adenosyl-L-methionine and 5′methylthioadenosine, as we saw here associated with methionine deficiency 4 h after LPS administration, are thought to be early events reflecting the activation of the salvage pathway for the rescue of methionine levels, but this could only confirmed by looking at later time points
A failure of this mechanism would lead to detrimental effects, by compromising cell differentiation, growth and survival
The methionine salvage pathway indeed recycles the sulphur of 5′-methylthioadenosine back into methionine, which is critically needed for protein synthesis
S-adenosyl-L-methionine, whose levels were particularly decreased by LPS in female mice, is a precursor for this reaction but also a methyl donor for epigenetic reactions and key regulator of metabolism, proliferation, and apoptosis
Persistent downregulation of the salvage pathway could also be damaging due to the anti-inflammatory properties of both Sadenosyl-L-methionine and 5′-methylthioadenosine
However, while methionine deficiency, if persistent, can impair multiple aspects of cell function, and ultimately cell viability
Reduced availability and metabolism of methionine is indeed thought to be the main driver of lifespan and healthspan enhancement by dietary restriction through improved lipid metabolism as well as reduced oxidative stress, inflammation and susceptibility to immune and central nervous disorders
Methionine metabolism is indeed reduced in the long-lived naked-mole rat
Thus, whether our observed rapid downregulation of methionine metabolism by LPS constitutes a beneficial or detrimental response in the brain cannot be fully answered in this study and our data also suggest that this may be, in part, sex-dependent.
Indeed, O-succinyl-Lhomoserine contributes to the synthesis of both homocysteine and L- methionine
This is particularly relevant to the link between immune responses and AD progression, since homocysteine can trigger neuroinflammation and microglial activation
In contrast, LPStreated males instead presented with increased levels of glutathione disulfide, a toxic oxidized form of glutathione and an end product of methionine metabolism, whose circulating levels were found to be elevated in inflammatory conditions

Sexual dimorphism in the hippocampal metabolic response to LPS
Changes in body temperature, pyruvate and methylglyoxal metabolism 4 h after onset of systemic inflammation were clearly sex-dependent.
Thermoregulatory responses to LPS in rodents are made of one to three phases of hyperthermia and/or hypothermia, although fever is less likely to occur in mice than in rats
LPS-induced hypothermia is seen as a thermoregulatory "failure", thought to reflect the inability of the brain to regulate body temperature in shock
It is also an indicator of the severity of LPS responses, as it was found to be dosedependent and more pronounced in mouse strains susceptible to this endotoxin
Consistent with our findings, LPSinduced hypothermia is generally found to be more severe in male than female mice
Hypothermia is thought to be in part induced in response to changes in the brain as it did not appear to be related to variations in circulating levels of IL-1β, IL-6 or IL-10 (
Our data showing that LPS-induced hypothermia is correlated with increased 2PY levels, thought to reflect an activation of the tryptophan-nicotinamide pathway, are consistent with previous reports showing that sickness responses to LPS are in part mediated by activation of the kynurenine pathway
Here, hypothermia was sex-dependent and this was also associated with a reduction in hippocampal pyruvate metabolism particularly affecting APP/PS1 males.
A possible link cannot be ruled out as hypothermia was found to cause a progressive decrease in cerebral pyruvate contents in the rat
Pyruvate is an intermediate energy metabolite of glucose with potent anti-oxidant and anti-inflammatory actions
Sex differences in pyruvate metabolism have been associated with a higher mitochondrial respiration rate and reduced oxidative stress in females
Evidence of anti-inflammatory effects of pyruvate in the brain include the demonstration that treatment with its ethyl pyruvate derivatives exerts robust neuroprotective effects, in both the post-ischemic brain and LPS-treated animals, by alleviating microglial activation and neutrophil infiltrations in vivo, and inhibiting LPS-induced pro-inflammatory changes in these cells in vitro
In addition, dietary supplementation with pyruvate was found to improve spatial memory impairments and brain energy metabolism in males of the same APP/PS1 mouse line as used here
Although systemic inflammation has been linked to cognitive decline and AD progression in both males and females
Thus, the present finding that male APP/PS1 mice were more susceptible to downregulation of pyruvate metabolism in the early hours postinoculation with LPS could constitute a male-specific mechanism underlying exacerbation of cognitive and neurodegenerative changes after systemic inflammation.
In contrast, females displayed a downregulation of methylglyoxal metabolism illustrated by reduced levels of its upstream regulators, with the exception of glycolysis, and of its reduction product D-lactate.
Methylglyoxal is a cytotoxic and pro-inflammatory glycotoxin whose deleterious effects are due to its role as a major precursor of advanced glycation end-products, and have been associated with several pathologies including diabetes, ageing and neurodegenerative diseases
Cerebrospinal fluid as well as serum methylglyoxal concentrations are increased in AD patients
Direct administration of methylglyoxal was also found to cause cognitive deficits in rats
Methylglyoxal is also produced by Aβ, contributing to cell death
In this context, we can hypothesise that the inhibition of methylglyoxal metabolism seen in females in response to systemic inflammation would constitute a protective response that, if persistent, may limit inflammation-induced exacerbation of AD-like pathology.
The mechanism behind a sexual dimorphism in this response, is however unknown.
Females were found to be more susceptible to the acute toxicity of methylglyoxal
Nevertheless, methylglyoxal metabolism has been implicated in obesity and diabetes
Our finding is, however, consistent with the elevated levels of the anti-inflammatory cytokine IL-10 that we found in LPS-treated females, but not males, at the 4 h time point.
Indeed, methylglyoxal was found to particularly inhibit the secretion of IL-10 and TNFα by myeloid cells

Conclusions
Taken together, our data indicate that while hippocampal metabolism in females, compared to males, may reflect a shift towards a proinflammatory and pro-oxidant signature, and while subtle metabolic differences in APP/PS1 mice compared to their WT littermates were only seen in females, in the early hours following inoculation with LPS, the physiological and metabolic responses of males are more pronounced, regardless of the genotype.
This is consistent with recent findings in a model of traumatic brain injury, whereby males exhibited a more aggressive neuroinflammatory profile than female mice during the acute and subacute phases post-injury
The molecular signature of male microglia was indeed found to be skewed towards pro-inflammatory activation and that of females found to be neuroprotective, expressing proteins related to the inhibition of inflammatory responses and promotion of repair mechanisms
Metabolic changes in the hippocampus occurred in the present study before morphological signs of microglial activation could be detected, affecting pathways known to modulate microglial activation.
This provides insights into how systemic LPS, whose brain penetration is poor at low dose and in the absence of blood brain barrier dysfunction
Importantly, we have found here that some of the metabolic changes are sex-specific, highlighting the importance of taking gender into consideration when studying susceptibility to inflammatory conditions and AD exacerbation.
Moreover, this study is the first to show an association between onset of systemic inflammation and downregulation of hippocampal methionine metabolism, but the protective or detrimental nature of this change needs to be determined in future studies.
No major differences in the response to LPS were seen here between WT and APP/PS1 mice, which can be due to the early pathological stages under investigation, since differences in microglial activation are subtle before the age of 4 months
However, some of the metabolic changes that we saw here in the hippocampus, a brain area critically affected by AD, 4 h after induction of systemic inflammation with LPS, are relevant to AD pathogenesis, particularly the activation of the tryptophan-nicotinamide pathway, reduced methionine availability and salvage as well as the reduction in pyruvate metabolism in males.
The extent to which a single infectious episode is sufficient to drive the progression of AD in susceptible individuals is not currently known.
Looking at the persistence of these metabolic alterations in relation to the progression of behavioural and neurological hallmarks of AD may help answering into this question.



Fig. 3 .
Fig. 3. Score plots of Principal Component Analysis (PCA) and two-class Orthogonal Partial Least Square Discriminant Analysis (OPLS-DA) models for hippocampal metabolism at 4 h post-injection with LPS or PBS.
R 2 : variance explained, Q 2 : variance predicted.
Dots represent individual animals.
A).
PCA analysis reveals global metabolic differences between LPS-treated males and females regardless of genotype [PC1 (X axis): R 2 X[1] = 0.232, Q 2 = 0.115; PC2 (Y axis): R 2 X[2] = 0.123, Q 2 = 0.082).
B)Global OPLS-DA model (R 2 = 0.994, Q2 = 0.886) revealing clear separations between PBS-and LPS-treated mice (X axis: predictive component), but also some separation between LPS-treated male and female mice (Y axis: first orthogonal component), regardless of genotype.
C) Accordingly, the class OPLS-DA model comparing genotypes in PBS-treated mice confirmed the lack of clear separation between WT and APP/PS1 mice (R 2 = 0.697, Q 2 = 0.244).
Predictive component 1 (X axis) vs 2 (Y axis).
2-class OPLS-DA models confirmed the strong differences in hippocampal metabolism due to sex in the absence of immune stimulation, (R 2 = 0.985, Q 2 = 0.809; D) as well as the excellent separation between PBS-and LPS-treated mice males (R 2 = 1.00,
Q 2 = 0.857; E) and females (R 2 = 1.00,
Q2 = 0.863, F).
D-F: Predictive (X axis) vs 1st orthogonal (Y axis) component.



Fig. 7 .
Fig. 7. Reduced methylglyoxal metabolism in the hippocampus of WT and APP/PS1 female 4 h after systemic LPS administration.
4.5-month-old male and female APP/PS1 mice and their wild-type (WT) littermates were challenged with LPS (100 µ/kg i.v.) or its vehicle PBS.
Schematic representation of the main pathways regulating methylglyoxal metabolism.
At 4 h post-injection, LPS-treated APP/PS1 female mice showed a reduction in lipid metabolism, with downregulation of 5 key metabolites involved in fatty acid and glycerolipid metabolism: hexadecanoic acid (A), octadecanoic acid (B), icosatrienoic acid (C), [FA (17:0)] heptadecanoic acid (D) and sn-Glycerol 3-phosphate (E).
This was associated with reduced levels of (D)-S-Lactoylglutathione (F) and (D)-Lactate (G), the reduction products of methylglyoxal.
Data are expressed as Means ± SEM.
Dots represent individual animals.
Discriminant metabolites are highlighted by grey text boxes.
Pairwise comparisons following 3-way ANOVAs: *, p < 0.05; **, p < 0.01; ***, p < 0.0001 compared to PBS-treated mice of same sex and genotype.
# , p < 0.05; compared to PBS-treated males of same genotype.