Propionate and Alzheimer’s Disease
Propionate, a short-chain fatty acid, serves important roles in the human body.
However, our review of the current literature suggests that under certain conditions, excess levels of propionate may play a role in Alzheimer's disease (AD).
The cause of the excessive levels of propionate may be related to the Bacteroidetes phylum, which are the primary producers of propionate in the human gut.
Studies have shown that the relative abundance of the Bacteroidetes phylum is significantly increased in older adults.
Other studies have shown that levels of the Bacteroidetes phylum are increased in persons with AD.
Studies on the diet, medication use, and propionate metabolism offer additional potential causes.
There are many different mechanisms by which excess levels of propionate may lead to AD, such as hyperammonemia.
These mechanisms offer potential points for intervention.

INTRODUCTION
Dietary fibers are carbohydrate polymers that have at least 10 monomeric units
The enzymes needed to digest most dietary fibers are lacking in the human body
Therefore, the microbiota in the intestine is tasked with fermenting dietary fibers.
Fermentation results in the production of short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs), which serve several important functions.
In the gut, they aid in microbial growth
They are also second messengers that can modulate gene expression and initiate the synthesis of gut peptides and hormones.
One of the major SCFAs is propionate, which is three carbons in length
It is estimated that in a human being who weighs 85 kg, the gut microbiota produce approximately 29.5 mg/kg of propionate each day via fermentation
In addition to fermentation, two other sources of propionate are food and the oral microbiome.
In 1984, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) labeled propionate as generally recognized as safe (GRAS) and approved its use for food preservation (U.S.
Department of
It is found in a concentration of 0.1 to 0.4% in various foods, including baked goods, dairy products, meat products, puddings, gelatins, and jams
Therefore, most persons are exposed to dietary sources of propionate every day.
It is estimated that in a single meal consisting of processed food, propionate is 0.3% (w/w;
Dietary choices thus could potentially impact the amount of propionate in the peripheral circulation.
Indeed,
Similarly,
As for the oral microbiome, oral microbiota can produce propionate
Increased propionate levels are associated with gingivitis and periodontal disease.
When propionate is ingested or generated in the intestine, it makes its way to the liver through the hepatic portal vein
Approximately 90-95% of propionate is used by the liver.
The remaining propionate enters the peripheral circulation.
In an interesting study,
Propionate can cross the blood-brain barrier (BBB).
According to the Human Metabolome Database, typical values of propionate in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) are 2.8-3.2
µM in adults
Propionate is also found in the saliva.
According to the Human Metabolome Database, different studies have found different ranges of resting propionate saliva levels, with levels ranging from 1 to 1,089.82 µM
Differences in the levels of propionate have been attributed to oral health, gender, and smoking status
Propionate serves several functions in the human body.
For instance, propionate promotes enteric smooth muscle contractions and stimulates host defense peptide expression
Deficient levels of propionate have been associated with increased risk for asthma and allergies, highlighting the positive role of propionate in the immune system
Additionally, the metabolism of propionate is associated with glucose production and energy metabolism
Through a series of reactions, propionate is first converted to propionyl-CoA before ultimately being converted to succinyl-CoA
Succinyl-CoA is a substrate in the TCA cycle.
Thus, dietary propionate could perhaps impact the TCA cycle.
Additionally, propionate can participate in the gut-brain axis
There is evidence that propionate can affect satiety by stimulating the release of peptide YY (PYY) and glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1).
PYY and GLP-1 function to provide a short-term signal of satiety to the brain.
Excess levels of propionate appear to be problematic.
One example of the effects of excess propionate is propionic acidemia (PA).
This metabolic disorder has been associated with motor impairments, brain atrophy, cognitive impairments, and dementia
Furthermore, persons with periodontal disease have increased levels of propionate in their saliva and appear to be at an increased risk for developing Alzheimer's disease (AD;
In line with those findings, there is emerging evidence that suggests that excess propionate may play a role in dementia, particularly in AD.
Dementia is an age-related disease that is associated with cognitive decline.
AD is the most common type of dementia and is characterized by neurofibrillary tangles and β-amyloid plaques
According to the Alzheimer's Association, an estimated 5.8 million individuals currently have AD in the United States
This number is projected to increase to 13.8 million by the year 2050
In this review article, we will explore the literature that supports the potential role of excess propionate in AD.

PROPIONATE, VALPROATE, AND ALZHEIMER'S DISEASE
Several recent studies offer evidence for a link between propionate and AD.
For instance,
They found a 1.35-fold increase in propionate levels in persons with dementia when compared to healthy controls.
They found that the levels of propionate were significantly increased in persons with AD in comparison to healthy controls.
Both studies were limited in that they only evaluated saliva samples; however, there is evidence for the validity of using saliva samples.
Similarly,
Moreover,
Several rodent studies link fecal and circulating levels of propionate to AD.
There is evidence that fecal levels of propionate are positively correlated with circulating levels of propionate in humans
Additionally,
Similarly,
They also found that AD transgenic mice had significantly higher fecal concentrations of propionate at 6 months of age in comparison to wild type mice.
Valproate provides further evidence for the role of excess propionate in AD.
As illustrated by Figure
Valproate (VPA) and its conjugate acid (valproic acid) are FDA approved medications (under trade names Divalproex, Depakote, Depakote ER, Depakene, Depacon, and Stavzor) for the treatment of epilepsy and bipolar disorder and are prescribed off label for agitation for persons with dementia
However, a growing body of evidence suggests that VPA causes neurotoxicity that is associated with its metabolism into propionic acid
In excessive amounts, propionic acid inhibits a urea cycle enzyme, carbamoyl phosphate synthase, which impairs the body's ability to excrete ammonia and thus results in hyperammonemia.
Once considered only a rare side effect, VPA induced hyperammonemic encephalopathy is now reported frequently in the literature.
It produces clinical signs and symptoms that appear to mirror those found in dementia (see Table
In a study investigating VPA's effects on fatty acid metabolism and the urea cycle in schizophrenic patients,
In a follow-up study by
As further evidence of the neurotoxicity associated with VPA,
They found that sodium valproate treatment resulted in brain atrophy, white matter volume loss, and a reduction in parietal lobe thickness.
They found that valproate treatment caused greater brain volume loss in comparison to the placebo.
In a second study with the same AD patients from the
Furthermore, through the first year of the study, the Mini-Mental State Examination scores implied that VPA treatment led to an accelerated decline in cognition.
Taken together, these studies provide further evidence for the role of propionate in AD.
Table
There appear to be age-related changes in the human microbiome, particularly changes in the relative abundance of Bacteroidetes.
For instance,
Likewise,
Bacteroidetes appear to play a role in AD and appear to potentially account for the excess levels of propionate in AD.
For instance,
They also found that the levels of several AD markers in CSF were significantly correlated with the relative abundance of the Bacteroides genus.
Although
Both
This finding supports a possible role of the gut microbiome in amyloid precursor protein (APP) expression.
In addition to Bacteriales, Actinobacteria may also play a role in AD.
Propionibacterium acnes (P.
acnes), which is part of the Actinobacteria phylum, is named after its ability to produce propionic acid
It is part of the skin, oral, and gut microbiome.
It can also cross the BBB
Concerning AD, P. acnes was reportedly found in the cortex of three patients with AD
Also,

POTENTIAL MECHANISMS
There is evidence for such a wide array of different mechanisms that excess propionate likely leads to AD by way of a combination of multiple different mechanisms.
Probably the most well-studied mechanism of propionate induced neurotoxicity is related to its ability to impair the urea cycle, the principal pathway for nitrogen metabolism.
This condition, known as hyperammonemia, occurs in propionic acidemia (PA), an autosomal recessive genetic disease characterized by an abnormal accumulation of propionic acid
As aforementioned, hyperammonemia can also occur in patients who are prescribed VPA.
In cases of PA with hyperammonemia of ≥360 µmol/L, significant encephalopathy and intellectual disability can occur
Abnormal accumulation of propionic acid results in excessive propionyl-CoA production, which inhibits N-acetyl-glutamate (NAG) formation
NAG is important because it activates carbamoyl phosphate synthetase I, which is a key enzyme in the first step of the urea cycle.
Propionyl-CoA also inhibits this pathway by depleting hepatic acetyl CoA, which is responsible for NAG synthesis.
Propionyl-CoA has a broad impact on metabolism, influencing not only the urea cycle, but also the citric acid cycle and related enzymes, the respiratory chain complex, and the glycine cleavage system.
Considering that L-carnitine plays a crucial role in propionic acid metabolism, excessive propionic acid levels inevitably result in L-carnitine deficiency
This further potentiates propionicacid-mediated neurotoxicity by disrupting β-oxidation pathways and preventing the conversion of propionyl-CoA into the nontoxic and beneficial propionyl carnitine
Although acute hyperammonemia can cause encephalopathy, the clinical manifestations of chronic, slightly elevated blood ammonia levels have received relatively little research interest within the field of dementia research
However, considering the well-known neurotoxic nature of ammonia, it is reasonable to speculate that chronically elevated levels of ammonia might be associated with the development of AD.
Indeed, some small clinical studies have reported an association between AD and elevated blood ammonia levels
While ammonia is a normal end product of human tissue metabolism, it is a highly neurotoxic compound at even sub-millimolar concentrations
Thus, ammonia detoxification in organisms is indispensable.
In the brain, under normal or hyperammonemic conditions, ATP-dependent formation of glutamine by glutamine synthetase [L-glutamate:ammonia ligase (ADP-forming; E.C.6.3.1.2);
GS] is predominantly used for ammonia removal
In hyperammonemia, astroglia located in proximity to blood-vessels in glutamatergic areas show increased GS protein content in their perivascular processes.
Since ammonia freely crosses the BBB and astrocytes are responsible for maintaining the BBB, the presence of GS in the perivascular processes can produce a rapid glutamine synthesis and subsequent release into the blood to limit excess ammonia from circulation.
The changes in the distribution of this critical enzyme suggest that the glutamate-glutamine cycle may be differentially impaired in hyperammonemic states
Combining a genomic and transcriptomic approach,
They found that the expression of the ornithine transcarbamylase (OTC) protein, another key enzyme of the urea cycle, in endothelial cells of AD brain vessels was increased 880% in the CSF of probable AD cases compared with controls.
Future studies investigating the relationship between chronically low-grade hyperammonemia and AD should also concurrently measure propionic acid levels in saliva and blood to determine if there is a causal relationship between excess propionic acid levels and hyperammonaemia, as seen in PA and patients treated with VPA.
Another potential mechanism may involve insulin.
Studies have shown that SCFAs, especially butyrate, may improve insulin sensitivity
However, there is evidence that propionate is not beneficial for insulin sensitivity.
This study, unlike most other studies on propionate and insulin sensitivity, included participants that were healthy and lean.
Other studies have found that propionate can improve insulin sensitivity; however, they are limited in that they either: (1) included unrepresentative delivery or quantities of propionate; and/or (2) included participants who were only overweight or prediabetic
In the Tirosh et al.'s (2019) study, the participants consumed a meal containing an amount of calcium propionate representative of that found in a typical meal consisting of processed foods.
The rodents were given a similarly representative amount of propionate in their diet.
As for the results, the results imply that orally delivered propionate does not have the same positive effects on insulin sensitivity that are associated with the SCFAs derived from the gut microbiota.
In fact, the results imply that orally delivered propionate may instead lead to insulin resistance and glucose intolerance.
In the human participants, the propionate-enriched meal leads to increased postprandial levels of insulin.
In the rodents, they studied the long term results of orally delivered propionate.
The results also imply a role of propionate in insulin resistance.
However, it is worth noting that the study is limited in that it only included 14 middle-aged men.
Thus, a larger study would be necessary to confirm their results and to elucidate the long-term effects of orally delivered propionate.
Consistent with the Tirosh et al.'s (2019) study, they found that propionate caused increased postprandial levels of insulin.
Moreover,
These findings are notable as there is evidence that persons with Type 2 diabetes are at an increased risk for developing AD
Additionally,
Thus, taken together, these studies suggest that insulin resistance may be one mechanism by which excess propionate leads to AD.
However, further studies are necessary to clarify this potential mechanism.
As for other mechanisms, propionate has been found to have several other neurotoxic effects, including mitochondrial dysfunction, neuroinflammation, glutamate excitotoxicity, DNA damage, inhibition of Na + /K + -ATPase, apoptosis of neuronal cells, an increase in oxidative stress, and a decrease in superoxide dismutase activity and both glutathione and serotonin levels
These neurotoxic effects have been associated with AD.
For instance,
Glutathione levels were also inversely correlated with the severity of the cognitive impairments in the participants.
However, future studies are necessary to further clarify the mechanisms by which excess propionate leads to AD.

POTENTIAL INTERVENTIONS
It is well established that L-carnitine (CAR) supplementation as an adjuvant therapy contributes to the amelioration of blood markers of oxidative damage in patients affected by disorders of excess propionate levels, as well as in the treatment of VPA-induced hyperammonemia
As
On the other hand, in the elderly population, serum CAR could be increased due to impaired access to tissues which in turn could result in an ALCAR decrease.
This last fact could lead to ammonia impaired elimination.
Perhaps higher ammonia levels and ALCAR deficit could be responsible for the cognitive and neurodegenerative diseases found in the elderly.''
Indeed, numerous clinical trial studies have investigated the cognitive therapeutic benefits of L-carnitine and acetyl-lcarnitine treatment in AD
However, only recently have investigators considered explaining their putative therapeutic benefits in the context of reducing hyperammonemia in neurological disorders of the elderly
And, to our knowledge, no one until now has considered excess propionate production via a bacterial infection as a possible causal process resulting in prolonged low-grade hyperammonemia.
The metabolic pathways associated with the breakdown of propionate may also offer points for intervention.
For example, vitamin B-12 is a cofactor in the conversion of propionate to succinyl-CoA
Their results support vitamin B-12 playing a role in the breakdown of propionate.
They also explored vitamin B-12 supplementation concerning mitochondrial health, since excess propionate leads to mitochondrial dysfunction.
They found that vitamin B-12 supplementation in C. elegans resulted in improved mitochondrial health.
Concerning AD, decreased vitamin B-12 levels appear to be linked to AD
Thus, perhaps decreased vitamin B-12 could be another potential cause of the excess propionate.
This reduction was significant, as it was a 7-fold reduction.
In addition to vitamin B-12, propionyl-CoA carboxylase may also be a viable target for intervention.
Like vitamin B-12, this enzyme is also involved in the conversion of propionate to succinyl-coenzyme A
Dysregulated propionyl-CoA carboxylase can lead to increased levels of propionate
Therefore, propionyl-CoA carboxylase, along with vitamin B-12, warrants future study.
Another potential intervention may be the antioxidant TEMPOL(4-hydroxy-2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidine-N-oxyl), which is a small (MW 172 Da) stable nitroxide radical that can readily permeate biological membranes.
In relation to AD,
This is of particular interest as propionate can impair the urea cycle and lead to hyperammonemia.
Thus, this antioxidant warrants further study, especially concerning its effects on propionate and its effects on oxido-nitrosative stress.
Butyrate, an SCFA, may be another potential intervention.
Butyrate appears to have neuroprotective effects and has been indicated as a viable treatment for neurological disorders, such as Parkinson's disease
Concerning AD,
Thus, like vitamin B-12 and potentially TEMPOL, butyrate supplementation may be a viable method to reduce propionate levels.
Yet, further research is needed to clarify this potential role of butyrate.
Further work would especially need to study the effect of butyrate on circulating levels of propionate.
Diet may be a target for intervention, as diet could directly impact one's intake of propionate.
Furthermore, diet can impact the levels of the Bacteroidetes phylum.
In comparison to non-Western diets, a Western diet, which consists of high protein and fat, was found to increase the levels of Bacteroidetes or Bacteroides in several studies
Furthermore, keeping in mind that propionate is used as a food preservative, a diet that features low consumption of foods with propionate may be another viable intervention.
Some promising dietary interventions on autism spectrum disorders (ASD) show some evidence for dietary interventions for propionate.
ASD appears to be another neurological disease associated with excess propionate.
Multiple studies have found that propionate causes ASD-like behaviors in rodents
Additionally,
As for dietary interventions, in several studies, participants with ASD experienced improvements in their symptoms when placed on a dairy-free and gluten-free diet
Additionally, as a preventative measure, replacing propionate with other compounds for food preservation may be beneficial.

CONCLUSION
Propionate serves important functions in the body.
However, excess levels of propionate may play a role in AD.
The cause of the excessive levels of propionate could be related to diet, medication use, the commensal microbiota, or potentially related to propionate metabolism.
Future studies should aim to clarify the cause of the excess levels.
There are multiple mechanisms by which propionate may lead to AD, including glutamate excitotoxicity and hyperammonemia.
The mechanisms offer potential points for intervention.



FIGURE 1 |
FIGURE 1 | Propionic acid (left) and valproic acid (right).



TABLE 1 |
Symptoms of valproate-induced hyperammonemia.



TABLE 2 |
Bacteroidetes.