Are there consistent abnormalities in event‐related EEG oscillations in patients with Alzheimer’s disease compared to other diseases belonging to dementia?
disease compared to other diseases belonging to dementia?
1 | BACKGROUND 1.1 | The gap in Alzheimer's disease (AD) biomarkers Alzheimer's disease (AD) is one of the most diffuse neurodegenerative disorders characterized by a progressive cognitive decline to dementia.
Several biomarkers of AD are currently used in clinical research.
According to the US National Institute on Aging-Alzheimer's Association (NIA-AA), in-vivo cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) measures of Abeta and phoshpo tau and amyloid/tau positron emission tomography (PET) maps allow the diagnosis of AD at the preclinical, prodromal (with objective mild cognitive impairment, MCI), and overt dementia stages for clinical trials
Furthermore, AD progression may be monitored by biomarkers derived from 18Fluorodeoxyglucose PET (FDG-PET), total tau in CSF, and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of brain atrophy in temporoparietal cortex and the medial temporal lobes (including the hippocampi).
Apart from the indirect role played by FDG-PET as a sensitive marker of neural and synaptic integrity, none of the above biomarkers reflects effects of AD neuropathology on neurophysiological mechanisms underpinning cognitive processes.
To fill this gap, measures of scalp-recorded electroencephalographic (EEG) rhythms are promising as they are non-invasive, cost-effective, and based on recording techniques largely available worldwide, including lowerand middle-income countries
These EEG measures may probe the effects of AD on ascending activating systems and reciprocal thalamus-cortical circuits in which oscillatory (de)synchronizing signals underpin cortical arousal during quiet vigilance and sensory processing in cognitive-motor tasks
In AD patients, abnormalities in event-related EEG rhythms may reflect the effect of AD neuropathology on (1) the synchronous conduction of action potentials along neural networks in multiple cortical areas and (2) synaptic transmissions, thus affecting spatial and temporal summation of post-synaptic potentials in cortical pyramidal neurons and, consequently, scalp-recorded EEG activity
Animal studies have elucidated the cellular and molecular basis of these effects at cortical and subcortical levels as loss of myelinated axons possibly associated with cortical neural hyperexcitability and hypersychronization as well as reduced neurotransmission, neural signaling, and synaptic activity
Resting state eyes-closed EEG rhythms in quiet vigilance have been repeatedly investigated in AD patients as candidate biomarkers in clinical trials (for reviews, see
Converging evidence from oddball paradigms showed that, as compared to cognitively unimpaired (CU) older adults, AD patients had lower amplitude in widespread delta (>4 Hz) and theta (4-7 Hz) phase-locked EROs as a function of disease severity.
Similar effects were also observed in PD, LBD, and/or cerebrovascular cognitive impairment patients.
Non-phase-locked alpha (8-12 Hz) and beta (13-30 Hz) oscillations were abnormally reduced (event-related desynchronization, ERD) in AD patients relative to CU.
However, studies on patients with other dementias remain lacking.
Delta and theta phase-locked EROs during oddball tasks may be useful neurophysiological biomarkers of cognitive systems at work in heuristic and intervention clinical trials performed in AD patients, but more research is needed regarding their potential role for other dementias.
2021;
The most consistent findings from this research indicates that AD patients with MCI and dementia show abnormalities in peak frequency, power, and "interrelatedness" at posterior alpha (8-12 Hz) and widespread delta (<4 Hz) and theta (4-8 Hz) rhythms according to disease progression
1.2 | Phase-and non-phase-locked event-

related EEG oscillations
Another well-known application of the EEG technique in AD patients allows for the study of EEG activity phase-locked to sensory stimuli or participant responses during cognitive tasks, the so-called event-related potentials or ERPs
It is well known that ERPs are obtained by averaging voltages across artifact free EEG epochs related to all sensory stimuli or participant responses using the stimulus or response onset as a zerotime.
This method allows for the removal of neural processes that are not phase-locked to sensory stimuli during the EEG recording.
The cognitive task most commonly used to elicit eventrelated EEG activity is that of the active oddball paradigm
In this paradigm, a series of frequent (70%-80%) and rare (30%-20%) auditory or visual stimuli are presented to the participant.
The participant must immediately respond to the rare (target) stimuli by button-press or other motor action, or by mental-counting the number of the stimuli (which are then reported to the experimenter at the end of the task)
As compared to ERPs computed by averaging the EEG epochs related to frequent stimuli, ERPs for the target stimuli are characterized by a large parietal late positive potential peaking at ~300-400 ms post-stimulus, the so called P300 or P3b component, reflecting focused attention, decision making, and working memory
Delayed latency and lower amplitude in the oddball P300 have repeatedly been observed in patients with AD at different clinical stages
Effects have also been reported (though with less large-scale replication) for early sensory and sub-conscious attention components, such as the auditory steady-state, P50 and Mismatch Negativity (MMN), and later cognitive components, such as the N400, Late Positive Potential (LPP), P600 and Error Related Negativity (ERN)
Some of these early components have demonstrated translational equivalence to EEG work with rodents
EEG activity recorded during cognitive tasks of episodic memory, language processing and executive function can provide further neurophysiological information in the frequency domain to enhance our understanding of the effects of AD on brain functions
In this line, ERPs can be analyzed by decomposing the phase-locked EEG oscillatory impulses at delta, theta, alpha, beta, and gamma frequency bands that linearly compose them, the so-called event-related EEG oscillations (EROs;
The ongoing EEG activity recorded during cognitive tasks can also be linearly analyzed to exploit event-related increase or decrease in amplitude (power) of the ongoing oscillatory responses non-phase locked to the stimulus or response onset at delta, theta, alpha, beta, and gamma frequency bands, the so-called event-related desynchronization/synchronization (ERD/ERS)
Such EROs and ERD/ERS measures have significant potential for understanding the abnormal cognitive neurophysiological systems that occur in AD relative to other dementias such as Parkinson's (PD), Lewy Body (LBD), and vascular cognitive impairment (VCI).

| AIMS AND METHODOLOGY
The Steering Committee of the Electrophysiology Professional Interest Area (EPIA) of The Alzheimer's Association International Society to Advance Alzheimer's Research and Treatment (ISTAART), Alzheimer's Association (AA;
formed a large Expert Panel to review the literature and provide recommendations on candidate ERO and ERD/ERS measures for characterizing neurophysiological oscillatory mechanisms in AD, PD, LBD, and VCI dementias.
The Expert Panel was multidisciplinary and included expertize from the fields of neurology, psychiatry, and neuroimaging of dementias, clinical neurophysiology and quantitative EEG of dementias and cognitive and systems neurosciences.
The Panel addressed the following specific question: What are the ERO and ERD/S measures that most consistently reveal abnormalities in brain neurophysiological oscillatory mechanisms in AD patients relative to age-matched cognitively unimpaired (CU) people and patients with PD, LBD, and cerebrovascular diseases?
To address to this question, the Panel pursued the following objectives: (1) identification of abnormal ERO and ERD/S measures in AD patients, (2) assessment of how these measures are affected by the progression of the cognitive impairment, and (3) the extent to which these measures can differentiate patient sub-groups.
A comprehensive literature search was completed on EROs and ERD/S in Alzheimer's disease patients with MCI (ADMCI) and dementia (ADD), Parkinson's disease patients with MCI (PDMCI) and dementia (PDD), LB disease with MCI (LBMCI), and dementia (LBD), and cerebrovascular disease with MCI and dementia (major and minor VCI).
The literature review was performed using the Scopus and PubMed databases, which were carefully searched by the authors (TA, EY, and BG) until November 4, 2020.
Searches were performed under "Title, abstract and keywords" in Scopus, and "Title, abstract" in PubMed.
Keywords for the AD patients were as follows: "Dementia" OR "Mild Cognitive Impairment" AND "Brain Oscillation" OR "Event-Related Oscillation"; OR "Event-Related Desynchronization"; OR "Event-Related Synchronization"; OR "Induced Oscillation"; OR "Evoked Oscillation."
Identical literature searches were carried out for patients with PD, LBD, and cerebrovascular disease with MCI and dementia (major and minor VCI).
All selected papers were critically reviewed by three members of the Expert Panel (BG, EY, and TA).
Only eventrelated EEG studies were included.
Studies using long stimuli (several hundreds of milliseconds) or where the analysis was not finely time-locked to the event onset, and those that used EEG measurements in patients in the resting state condition were excluded.
Afterward, four members of the Expert Panel (BG, EY, TA, and CB) produced a first draft of the manuscript.
This draft was sent to the co-Authors for amendments.
Following revisions, the Panel reached a unanimous consensus about the findings and recommendations.
The manuscript was finalized in mid-February and revised in July 2021.
It should be noted that the terms and methodological procedures discussed in this manuscript may not correspond to those used in daily medical practice, and we do not recommend that neurologists and psychiatrists use the present terms and procedures in their practice for diagnostic, prognostic, or monitoring purposes.
Indeed, this manuscript is not a collection of guidelines for the application of techniques of clinical neurophysiology in daily medical practice.
Similarly, the manuscript was not designed to suggest revisions to diagnostic criteria.
Rather, it was designed to reach consensus recommendations on the optimal ERO and ERD/S measures to be used in clinical trials enrolling AD patients.
Notably, the present review of the literature was not based on standard procedures typically adopted by international biomedical societies for the review of the medical intervention and practice (e.g., among them, see the GRADE Handbook to address the so-called PICO health care questions,
The authors hope that the field will soon reach maturity for involvement of international biomedical societies for that purpose.
Significant caveats and intrinsic limitations of this article include (i) the potentially restrictive criteria used for the literature review and classification; (ii) the inclusion of studies that have applied the heterogeneous diagnostic criteria for AD, which been used for decades, and therefore may not exclude AD patients with moderate cerebrovascular, non-AD hippocampal impairment (TDP-43), and Lewy body co-pathology, especially in older groups; (iii) the use of the term ADMCI to denote patients with amnesic MCI, thus suggesting possible prodromal ADMCI without a diagnosis based on in-vivo biomarkers of AD; (iv) the blurring effects of the head as a volume conductor spreading scalp EEG activity, and (v) heterogeneous procedures for the detection of artifacts in preliminary EEG data analysis.

| PROCEDURES FOR THE ANALYSIS OF EVENT-RELATED OSCILLATIONS (EROS) AND EVENT-RELATED DESYNCHRONIZATION/ SYNCHRONIZATION (ERD/ERS)
In event-related EEG paradigms, many epochs (typically >20), each keyed to a time-locking stimulus or response event, are recorded in sequence to reach a sufficient signalto-noise ratio.
In any EEG epoch, event-related EEG potentials within ~1 s post-stimulus are embedded in greater non-phase locked ongoing EEG rhythms that are unrelated to the stimulus.
After the averaging of all artifact-free EEG epochs related to the event onset, these potentials become visible in the ERPs and can be studied in terms of peak amplitude, latency, and topography (distribution over the scalp).
Thanks to the averaging procedure, non-phase locked EEG rhythms unrelated to the event-onset are markedly reduced
Many measures can be derived from event-related EEG epochs as illustrated in Figure
In the following sections, we briefly review these and report main findings in understanding the pathophysiological oscillatory mechanisms generating abnormal EROs and ERD/ERS in patients with AD compared to other dementias.

| Event-related digital filtering of ERP
There is ongoing discussion about the optimal procedures to analyze and interpret scalp-recorded event-related EEG activity in time and frequency domains
From an analytical point of view, EEG activity can be decomposed as several overlapping oscillations of the voltage (i.e., waveforms), each characterized by: (i) a phase related to stimulus or response onset, (ii) a time evolution within 1s post-stimulus at frequency bands, and (iii) a scalp (source) topography of the maximum amplitude | 5 of 42
Signal processing methods can be used to derive these oscillations from the original eventrelated EEG activity and analyze them separately
Decades ago, Erol
Digital bandpass filtering is widely used to separate band frequency components forming ERPs such as delta (0.5-3.5 Hz), theta (4-7 Hz), alpha (8-13 Hz), beta (15-30 Hz), and gamma (28-48 Hz).
The band passed ERPs at each frequency band (i.e., EROs) can be analyzed as peakto-peak amplitude within 1s post-stimulus and topography
EROs can also be derived by the calculation of phase and power density from the averaged ERPs at frequency bands from delta to gamma
In the analysis of EROs, the combination of results from digital filtering and power density analysis provides an enriched view of the underlying neurophysiological mechanisms generating event-related and phase-locked EEG activity

| Event-related power spectrum of

EEG epochs
Spectral analysis can be applied on epochs at scalp electrodes or source estimates to derive other interesting measures of event-related EEG activity.
This analysis can be performed by time-frequency procedures that take into account the intrinsic non-stationary nature of event-related EEG signals
Specifically, time-frequency analysis provides estimates of the power of event-related EEG epochs at frequency bands in relatively short time periods (~1 s post-stimulus).
Short-time Fourier transform (STFT) and wavelet transform (WT) methods have gained in popularity for this purpose
The power of EEG activity in post-stimulus periods can be corrected for the pre-stimulus values as a type of "baseline correction".
A popular procedure for baseline correction is ERD/S
For each EEG epoch, electrode, and frequency band of interest, ERD/S computes the time course of the percentage of power changes after a stimulus (or before the onset of a voluntary movement) relative to a previous period of background EEG activity.
For any given period, a percentual decrease of EEG power at that frequency band (relative to baseline values) is called ERD, while a percentual increase is called ERS.
Notably, this procedure investigates the event-related and non-phase-locked EEG oscillatory activity, so a model of ERPs is removed from any event-related EEG epoch before the computation of ERD/ERS
Another methodological approach to investigate the timeand non-phase-locked component of event-related EEG activity is the computation of the so-called "induced" EEG power, as opposed to "evoked" EEG power computed applying spectral analysis on ERPs
The induced EEG power represents the time-and non-phaselocked component of event-related EEG activity.
To compute this, EEG power is calculated by averaging the power of the single EEG epochs.
Induced EEG power is then obtained by subtracting evoked power from total power

| Event-related phase locking analysis of

EEG epochs
Phase-locking analysis of event-related EEG activity at each electrode and frequency band of interest measures the consistency of the spectral phase values across all EEG epochs F I G U R E 1 Common methodologies used in event-related oscillation studies related to single events.
It is independent of EEG power computed in those epochs and reflects the stability in the phase-locking reactivity of underlying neurophysiological oscillatory mechanisms during the course of the experiment
Phase locking values are normalized between 0 and 1.
For each electrode and frequency band of interest, a phaselocking value of 1 indicates that within the period of interest, the phase of the event-related EEG oscillatory impulse is equal across EEG epochs.
In contrast, a phase-locking value of 0 represents random values of the phases of that oscillatory impulse across EEG epochs.
A popular method to compute phase information is the Wavelet Transform, also termed as inter-trial coherence

| Event-related coherence analysis of EEG epochs
Spectral coherence analysis of event-related EEG activity at a given frequency band measures the linear and bivariate interdependence of that activity at an electrode or source pair.
This analysis is challenging due to issues of volume conduction, spatial blurring of EEG signals by the skull, and the indeterminacy of EEG source reconstruction techniques
Many other linear and non-linear procedures can be applied with the same purpose
Caveats with the use of these techniques have recently been discussed by an International Federation of Clinical Neurophysiology Workgroup
Simulated and empirical comparisons have shown sensor-based phase-lag approaches to be effective

| Event-related cross-frequency couplings of epochs
For each electrode, the cross-frequency coupling of eventrelated EEG activity measures the dependence of that activity at a frequency band on the activity computed at another frequency band.
This analysis is based on previous evidence that EEG rhythms at low frequency bands (i.e., delta and theta) may trigger and frame operative EEG rhythms at higher frequency bands (i.e., beta and gamma;
There are several different approaches to cross-frequency coupling analysis.
Commonly used approaches include the computation of multiple coupled charateristics of eventrelated EEG activity, such as amplitude (of a frequency band)-amplitude (of another frequency band), powerpower, phase-amplitude and phase-phase.
Several mathematical methods can be used to test each cross-frequency coupling approach
The event-related cross-frequency coupling analysis is used to evaluate the interdependence of the event-related EEG activity for an electrode (source) pair.
In this analysis, the procedure computes the interrelatedness between a given spectral characteristic of the EEG activity at one electrode (source) with that computed at another electrode (source;
Therefore, it can be considered as an additional approach to the study of brain neural newtorks with EEG techniques.

ADMCI and ADD patients
In wakefulness, scalp-recorded EEG oscillatory activity at delta frequencies occurs at ~0.5-3.5 Hz and may be generated mainly by cycles of hyperpolarization and depolarization in large populations of cortical pyramidal neurons via thalamic inputs
However, delta activity can also be recorded in several locations in the human brain, including the nucleus accumbens
A similar transient increase in EEG delta responses was also found during the processing of emotional stimuli
A typical experimental condition eliciting these delta oscillations is the "oddball" paradigm.
In this task, widespread delta oscillations have been shown to increase in amplitude during rare auditory or visual "target" stimuli requiring a cognitive response, compared to frequent stimuli to be ignored
The topology of these delta responses varies according to stimulus modality.
While visual and auditory oddball paradigms elicit higher frontal, central, and parietal delta responses, more complex visual stimuli with emotional contents elicit greater parietal and occipital delta responses
Evidence shows that physiological and pathological brain aging reduces the amplitude of event-related EEG delta responses
For example, two studies by
Similarly,
These authors reported reductions in event-related delta responses across multiple scalp regions in the older CU and ADMCI groups compared to the young group, and reductions in delta at parietal-occipital electrodes in ADMCI patients relative to CU groups
Furthermore,
Similarly, Başar's group showed that ADMCI patients had lower delta responses during auditory
Furthermore,
The effect of pathological brain aging on event-related EEG delta responses was even more pronounced in ADD patients.
Notably, delta responses of ADMCI patients and CU controls were positively correlated with frontal cortical gray matter volume
Similarly, event-related delta coherence over frontal-parietal electrode pairs was lower in ADD patients when compared to CU controls during the visual oddball paradigm
As the successful processing of and reaction to oddball target stimuli requires selective attention and limited working memory load, it can be speculated that abnormal phase-locked delta EROs in ADMCI and ADD patients may reveal a dysfunction in those processes of executive function
This dysfunction may be specific to the oddball, as
In this task, the participant has must respond to the stimulus that appeared some (i.e., N) events before.
As compared to the oddball paradigm, the N-back task imposes a larger load on working memory and cognitive control to mitigate interference effects.
Thus, the relatively high background brain arousal occurring during the N-back task may reduce differences in phase-locked delta EROs between CU adults and ADD patients.
Notably, a reanalysis of the same EEG datasets revealed that ADMCI patients had lower delta non-phase-locked ERD relative to CU persons.
These results highlight the complex interrelatedness between parallel phase-and non-phase-locked neural synchronization mechanisms, brain arousal, stimulus information and cognitive-motor information processing.
Table

| Event-related delta responses in non-

AD dementias
Caution is needed when considering reduced event-related delta responses as an electrophysiological biomarker for AD, as the effect may simply be a non-specific indicator of brain disorders.
Along this line, cognitively intact PD patients have shown lower delta EROs relative to CU adults during cognitive tasks
In a separate study, delta EROs during oddball target detection were lower as a function of cognitive decline in PD patients compared with CU participants
In another study,
Results showed reduced event-related delta power in the PDMCI group compared to the CU group and reduced delta phase locking in the PDMCI group compared to the ADMCI group
Furthermore,
Delta power responses were lower in the LBD than in the CU group during both visual and auditory versions of the task.
In contrast, only delta phase-locking responses during the auditory oddball task were lower in the LBD than in the CU group
These authors also showed that LBD patients' scores on the motor Movement Disorder Society Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale (MDS-UPDRS) were negatively correlated with delta power responses to visual stimuli
Abnormalities in event-related delta responses have also been found in major VCI patients.
Notably, the above abnormalities in event-related delta responses may not be specific to patients with dementia.
Indeed, similar reductions in delta responses have been found in patients with schizophrenia
Moreover, patients with alcohol use disorder have been shown to exhibit lower event-related delta responses as compared to CU participants during go/no go
Reduced eventrelated delta responses during the visual oddball tasks have also been observed in the adolescent children of parents with alcohol use disorder as compared to controls
Therefore, event-related delta responses during cognitive tasks may characterize impairments in brain disorders more broadly, rather than being a signature of AD or other dementias.
Table

| Event-related theta responses in

ADMCI and ADD patients
Similar to delta responses, previous studies have demonstrated transient event-related magnitude increases in EEG theta oscillations (i.e., hundreds of milliseconds) in CU participants during cognitive tasks.
Studies also highlight lower event-related theta power in older relative to younger CU participants across various tasks.
These include the Sternberg
Similarly, the peak frequency of theta responses was lower in older adults (mean = 4.1 Hz) compared to the young adults (mean = 5.2 Hz; van
Findings with other measures of event-related thetas responses, such as phase-locking and phase synchronization, were less robust
Concerning pathological brain aging, most studies showed a reduction of event-related theta power during memory tasks in ADMCI and ADD patients over CU participants.
Moreover,
In retrospective studies, ADMCI patients who converted to ADD (ADMCI converter) were found to have previously exhibited reduced event-related theta responses during an N-back task, relative to ADMCI non-converters and controls
ADMCI converters were also characterized by lower event-related theta responses at the baseline recording session than at one-year follow-up
Analogously, event-related theta responses during a word processing task were lower in ADMCI converters relative to CU participants and ADMCI non-converters
Similar effects were observed in non-memory cognitive tasks.
Furthermore,
Similarly,
In a separate study,
Finally,
The impaired event-related theta responses in ADMCI and ADD patients may be strictly related to the pre-stimulus theta rhythms.
Indeed,
Furthermore, these event-related theta responses may be sensitive to interventions for neuromodulation.
Along this line,
Similarly, Cespón et al. (
The authors found that event-related theta responses (but not other frequency bands) during an N-back task were greater after the cathodal tDCS neuromodulation in ADD (but not controls)
However, the impaired event-related dynamics were not unique for the theta responses in AD; therefore, more research is needed to find the right modulation for normalizing event-related delta, theta, alpha, beta, and gamma responses in these patients.
In another study,
Results showed that rTMS intervention only modulated beta responses to the single pulseTMS
In relation to the study of event-related theta power responses, other measures have shown mixed results in ADD patients, possibly due to the intrinsic features of spectral markers, task difficulty, and sample size differences.
Sweeney-Reed et al. (
In their study, ADMCI patients showed greater frontal theta event-related phase-locking as compared to CU participants
Furthermore, Yener and colleagues digitally filtered theta responses of ADMCI patients and controls during a visual oddball task and found no significant group differences
Later the same group showed that during simple visual stimulation, ADD patients without drugs had overexcited occipital regions that were represented with greater theta responses
Moreover,
Similarly,
In a later study,
Table
visual oddball task was lower in both ADMCI and PDMCI patients compared to CU adults.
Furthermore, theta phaselocking was lower in PDMCI but not ADMCI patients when compared to controls
Furthermore, theta phase-locking was lower in PDMCI (but not ADMCI) than in CU participants
Similarly,
Concerning cerebrovascular disease, Xu et al. (
Furthermore, the topology of the interdependence as indexed by graph theory markers showed a lower clustering coefficient in the theta band as compared to CU controls
Table
In general, event-related delta and theta power, phase-locking, and coherence during cognitive tasks were increased in CU participants
Furthermore, some markers of event-related theta responses (particularly event-related power) were lower in ADMCI and ADD patients compared to CU adults
However, these effects may be non-specific as similar changes were observed in PDMCI
Future comprehensive EEG experiments are therefore needed to compare event-related delta and theta responses among patients with different dementias at different levels of cognitive deficits.

| Event-related alpha responses in

ADMCI and ADD patients
Since the first discovery of EEG recordings
During development, the alpha frequency peak is observed at 5-10 Hz in infants and at 9-11 Hz in adolescents
During later life, alpha rhythms show lower amplitude and slower frequency peak
These effects are even more pronounced during pathological brain aging in dementia
Previous studies have shown mixed effects of aging on event-related alpha responses.
On the one hand, several studies reported greater event-related alpha phase locking
Furthermore,
Moreover, other studies have reported delayed eventrelated alpha responses in older relative to younger CU adults
On the other hand, several studies found no significant aging effects on event-related alpha responses raising the issue of reliability of such measures
Similarly, previous studies have yielded mixed findings regarding event-related alpha responses in ADMCI patients.
On the one hand, some studies reported significant effects.
For example,
Furthermore,
Along the same line,
In contrast,
Similarly, Del
Previous studies have also produced mixed findings on event-related alpha responses in ADD patients.
Specifically,
Along the same line,
Similar effects were also observed by
On the contrary,
Furthermore, several studies found no differences in event-related alpha responses during cognitive tasks between ADD and CU groups
Table

| Event-related alpha responses in patients with non-AD dementias
Findings regarding event-related alpha responses in patients with dementia not due to AD have also been mixed.
Concerning brain diseases due to α-synucleopathy,
Furthermore,
Finally,
Abnormal event-related alpha responses have also been observed in VCI patients, though the methodological approaches and findings have been varied.
In one study,
In two separate studies,
Notably,

ADMCI and ADD patients
Multiple studies showed a strong relationship between cortical beta rhythms and voluntary movements in humans
Changes in cortical beta rhythms were also related to increased attention, working memory, emotional arousal, and other cognitive processes
Evidence also suggests that event-related beta responses during cognitive tasks may change across the lifespan.
Wiesmann and Wilson (
Furthermore,
Findings regarding event-related beta responses in ADMCI and ADD patients have been mixed.
On the one hand, beta responses during cognitive tasks increased with cognitive load in CU participants but not ADMCI patients
For example, Missonier et al. (
Results showed that ADMCI patients who later progressed to dementia had lower beta responses compared to CU and stable ADMCI groups.
Furthermore,
In the same vein,
On the other hand,
In the same study, beta power was found to be lower in the ADMCI group than in CU group.
Furthermore, del
In contrast,
Furthermore,
Mixed results were also reported for event-related beta responses even in studies focused on ADD patients.
Specifically,
Furthermore, there were no differences between ADMCI patients who progressed to dementia and ADD patients
Along the same line,
In contrast,
Similarly,
In addition, several studies found no difference in event-related beta responses between ADD patients and controls.
For example, no beta differences were reported by
Table

| Event-related beta responses in patients with non-AD dementias
Mixed results have also been reported for event-related beta responses in patients with MCI and dementia not due to AD.
In one study,
Using graph theory,
In relation to the CU group, major VCI patients were characterized by a lower graph clustering coefficient at the beta and other bands
Keeping in mind the above results, event-related beta responses may be abnormal in AD, LBD, and VCI patients, but further studies are needed to define optimal experimental conditions to obtain repeatable and clinically significant results.
4.9 | Event-related gamma responses in

ADMCI and ADD patients
Gamma responses have been associated with multiple functional roles, similar to the other frequency bands.
Earlier studies showed the role of event-related gamma responses in sensory information processing in hedgehogs
More recently, many reviews have extended the functional role of event-related gamma in the human brain
More specifically, gamma responses have been linked to episodic memory processes
In addition, the causal role of brain systems generating gamma was highlighted in a recent review on the beneficial effects of interventions targeting gamma responses in patients with neuropsychiatric diseases
Like other frequency bands, event-related gamma responses are affected by physiological aging
For example,
Regional event-related gamma responses are also affected by pathological aging; however, findings vary according to the methodological approach used.
On the one hand,
Furthermore,
Another study by
On the other hand,
This effect was confirmed later in ADMCI patients
Furthermore,
Furthermore, event-related gamma coherence during the same task was greater in ADD patients had not undergone cholinergic therapy) compared to CU participants
Other studies found no differences in event-related gamma responses during cognitive tasks between ADD and CU controls
Table
The explored literature was insufficient for an evaluation of event-related gamma responses during cognitive tasks in patients with MCI and dementia not due to AD.

| DISCUSSION AND

RECOMMENDATIONS
In this article, a multidisciplinary panel of experts reviewed the field literature and reached consensus about the eventrelated EEG oscillations during cognitive tasks more consistently found to be abnormal in ADMCI and ADD patients when compared to CU individuals and patients with MCI and dementia due to PD, LB, and VCI.
Previous EEG studies from independent research teams have consistently demonstrated reduced event-related delta and theta power in ADMCI and ADD patients during oddball tasks at the group level, relative to CU controls
Notably, these effects were not demonstrated at the individual level.
Furthermore, they may be disease unspecific as similar abnormalities were observed in PDMCI
Keeping the above data in mind, the present Expert Panel recommends that eventrelated delta and theta power during oddball tasks may be used in future clinical trials carried out in ADMCI and ADD patients for analyses at the group level.
Their use for diagnostic purposes is not recommended.
Specifically, event-related delta and theta measures may be tested as prognostic biomarkers and endpoints of pharmacological and non-pharmacological interventions targeting the cognitive processes underpinning oddball paradigms, such as focused attention, decision making, and working memory
Indeed, considering the diagnosis of ADMCI and ADD based on clinical and standard diagnostic criteria for research
Furthermore, AD patients with the smallest alterations in these EEG measures (i.e., the most preserved The above-mentioned EEG measures may also provide a functionally-specific complement to the measures derived from resting state condition.
Notably, several commercial and open-access WEB-based EEG platforms (e.g., among others, see EEGlab at
LORETA at
and Fieldtrip at
are available for this purpose.
Figure
Previous EEG studies by independent research teams repeatedly showed that non-phase locked alpha and beta ERD/ ERS in ADMCI and ADD patients were lower in magnitude than CU controls during cognitive tasks at the group level
Similarly, some studies showed that ADMCI and ADD patients pointed to lower event-related beta power and phase-locking during cognitive tasks at the group level
Finally, event-related gamma power and coherence during cognitive tasks were higher in ADD patients than CU controls at the group level, as a function of the post-stimulus period and frequencies considered
However, the EEG methodologies (i.e., alpha and beta ERD/ERS) and the cognitive tasks used (oddball, N-back, word recognition, etc.) were heterogeneous across the reviewed studies, which may limit the interpretation of findings.
Furthermore, other studies showed contrasting evidence.
Therefore, the present Expert Panel recommends further clinical research before the use of event-related EEG oscillations at alpha, beta, and gamma frequency bands in clinical trials investigating ADD and ADMCI patients.
More research is also needed to systematically compare these measures across AD, PD, LBD, and VCI patient groups.
AD patients, Missonnier et al. reduced event-related theta power during an n-back working memory task in progressive ADMCI patients as compared to stable ADMCI patients and CU participants at one-year follow-up.
They reported reduced frontal eventrelated theta power in progressive ADMCI patients as compared to stable ADMCI patients and CU participants.
The same group
Based on clinical status at follow up, CU participants were divided into two groups: stable and deteriorated.
At baseline, event-related theta responses during a 2-back working memory task were lower in the ADMCI patients than the stable CU group but there was no difference between the stable CU and deteriorated CU groups.
In another study,
They reported that eventrelated theta power during a word comprehension task was lower in the progressive ADMCI patients (i.e., those who progressed to ADD), as compared to the stable ADMCI patients and the CU participants.
Overall, the above findings confirm that reduced event-related theta responses during cognitive tasks not only reflect cognitive status in AD patients but they may also predict or monitor disease progression at the group level.

| LONGITUDINAL STUDIES USING EVENT-RELATED EEG RESPONSES FOR THE PREDICTION OF COGNITIVE DECLINE IN PEOPLE WITH AD AND PEOPLE WITH MCI OR OTHER DEMENTIA
To our knowledge, only one study has investigated eventrelated EEG delta responses in ADMCI patients longitudinally.
Furthermore, as compared to CU participants and stable ADMCI patients, ADMCI patients progressing to ADD showed reduced eventrelated delta responses at 1-year follow-up.
Though more research is needed in this area, current evidence suggests that event-related delta and theta responses may predict AD progression at the group level.
Longitudinal studies have also examined if alpha and beta event-related responses during cognitive tasks may predict or reflect AD progression.
Prieto del
They showed that late alpha ERD diminished with repeated presentation of words in the CU group but not in stable and progressive ADMCI patients, thus indicating that such an EEG biomarker may reflect cognitive status but not AD progression.
In another longitudinal study,
Similarly, Prieto del
In contrast,
In general, alpha ERS and ERD were both reduced in ADD patients at baseline was greater in progressive (follow-up at three year) than stable ADMCI patients.
Finally,
The mixed results for alpha and beta frequencies due to a number of factors including the different EEG variables, time periods, and cognitive paradigms used.
Overall, at baseline, beta ERS/ERD and phase-locking were generally lower in CU participants and AD patients who showed diminished cognitive status at follow-up (one year or later).
Further longitudinal studies are needed, however, to reach conclusive recommendations about these frequencies.
Longitudinal studies examining event-related gamma responses in AD patients during cognitive tasks are also lacking.
To our knowledge, there is only one study in the literature, conducted by
The authors investigated gamma fractal dimensions of event-related EEG responses during a 2-back task; results showed that progressive ADMCI patients (follow-up at one year) were characterized by higher gamma fractal dimensions as compared to stable ADMCI patients, possibly reflecting reduced complexity of the EEG signal
Notably, mapping event-related gamma responses during cognitive tasks may help to inform potential treatments for AD patients based on neuromodulation of gamma, which is an emerging field.
More specifically, both animal
Thus, event-related gamma responses during cognitive tasks may represent an informative intervention endpoint.
To our knowledge, there are no longitudinal studies investigating event-related delta, theta, alpha, beta, and gamma responses during cognitive tasks in non-AD older adults with MCI or dementia.
Considering the above review, the present Expert Panel recommends that significant efforts be made to develop longitudinal studies investigating event-related EEG responses during cognitive tasks in older people with MCI and dementia due to Alzheimer's and related neurodegenerative disorders.
Such studies will dramatically improve our understanding of the extent to which EEG responses (including gamma) may provide heuristic measures of the natural deterioration of cognitive systems during disease progression, as well as sensitive biomarkers to demonstrate potential benefits of future smart drugs, cognitive training, and/or brain stimulation.

| MULTIMODAL STUDIES USING CSF, NEUROIMAGING, AND EVENT-RELATED EEG RESPONSES IN PEOPLE WITH AD AND PEOPLE WITH MCI OR OTHER DEMENTIA
Multimodal studies using CSF, neuroimaging, and eventrelated EEG responses during cognitive tasks are sparse in AD and non-AD patients with MCI or dementia.
Results from existing studies are summarized in the following section.
In AD research, Prieto del
ADMCI patients with the most significant genetic risk factor of sporadic AD (i.e., ApoE ɛ4) showed reduced alpha ERD in temporal sources and less beta ERD in frontal sources, relative to CU people and ADMCI patients without ApoE ɛ4, thus suggesting reduced efficiency and capacity of memory-related information processing in the former group (Prieto del
In another study
In those ADMCI patients, the authors evaluated the predictive value of event-related EEG responses during an episodic memory task (del
As compared to CU and stable ADMCI groups, progressive ADMCI patients showed lower associative memory scores, larger atrophy of the medial temporal lobe, and lower capacity to recruit alpha oscillatory cortical networks
Interestingly, accuracy in predicting progression from MCI to dementia was higher using the encoding-induced abnormal alpha ERD in posterior cingulate sources at baseline compared to neuroimaging biomarkers of amygdala atrophy
When both neuroimaging and EEG biomarkers were used as an input, the best accuracy (about 80%) was reached
These findings extended previous magnetoencephalographic (MEG) evidence indicating that as compared to stable ADMCI patients, progressive ADMCI patients are characterized by lower episodic and semantic memory scores, larger atrophy of entorhinal cortex, and higher interdependence of source activity between anterior cingulate and temporo-occipital at alpha frequencies
Notably, this higher interdependence was associated with greater medial temporal atrophy and worse cognitive performance
In another multimodal study,
Structural MRIs were also carried out.
Relative to the CU group, ADMCI patients showed reduced alpha and beta ERS | 31 of 42 GÜNTEKIN ET al.
Furthermore, EEG source estimates showed that ADMCI patients were characterized by reduced beta ERS in inferior and middle gyrus, fusiform gyrus, and cuneus.
Furthermore, the correlation between EEG and structural MRI measures showed that beta ERS was correlated with the size of hippocampus, entorhinal cortex, and parahippocampal gyrus.
et al. (
As compared to people with subjective memory complaints and those who were CU, ADMCI patients showed reduced theta, alpha, and beta power.
Furthermore, ADMCI patients had lower hippocampal volume, with no differences between subjective memory complaints and CU groups.
The authors also found significant positive correlations between theta-alpha power derived from EEG data and biomarkers of right precuneus and supramarginal gyrus as well as bilateral cingulate cortex, fusiform gyrus, and medial temporal lobe.
In a final study,
Structural MRIs were also carried out.
Results showed that both event-related delta responses to the target stimuli and frontal volume were reduced in the ADMCI relative to the CU group.
Additionally, the authors reported a linear reduction in frontal event-related delta responses and frontal lobe atrophy for CU and ADMCI participants as a whole group.
The results of this section support the idea that established multimodal fluid and neuroimaging biomarkers of AD are significantly associated with event-related EEG responses during attention and memory tasks.
However, further crossvalidation studies are needed to confirm the direct effects of AD-related amyloidosis, tauopathy, and neurodegeneration and their association with topography-specific event-related EEG responses.
Confirming that association may lend further support to the use of EEG responses in the assessment of cognitive systems in AD patients.
Finally, the present Expert Panel recommends the use of EEG source estimation techniques in the analysis of eventrelated delta and theta responses during oddball tasks in older people with MCI and dementia due to Alzheimer's and related neurodegenerative disorders.
Ideally, future EEG studies should use >48 scalp electrodes to mitigate spatial blurring of rsEEG source estimates
In such studies, the exact location of electrode placement over the scalp can be digitized and integrated into realistic head models based on individual structural MRIs to enhance the spatial accuracy of rsEEG source estimates
Estimated EEG source solutions may be especially suitable in multimodal studies in patients with MCI and dementia using neuroimaging techniques to map cerebrovascular lesions, core neuropathology, and neurodegeneration.
Within a common brain space constructed by realistic MRI-based head models, abnormalities in EEG source solutions may be correlated with core neuropathology and neurodegeneration, as revealed by structural MRIs and PET or singlephoton emission computerized tomography (SPECT), as well as clinical manifestations.
Correlations between EEG biomarkers and specific features of Alzheimer's and related neurodegenerative disorders may elucidate the neurophysiological correlates of those disorders in the cognitively unimpaired brain.

| INTERNATIONAL INITIATIVES FOR RESEARCH ON RSEEG MEASURES IN AD
In general, the findings reviewed in the present article raise the need for international consensus initiatives to develop or refine a multicenter standardization of instructions to patients, EEG recordings during oddball tasks, and selection of artifact-free rsEEG periods in line with the standards of clinical trials in AD.
First attempts can be found in initiatives of the International Federation of Clinical Neurophysiology
The present Expert Panel recommends the development of comprehensive EEG experiments comparing eventrelated delta and theta responses during oddball tasks among groups of patients MCI and dementia due to AD, PD, LB, and VCI.
A key feature of those future studies may be the longitudinal multicenter enrollment of patients and use of standard methods for the computation of phaselocked EROs at delta and theta bands.
Two interesting examples are shown in
Despite several evidence-based reviews
Therefore, while these measures are not yet suitably validated for diagnostic, screening and progression tracking use-cases, we recommend machine learning and other discriminative analyses be applied both to future studies, and retrospectively to some of the high-quality data sets already collected.
When performing these analyses, we also recommend that hypothesis driven approaches to data characterization (e.g., functional connectivity and other graph-related measures) be applied, alongside deep learning and other feature discovery approaches.
How should we frame event-related EEG oscillations in the theory of AD biomarkers?
It well know that the Working Group of the National Institute of Aging and Alzheimer's Association (NIA-AA) Research Framework
Keeping in mind the above theoretical qualification of AD biomarkers, the present Expert Panel posits the introduction of another class of biomarkers in the instrumental assessment of AD patients.
These biomarkers may probe the vulnerability or resilience of subcortical and thalamocortical neural (de)synchronization mechanisms in relation to AD processes.
For the purposes of the present study, the biomarkers of event-related EEG oscillations may be represented by the mentioned event-related delta and theta power during oddball tasks.
Keeping in mind the neurophysiological meaning of these EEG biomarkers, the term neural synchronization or physiological biomarker (i.e., "P" biomarker) may be introduced in the above A-T-N Research Framework

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This manuscript was facilitated by the Alzheimer's Association International Society to Advance Alzheimer's Research and Treatment (ISTAART), through the Electrophysiology Professional Interest Area (PIA).
The views and opinions expressed by the authors in this publication represent those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect those of the PIA membership, ISTAART or the Alzheimer's Association.
The EPIA is committed to exploiting biomarkers for (1) improving the understanding of neurophysiological mechanisms underlying Alzheimer's disease and other dementias at micro, meso, and macro spatial scales and (2) promoting clinical applications and international initiatives.
EPIA members believe that quantitative EEG techniques and biomarkers are an important resource for brain research and clinical applications in neurologic and psychiatric diseases, especially in lower-and middle-income countries.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
There are no relevant conflicts of interest for the co-authors in the present article.


The maximum peak-to-peak amplitude Delta response: CU > ADMCI for the frontocentral-parietal areas Kurt et al. (2014) • 22 ADMCI • 21 CU Auditory oddball paradigm The maximum peak-to-peak amplitude Delta response: CU > ADMCI for the frontal and mid-centroparietal areas Yener et al. (2014) peak-to-peak amplitude No difference for simple visual stimulation Delta response: CU > ADMCI, Females > males and gender difference was stronger in CU Yener et al. (2016) The maximum peak-to-peak amplitude Volume of frontal cortex was estimated from MRIs Delta response: CU > ADMCI The volume of the frontal cortex was positively correlated with frontal delta response for both CU and ADMCI groups (Continues) | 9 of 42 GÜNTEKIN ET al. parietal electrodes.
Furthermore, Xu et al. (2015) reported a decrease in the pre-and post-stimulus interdependence of delta responses at electrode pairs in VCI patients.
In similar experimental conditions, Lou et al. (2011) found reduced event-related delta synchronization in VCI patients, while Wang et al. (


Abbreviations: ADD, Alzheimer's disease dementia; ADMCI, Alzheimer's disease patients with mild cognitive impairment; aMCI, amnestic mild cognitive impairment; CU, cognitively unimpaired control; ERO, event-related oscillation; ERS, event-related synchronization; ERD, event-related desynchronization.



4. 4 |
Event-related theta responses in patients with non-AD dementiasConcerning non-AD dementias, the study of event-related theta responses have shown interesting findings.


Abbreviations: ADD, Alzheimer's disease dementia; ADMCI, Alzheimer's disease patients with mild cognitive impairment; CU, cognitively unimpaired control; ERO, event-related oscillation; ERS, event-related synchronization; ERD, event-related desynchronization; tDCS, transcranial direct current stimulation.


Concerning disease prediction, Michalopoulos et al. (



•
analysis Individual alpha frequency (IAF) peak Event-related desynchronization (ERD) The latency of the alpha ERD peak DEM> young CU, older CU >Young The amplitude of the alpha ERD peak DEM > young CU DEM > older CU Karrasch et al. (2006) responses analyzed both for the encoding and retrieval During encoding: The responses in the 10-20 Hz; Increased ERS in the CU and Increased ERD in the ADMCI The responses in the 12-14 Hz; Increased ERD in the ADMCI, but not in the ADD Güntekin et al. (2008coherence CU > unmedicated ADD (for the left fronto-parietal electrode pairs) medicated ADD > unmedicated ADD (for the left fronto-parietal electrode pairs) Yener et al. (2009synchronization/ desynchronization (ERS/ERD) Pre-event upper-alpha ERD: CU > ADMCI at the temporal and posterior areas Post-event upper-alpha ERS: ADMCI < CU at prefrontal areas Deiber et al. (2015) ApoE ɛ4+ at the frontal sources CU > ADMCI ApoE ɛ4-at frontal and temporal sources del Val et al. (2016) task Event-related (de)synchronization (ERD/ ERS) Lower ERD response in ADD and ADMCI compared to CU Fraga et al., 2018 coupling between theta and alpha/beta Late alpha (9-11 Hz) suppression: diminished with each repetition of the word in the CU but not in the both ADMCI group Fodor et al. (2018) high frequency alpha ERD pre-training than post-training at frontal locations During response execution: Greater high-frequency alpha ERD post-training than pretraining at the frontal locations Goodman et al.


Abbreviations: ADMCI, Alzheimer's disease patients with mild cognitive impairment; ADD, Alzheimer's disease dementia; CU, cognitively unimpaired control; DEM, dementia patients; ERO, event-related oscillation; ERS, event-related synchronization; ERD, event-related desynchronization.


using a simple sensory visual task (digital filtering of ERP responses), Tülay et al. (2020) using a visual oddball task (total and evoked power), Başar et al. (2010) using visual sensory and oddball tasks (event-related coherence analysis) or Cespon et al. (



A B L E 5
Event-related beta responses in ADMCI and ADD patients (de) synchronization (ERD/ERS) Lower ERD response in AD patients compared to the CU in the right central area Güntekin et al. (2013) • 17 ADMCI • 17 CU Visual oddball paradigm EEG-evoked power, Inter-trial phase synchronization of beta responses Event-related beta responses Evoked beta power: target and non-target difference diminished in ADMCI Prieto del Val et al. (2015) obtained for left and right sides of the hippocampus and amygdala Beta ERD: CU>ADMCI both for the encoding (14-25 Hz; 0-1000 ms) and retrieval task (13.5-18
Hz; 700-1000 ms).
During retrieval: ADMCI-s showed a greater correlation between beta ERD and associative memory in comparison with ADMCI-c Fraga et al. (2017) coupling between theta and alpha/beta Beta suppression (15-20 Hz): ADMCI convertors>CU, ADMCI non-converters for semantic congruency.
Increased late beta suppression associated with word congruency: ADMCI convertors>CU, ADMCI nonconverters at the frontal area Caravaglios et al.


Abbreviations: ADMCI, Alzheimer's disease patients with mild cognitive impairment; ADD, Alzheimer's disease dementia; CU, cognitively unimpaired control; ERO, event-related oscillation; ERS, event-related synchronization; ERD, event-related desynchronization.


Abbreviations: ADMCI, Alzheimer's disease patients with mild cognitive impairment; ADD, Alzheimer's disease dementia; CU, cognitively unimpaired control; ERO, event-related oscillation; ERS, event-related synchronization; ERD, event-related desynchronization.