Culture, Ethnicity, and Level of Education in Alzheimer's Disease
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the most frequent cause of dementia, where the abnormal accumulation of beta-amyloid (Aβ) and tau lead to neurodegeneration as well as loss of cognitive, behavioral, and functional abilities.
The present review analyzes AD from a cross-cultural neuropsychological perspective, looking at differences in culture-associated variables, neuropsychological test performance and biomarkers across ethnic and racial groups.
Studies have found significant effects of culture, preferred language, country of origin, race, and ethnicity on cognitive test performance, although the definition of those grouping terms varies across studies.
Together, with the substantial underrepresentation of minority groups in research, the inconsistent classification might conduce to an inaccuratte diagnosis that often results from biases in testing procedures that favor the group to which test developers belong.
These biases persist even after adjusting for variables related to disadvantageous societal conditions, such as low level of education, unfavorable socioeconomic status, health care access, or psychological stressors.
All too frequently, educational level is confounded with culture.
Minorities often have lower educational attainment and lower quality of education, causing differences in test results that are then attributed to culture.
Higher levels of education are also associated with increased cognitive reserve, a protective factor against cognitive decline in the presence of neurodegeneration.
Biomarker research suggests there might be significant differences in specific biomarker profiles for each ethnicity/race in need of accurate cultural definitions to adequately predict risk and disease progression across ethnic/racial groups.
Overall, this review highlights the need for diversity in all domains of AD research that lack inclusion and the collection of relevant information from these groups.

Introduction
Alzheimer's disease (AD), the most frequent cause of dementia, is a progressive degenerative brain disorder affecting approximately 5.5 million people in the United States (US) and 24 million people worldwide
With brain atrophy and abnormal accumulation of proteins such as betaamyloid and tau comes cognitive decline and weakening of behavioral abilities, resulting in the loss of independent functioning.
The average post-diagnosis AD survival rate is typically 5 to 8 years
However, this tends to vary among patients due to other factors such as age, gender, ethnicity, socioeconomic status, and additional health complications, including, more recently, COVID-19
In cross-cultural neuropsychology the approach to assessing neurological disorders, especially dementing diseases, is to look at the influence of cultural variables on cognition, so as to determine the manifestations of brain pathology in within various cultural contexts
In this review, the topic of AD is approached from a cross-cultural neuropsychological perspective.
It starts by defining culture and culture-related concepts, leading to how cultural groups are defined across the scientific literature, followed by a discussion about cross-cultural matters in psychometrics and neuropsychological testing.
Then, the relevance of cultural variables is examined, including ethnicity and education, as well as the differences across ethnicities in the prevalence of AD and its cognitive profile and related biomarkers.
There are three AD sections presented: (1) the influence of education in the diagnosis and progression of AD; (2) AD in diverse cultural groups (defined by ethnicity or race, native languages, and country of origin); and (3) AD biomarkers across ethnic and racial studies.

Defining Culture
Culture is defined as the set of learned traditions and living styles shared by the members of a society
It includes the ways of thinking, feeling, and behaving
The internal representation of culture is subjective and includes ways of thinking and feeling, knowledge, values, attitudes, and beliefs.
The behavioral dimension represents how we relate with others and how our behavior changes in different contexts and circumstances.
Finally, cultures incorporate specific physical characteristics of the corresponding group, such as clothes, ornaments, houses, and instruments.
Cultural elements also include symbolic objects that represent abstract concepts, in the way a wedding ring represents a bond of love and commitment between two people.
Culture represents a way for an individual to adapt to and survive in specific environments.
However, culture is dynamic, and cultural changes are continuously observed
Grouping Cultures.
Researchers in cognitive neuroscience have used different criteria to group cultures, including preferred language (e.g., Spanish speakers, English speakers).
For instance, Loewenstein et al.
Results indicated equivalent high sensitivity for both language groups, indicating that the FOME was a reliable, culturally fair test when screening patients for possible dementia, in the context of those whose native language was either Spanish or English.
Others have equated culture with the country of origin.
For example, Buré-Reyes et al.
After holding education and age constant, significant differences emerged across two of the five tests administered An additional culture-grouping criterion has been the participants' race.
For example, potential differences in cross-sectional and longitudinal cognitive performance have been examined, including cardiovascular risk factors, and AD brain biomarkers in Black and White individuals, all clinically normal at baseline
These racial groups did not differ in vascular or brain biomarkers.
However, Blacks had a lower cognitive performance at baseline and declined faster than Whites even after adjusting for the lower levels of educational attainment and reading ability of the former.
Race is frequently described as a fixed genetic characteristic
The differences in cognitive performance noted between Black and White individuals are more likely attributable to cultural rather than racial differences.
Moreover, authors who define culture as race frequently use the term Caucasian for a racial or ethnic identity equivalent to Whites or European Americans.
However, the term Caucasian has no scientific basis.
Historically, it has been regarded as a biological taxonomic category that usually included ancient and modern populations from all or parts of Europe, Western Asia, Central Asia, South Asia, North Africa, and the Horn of Africa.
In the eighteenth century, the term meant "beautiful people (with an implication of superiority) from the Caucasus Mountains", a mountain range at the intersection of Europe and Asia
Consequently, because it was developed as a concept implying inequality, the term appears to be discriminative, inappropriate, and inadequate.
Not all Europeans originate from the Caucasus; the Anglo Saxons, Latins, Slavs, and others to whom the term is often applied have no historical or ethnic connection with the Caucasian peoples
Regardless, this term remains ubiquitous in the medical field and will be used here only for consistency with the literature.
Lastly among the cultural grouping variables, it is common among neuroscience researchers to equate culture to ethnic origins (e.g., European, Latin, Anglo-Saxon, African, Amerindian, Asian cultures, etc.)
Ethnicity, which is a broader category than race, identifies people as belonging to a group based on similarities such as common ancestry, language, history, society, culture, or nationality
Altogether, ethnoracial factors can be thought of as the raceethnicity influence of both intra-and inter-personal factors, including genetics, ancestry, and self-identification
Several limitations have come from the classification of groups by ethnic origins.
First, it is too broad and ambiguous to include continental ancestry groups such as African or African American; second, it collapses enormous diversity and erases cultural and ancestral identities.
A classification that is commonly used is "non-Hispanic whites"
The terms "Eastern" and "Western" refer to groupingsby-culture
Eastern cultures include Asia and the Middle East, while the Western world includes South and North America, European countries, New Zealand, and Australia.
A noteworthy distinction between East Asian and Western cultures is the dissimilarity in information processing biases related to their distinct cultural values and beliefs.
It has been suggested that the collectivistic and individualistic biases of East Asian and Western cultures, respectively, affect cognition as well as neural structure and function
It has long been found that East Asians and peoples from European cultures attend to different aspects of the world and, therefore, reason differently.
East Asians are presumed to perceive and reason holistically, attending to the field where objects are embedded and attributing causality to interactions between the object and the field
In contrast, Europeans, representative of Western society, are considered analytic, attend primarily to the object, and pay little attention to the field, preferring to attribute causality to the object's properties
It has been suggested that the tendency of Asians to process information holistically results in greater sensitivity and responsiveness to contextual cues in the memory domain.
Masuda and Nisbett
East Asians focused on contextual characteristics of objects displayed and relationships to their environments, more than Americans (Westerns).
The change in the object's environment negatively affected East Asians' accuracy in their responses, while this modification had no significant effect on the ability of Americans to identify old and new objects.
This finding supports the idea that Westerners think more independently, while Easterners think more interdependently.

Culture and Cognition
Cognitive abilities are culturally bound.
One of the earliest analyses of the interaction between biological and cultural factors in the development of human cognition came from the Soviet neuropsychologist Luria
According to Luria
An intrinsic factor in Luria's proposed systematic organization of higher mental functions was the engagement of external artifacts (e.g., objects, symbols, signs), which have an independent history of development within cultures
This principle of construction of functional systems of the human brain is represented in what Vygotsky
Central to the association between culture and cognition is the distinction between cognitive processes
Primary cognition (i.e., cognitive mechanics) refers to biologically based, hardwired cognitive functions while secondary cognition (i.e., cognitive pragmatics) refers to culturallybased processes
However, Park et al.
These processes are operations performed on information in the environment or information built or retrieved from the individual's cognitive system and could vary across cultures
For example, there are variations in perceptual attention and reasoning between individuals from East Asian and European cultures.
There are well-documented differences in cognitive processes between these groups resulting from fundamental differences between their cultural environments.
Furthermore, African American males have been shown to have significantly higher scores in the Seashore Rhythm test than European Americans and Hispanics
The relevance of culture in neurocognitive processes has gained increasing interest regarding the potential of culturally related effects impacting cognitive performance
A recent special issue of Cognitive Neuroscience examines the interaction between interoceptive and exteroceptive bodily self-awareness in Western and East Asian adults
Cultural differences in levels of attention towards context, were found, using the neural event-related potential (ERP) component, N400
Anatomical differences in brain activation have been reported when Western and Eastern cultural groups performed the same mathematical task

Influence of Culture in Cognitive Assessment
Neuropsychological assessments determine the presence and characterization of cognitive impairment in AD and other dementias.
However, these tests of cognitive abilities are particularly susceptible to the influence of culture
It has been proposed that performance in cognitive assessments is culture-specific because of cultural social differences in:
Differences in values and meanings refer to an absence of general agreement on the value of specific responses to particular questions.
For example, an artistic response in the Raven's progressive matrices test may be considered superior, by some, when compared to a response that follows a conceptual principle (i.e., the figure that continues the sequence)
Furthermore, identical items do not necessarily have the same meaning in different cultures, regardless of how appropriate and accurate the translation is.
For example, an item referring to the protection of animals may have a different significance in Europe than in a huntingbased society
In some cultures, modes of knowing might be a collective rather than an individual endeavor.
Many members of collectivistic societies are distressed by testing situations that require individual responses without the participation of the social group.
These members perform most activities collectively (e.g., many Amerindian groups), where the community or family often feels a responsibility to contribute, help, and participate in the individual's test.
Conventions of communication are highly culturedependent.
The way questions are asked can be appropriately interpreted in one culture while inappropriately interpreted in another culture.
In many societies, it can be inappropriate to answer questions asked by a stranger.
Therefore, interpersonal interaction is expected before testing
On the other hand, too much talking, proximity, and physical touch may be counterproductive for individuals from Anglo Saxon cultures.
Ardila
1. Patterns of abilities.
Neuropsychological tests measure cognitive abilities that are, in most cases, learned abilities that correlate with the subject's learning opportunities and contextual experiences.
Different cultural environments lead to the development of different patterns of abilities.
2. Cultural values.
Attitudes toward testing vary across cultures and can affect test performance and engagement.
Normative performance for a particular assessment tool is obtained by sampling the developer's cultural group members.
Moreover, most neuropsychological testing follows psychometric principles shared by a particular psychometric-oriented society or culture but are not necessarily shared by all cultural groups in contemporary testing
For example, (a) Oneto-one relationship during testing: There is an examiner and an examinee, and nobody else is expected to help with the test answers, emphasizing individuality.
(b) Background authority: The very setup of neuropsychological testing indicates a subordinate relationship (dominance dimension) in which the examiner has and authority based on his/her educational background.
In a standard testing situation, the examinee must follow the instructions given by the examiner, and hence, the examiner has the authority.
(c) Best performance: The examinee is expected to perform at an optimal level.
To do "one's best" may be most significant in a culture highly valuing competition, but not in a less competitive society.
(d) Speed in responding: Many neuropsychological tests are timed, and speed with responding is expected.
Time is understood differently across different cultures.
For many cultural groups, speed tests are improper.
The patient may ask, "Do you want me to perform at my best or as fast as I can?" Speed and performance quality may be contradictory as good products result from a slow and careful process.
3. Familiarity.
Neuropsychological tests include items and stimuli that are not necessarily relevant across cultures.
Some items may be unfamiliar for cultural groups other than the sample for which the test was created.
4. Language.
Languages differ in phonology, lexicon (semantic field of the words), grammar, pragmatic, and reading systems.
These differences may affect cognitive test performance.
Therefore, tests created in a particular language must be adapted, to another language based on each culture's idiosyncrasies, not just simply translated word-forword.
This issue might be complicated by the corresponding group's representation (or lack of) among the scientists involved in the instruments' adaptation.
Language usage differs according to the cultural (and subcultural) background and strongly correlates with the subject's educational level.
Sometimes, test instructions are given in a formal language which may be difficult for individuals with limited education to understand due to limited exposure to this type of language.
Another language-related variable that may influence neuropsychological test performance is dual language use (e.g., bilingualism).
There are two competing hypotheses related to the association between bilingualism and cognitive assessment: (1) subtractive effect of bilingualism (e.g., when compared to monolinguals, bilinguals show deficiencies in neuropsychological test performance), and (2) additive effect of bilingualism (i.e., bilingualism has a beneficial effect on specific cognitive functions, particularly on those functions in which executive control is involved)
5. Acculturation.
Changes in culture can result from repeated contact among various societies over time.
The modification of an individual's culture because of contact with a different culture is known as acculturation
Four processes have been identified in the acculturation process: assimilation-adoption of the dominant culture with corresponding abandonment of one's own cultural identity; marginalization-abandonment of one's own cultural identity, without adoption or rejection of the dominant culture; separation-maintenance of one's own cultural identity without adopting the dominant culture; integrationmaintenance of one's own cultural identity and adoption of the dominant culture.
Several studies have shown that lower levels of acculturation are significantly associated with lower cognitive test performance in different cultural groups
Test performance is frequently confounded by the individual's gender, level of education, migration status, and language proficiency

Influence of Education Level on Cognitive Tests
Formal education, and schooling in general, play a significant role in acquiring general knowledge and training of cognitive abilities, some of which are evaluated in neuropsychological assessments.
Further, schooling trains individuals in different learning strategies that may develop positive attitudes toward cognitive testing.
However, well-educated individuals do not necessarily possess greater testing-taking abilities than less-educated individuals.
Rather, highly educated individuals have the same test-taking abilities as less educated individuals, with the additional advantage of strategy training
Furthermore, individuals with no formal education may develop abilities that educated people do not
Nonetheless, cognitive testing frequently evaluates abilities that welleducated people are trained in, and it is not surprising that they outperform their lower-educated counterparts.
As expected, there is a strong association between educational level and performance on various neuropsychological tests
However, this effect is not equivalent across all tests.
While some tests are more sensitive to educational variables (e.g., language tests)
It is also noteworthy that although the educational level has a substantial relationship with performance on some cognitive tests, it might not necessarily provide an advantage for solving everyday problems.
Additionally, years of education do not have a linear relationship with cognitive test performance; instead, the correlation weakens and then reaches a plateau.
Cognitive test scores are significantly lower among individuals with 0 years, as compared to 3 years of education, while the disparity is less prominent among those with 3 years as compared to 6 years of education, and even less so among those with 6 years, as compared to those with 9 years of education, and so forth.
Among those with 12 versus 15 years of education, there are virtually no differences in test performance
However, recent work shows that among older adults, further university-based education may improve language processing abilities and working memory
Literacy is suggested to be a better predictor of latelife cognitive status than years of education, especially for minority groups.
Educational experiences can be defined by the duration (years of schooling), the degrees attained, or the quality of schooling.
The extent of the cognitive benefits of education may better correspond with educational quality indices than with educational accomplishment measures
Early-life educational quality and literacy in late-life explain a substantial portion of race-related disparities in late-life cognitive function
Too often, educational experience and educational level are confounded with cultural factors.
In the US, many Hispanic immigrants or African Americans have lower levels of educational attainment, and any differences with mainstream American individuals may be due to lack of schooling rather than to the effect of culture
Differences in test performance between "Anglos" and "Hispanics" (or other cultural or subcultural groups) in the US are easily attributed to cultural variables
However, and most often, differences are simply the result of differences in educational levels.

Level of Education, Cognitive Reserve, and Alzheimer's Disease
Higher education is thought to delay the onset of AD by enhancing cognitive reserve.
The cognitive reserve model has been suggested as an explanation for the association between higher education and the lower frequency of AD.
Cognitive reserve refers to the ability of the brain to remain functionally resilient in the presence of AD neuropathology.
This theory suggests that the brain uses existing "cognitive reserve/reservoirs" to compensate for pathology
Prior research has shown that years of education were associated with a lower risk of AD diagnosis.
Larsson et al.
While higher education levels may delay the onset of cognitive impairment, once cognitive decline occurs, the severity of underlying neuropathology would be expected to be greater in these individuals, and their survival post-AD diagnosis would be expected to be shorter.
However, in a systematic review, it was found that only in one study, post-diagnosis survival was shorter among those with higher education levels
Similarly, increase in years of education was associated with slightly earlier reports of symptom onset, but a slower decline in Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) scores longitudinally
Another systematic review found those with higher cognitive reserve were more likely to have attended university-level classes
Brain imaging studies have demonstrated an association between brain structure and education, supporting the idea that higher education increases brain reserve.
The concept of brain reserve is based on the theory that larger brain volumes, as compared to smaller brain volumes, can better withstand the consequences of brain damage as manifested in clinical symptoms
Liu et al.
They found that a greater number of years of education was associated with greater regional cortical thickness.
Additionally, specific cortical regions were significantly thinner in AD patients with higher education than those with less education.
These findings suggested that AD patients with higher education could cope better with degenerative brain disease than those with less education, as would be predicted in the cognitive reserve model
Similarly, Stern et al.
They found that the lower educational group (i.e., those with fewer than eight years of education) had a two fold increased risk of developing dementia than the more highly educated group.
Similarly, those with lower occupational attainment were at 2.25 times higher risk of developing dementia than those with higher occupational attainment.
However, they also found that once AD symptoms were observed, patients with high cognitive reserve showed a more rapid rate of cognitive decline than those with lower cognitive reserve
AD pathology progresses before symptoms of cognitive decline appear, more specifically before they can be detected.
Individuals with a lower cognitive reserve cannot endure AD pathology without developing overt symptoms as long as individuals with a higher cognitive reserve
Kim et al.
Participants were followed up more than three times to record their Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR) scores and were placed in one of three groups, namely, subjective cognitive impairment (SCI), mild cognitive impairment (MCI), and advanced AD.
They found that those with higher educational levels (12 years of education or higher) had slower progression from SCI to MCI than those with lower education levels (fewer than 12 years of education).
Table
Anderson et al.
Using existing data from the International Genomics of Alzheimer's Project database, researchers found that intelligence was highly correlated with lowered AD risk and may have mediated the association between education and AD risk.
However, when associations between cognitive reserve, measured by performance on tests of verbal learning, non-verbal reasoning, mental agility, and verbal fluency, along with data from studies of functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) and cerebral structure, were examined, educational attainment positively contributed to cognitive function at an older age, even after accounting for overall IQ
In a longitudinal study examining whether cortical thickness and volumes obtained from MRI scans suggested a protective effect of education against AD, participants with higher educational levels were found to have greater regional cortical thickness than those with fewer years of education.
Additionally, after participants' cognitive performance (measured using the MMSE and the CDR was matched, cortical areas were significantly thinner in AD patients with higher years of education
These cortical regions included the temporal gyri, inferior and superior parietal gyri, and lateral occipital cortex.
These findings suggest that AD patients with higher education were able to compensate cognitively for greater regional brain atrophy, supporting the cognitive reserve model
Nicolas et al.
Brain metabolism and volume were evaluated using positron emission tomography (PET) and MRI scans and analyzed in two diagnostic (AD and MCI patients) and two education groups (i.e., those with 16 years or more of education and fewer than 16 years of education).
AD patients had decreased basal forebrain and hippocampal volume and metabolism compared to cognitively normal controls.
Among participants with a high level of education, those with MCI showed higher basal forebrain and hippocampal metabolism than AD participants, suggesting that the compensatory effect of education is seen at the MCI level but might be lost in later pathological stages
More recently, bilingualism has been identified as a potential contributor to the cognitive/brain reserve in elderly individuals.
Seemingly, bilingualism delays the onset of symptoms associated with neurodegeneration by up to 5 years
Interestingly, bilingual/multilingual individuals who actively used two or more languages could tolerate more significant amounts of neurodegeneration than monolinguals without obvious cognitive impairments
The idea is that the habitual use of two languages requires extensive and continual cognitive control mechanisms (i.e., repeated activation of neural network connections).
Engaging in constant cognitive control increases the bilingual's inhibitory and switching mechanisms, resulting in advantages in other specific cognitive domains
Brain Reserve.
Brain imaging studies have demonstrated an association between brain structure and education, supporting the idea that education increases brain adaptations, leading to differential behavioral expression in brain injury cases.
Brain reserve theory suggests that larger brains can better withstand brain damage without presenting clinical symptoms than smaller ones
Negash et al.
Results identified education and intracranial volume (ICV) as significant factors associated with resilience; the resilient group had more years of education and a larger brain size than the dementia group.
However, in the final regression model, ICV was maintained as the highly significant factor associated with resilience, suggesting that larger cranial size is associated with resilience even with lower education.
Higher levels of education and larger hippocampi were significant predictors of confrontation naming abilities and executive function skills, mainly in cognitively normal participants
In AD, participants with more years of education experienced quicker cortical atrophy (in 5 years) than those with fewer years of education

Alzheimer's Disease and Cultural Group Disparities

Ethnoracial Disparities in AD Research
Despite the fact that AD has become one of the most prevalent diseases, ethnoracial disparities in the prevalence, genetics, age of onset, and disease progression have not been thoroughly incorporated into current research and assessments tools.
For example, US Latino/Hispanic and Black populations are disproportionately affected by AD, but tend to be the most underrepresented groups in empirical and clinical research
However, the mortality rate associated with AD for Whites, Asians, and American Indians seems to be substantially higher than for African American and Latino patients
These minority groups do not have the same access to healthcare and early screening assessments, nor is educational attainment as high in these groups compared to non-Hispanic Whites
Refer to Table
While AD research aims for diversity in research samples, systemic barriers remain, leading to the underrepresentation of certain ethnoracial minority groups.
Ethnoracial factors are reported to influence cognitive reserve, neuropsychological performance, biological markers (both neuroimaging and biofluid), immunity, and overall neurodegeneration in AD
For example, various ethnoracial factors (e.g., language, education, culture) modulated performance on cognitive functioning tests, contributing to the lack of normative data across these ethnoracial groups
If more is known about the interplay between identified social determinants of health, co-morbidities, and genetic factors in AD and ethnoracial disparities, the sensitivity of assessments can be improved for minority ethnoracial groups.

Ethnoracial Disparities Across Alzheimer's Disease Presentation
In 2019, it was reported in a population-based study of individuals 65 years of age or older 3.2 million Medicare Fee-for-Service (FFS) beneficiaries (11.2% of the sample of 28 million) and 5 million people from the US Census (10.9%) carried an AD diagnosis in 2014
AD diagnoses were more prevalent in women than men for both sample populations, and the frequency of AD diagnoses increased with standard age groups: 3.6% for those between 65 and 74 years of age, 13.6% for 75 and 84 years, and 34.6% for individuals 85 years of age and older.
Matthews et al.
Hispanics (12.9%), non-Hispanic Whites (11.3%),
American Indian or Native Alaskan (10.5%), and Asian or Pacific Islanders (10.1%);
(b) Census: Blacks (13.8%),
Hispanics (12.2%), those belonging to two or more ethnoracial groups (11.5%), non-Hispanic Whites (10.3%),
American Indian or Native Alaskan (9.1%), and Asian or Pacific Islanders (8.4%).
Overall, for individuals 85 years or older, more than 43% of Blacks and 40% of Hispanics bear the most burden of AD and related disorders
With the prevalence of AD and related disorders being substantially higher for some ethnoracial groups, these groups with higher prevalence also tend to be the most underrepresented in research
The reasons behind the disparities in the outcomes of AD research (e.g., prevalence, incidence, onset, progression) remains largely unanswered.
Hispanics/Latinos seem to have an earlier age of onset and faster progression when compared to other ethnoracial groups
Vega et al.
Acculturation also adds to the complexity of factors influencing cognitive decline in Hispanic/Latino older adults.
Although the likelihood of cognitive impairment
Lamar et al.
In contrast, higher levels of self-reported experiences of discrimination and social isolation and smaller social networks were significant predictors of lower baseline levels of global cognition, episodic and working memory, slower perceptual speed, and faster rates of decline in visuospatial abilities
Further complications arise in the validity of predictive models of cognitive decline in Hispanic/Latino older adults when regional differences are examined within the same ethnic group
It was found that the overall prevalence and incidence (14.2% and 2.3%, respectively) were twofold greater among African Americans than European Americans with relatively little variation over the period of the study within each ethnoracial group
When education was entered into their regression model, the prevalence of AD increased from 14.6 to 14.7%, while the incidence was unimpacted [102].
Furthermore, African Americans tended to have lower baseline global cognition [103], perform more poorly on cognitive tests used in the assessment of AD, have a higher prevalence of apolipoprotein E (APOE) e4 allele [103], and have a slower rate of decline associated with AD [104] compared to non-Hispanic Whites.
A large population-based study followed individuals 65 years and older for up to 18 years (64% black, 36% white) and assessed cognitive performance, cognitive decline, and AD incidence (age-and sex-adjusted)
Results indicate that black participants performed worse on neuropsychological testing at baseline and had higher prevalence and incidence risk for AD than white participants, suggesting differences at the cognitive level.
Furthermore, when household income, household assets, educational attainment, and occupational status were considered in a predictive prevalence model for AD, African American cognitive performance declined by 25.8% compared to Whites
Nevertheless, similar to Hispanic populations, African Americans remain disproportionately affected by AD, yet they remain vastly underrepresented in studies examining ethnoracial influence on AD and related disorders.
Coverage of the ethnoracial influence on AD among Asian American, Native Hawaiian, and Pacific Islander populations is also limited.
One review covers multiple domains, such as prevalence, risk factors (e.g., sociodemographic, physiological, and genetic variables), and clinical functioning in AD among Asian Americans, Native Hawaiians, and Pacific Islanders
Generally, authors report that knowledge of the disease among the public in these ethnoracial groups is deficient, and seeking treatment for cognitive decline is considered stigmatizing
Cross-cultural studies that transcend geographical barriers, while still needed, are even scanter.
An influential report [108] compared three Chinese samples (residing in Taiwan and China) to a Caucasian sample (Los Angeles, California) and found that the Chinese samples had a significantly higher prevalence of AD, even when educational attainment was factored in.
However, lower AD rates have been reported in Eastern populations compared to Western regions
In a 3-year longitudinal study,
Chinese participants with MCI were 2.3 times more likely to be diagnosed with vascular dementia than their American counterparts.
Furthermore, cross-cultural differences in categorical memory errors have been reported in normal individuals from Eastern and Western societies
For example, Gutchess and Boduroglu
Although older Turks were found to have an increased categorical error rate as compared to younger Turks, older Turks still had fewer errors compared to older Americans.
Israeli and Arab populations also remain understudied in AD research.
A high level of inbreeding in this population highlights the likelihood of other genetic factors which may have influenced the high prevalence of AD.
Additional reports show a high association between education and prevalence of mild cognitive impairment and dementia among Israeli Arabs
While illiteracy rates among Israeli Arabs are high, the relationship to cognitive performance on AD screenings in this group is highly complex and understudied.
They attribute some of these complexities to potential cultural and socioeconomic influences, including low AD-related knowledge and limited access to resources among this population.
AD is understudied across multiple minority ethnoracial groups, but effects indicate that subpopulations are differentially affected in terms of disease prevalence, incidence, onset, and progression.
The next step is to examine how these groups are practically differentially affected by the AD research disparities.

Alzheimer's Disease Presentation Between Different Native Languages
Participants' spoken languages have characterized AD samples (e.g., Spanish speakers vs. English speakers), which contextualizes findings regarding the role that culture and language play in AD risk, incidence, prevalence, and influencing performance on neuropsychological tests.
A study
For the whole sample, ethnicity predicted performance for only writing a check (higher for English-speakers than Spanishspeakers).
The same authors [116] later examined digit span neuropsychological performance on amnestic MCI patients and clinically normal individuals in Spanish-and Englishspeakers.
They reported that both cognitively normal and AD English-speakers performed better on all digit span aspects (i.e., forward, backward, raw score) compared to Spanish speakers with no differences in two-digit chunking.
These authors
However, culture/ language significantly predicted digit span scores even after controlling for age, education, fluid memory score, and language syllable-length differences indicating that chunking is less impacted by cultural bias
Furthermore, some commonly used AD assessments are even less susceptible to cultural bias, like the Loewenstein-Acevedo Scales for Semantic Interference and Learning (LASSI-L)
While culture/language differences do not always impact the metrics used to assess functional decline associated with AD, but that is not to say that differences due to language are negligible.
For instance, more literature is emerging that examines the prevalence and incidence of AD in more ethnically diverse populations of Arabic-speakers [118], and there is an increased urgency for understanding how healthy Arabic populations fair in different cognitive assessments, for example, verbal fluency, to provide a better understanding of atypical aging in this population
Studies comparing different languages and AD incidence and prevalence are scarce outside of alphabetic languages.
In a study comparing English-to Chinese-speaking AD patients on a number transcoding task [120], Chinese-speakers had more intrusions in transcoding numbers than the English-speakers with no meaningful differences in syntactic errors, indicating that the difference is not due to differences in executive function among Chinese-and English-speaking AD patients
Overall, while comparisons in the incidence and prevalence of AD between speakers of different languages indicate important socio-ethnic influences across cultures, more research is needed to fully understand how AD presentation differs between speakers of different languages.

Alzheimer's Disease as a Function of Country of Origin
The prevalence of dementia, particularly AD, is increasing rapidly in both developing and developed countries, but its prevalence varies considerably worldwide.
This may be attributed to the lack of methodological consistency among studies, comprising diagnostic criteria and different mean population ages
However, even after considering these potential sources of bias, differences in age-adjusted dementia prevalence still exist among regions of the world
In Latin America, the prevalence of dementia is 7.3%, higher than anticipated due to the combination of low average educational attainment and high vascular risk profile [123] The prevalence of dementia in Europe is 6.4% (all causes), 4.4% for AD, and 1.6% for VaD
However, the average incidence rates per 1000 person-years reported in Italy were 12.47 for overall dementia, 6.55 for AD, and 3.30 for vascular dementia
They found that women hold a high probability of developing AD, whereas men carry a high risk of developing VaD
Additionally, the predominance of specific genetic variants in different countries underscores the importance of studying diverse populations
The predominance of genetic variants in certain countries and not in others emphasize the importance of analyzing these factors across the world to understand AD risk better and improve patient outcomes.
While it is evident that economic discrepancies between countries affect all levels of care, from risk assessment and prevention to diagnosis and treatment, there are also significant differences between Latin American countries regarding the availability of trained practitioners, access to and timely diagnosis, and possibilities of treatment.
Overall, low educational background and other socioeconomic factors have been associated with a high risk of obesity, sedentarism, diabetes, hypertension, dyslipidemia, and metabolic syndrome, all of which also raise the risk of vascular dementia and AD in different countries
There are considerable challenges to overcome before developing countries can advance and collaborate with the international research community [121, 129].

Biomarkers and Ethnicity in Alzheimer's Disease
AD biomarkers interact with ethnicity and race, therefore this section focuses mainly on studies that compare two or more races/ethnicities.
The literature often distinguishes race as a biological factor and ethnicity as a social factor, more related to culture than genotype.
There are two possible scenarios regarding differences in clinical onset and progression of AD between races.
First, if differences are not reflected in biomarkers between ethnoracial groups, any differences in cognitive diagnoses can be attributed to biased results from diagnostic tests and procedures.
Lack of biologically based differences between ethnicities/races would signal flaws in tests that might have been designed for English-speaking populations of European descent, thereby yielding biased results when the same norms are applied to participants of different races/ethnicities
Second, in the case in which racial/ethnic differences in diagnosis are also reflected in biomarkers, explanations involving socioeconomic status, educational attainment, diet, and other environmental factors may be used.
In either situation, we are far from understanding ethnic/race variation in AD in the current state of aging science.
Science is just not advancing fast enough to compensate for the increase in aging populations across all races and ethnicities, but there is an underrepresentation of minorities in research
A substantial limitation arises when discussing biomarkers and their interaction with ethnic and racial factors: most studies comparing multiethnic samples are conducted in well-developed countries with populations predominantly of European origins (i.e., US, Canada, and European countries), including minorities and immigrants or their descendants who live in drastically different socioeconomic situations from the majority groups.
While being consistently underrepresented in research, African Americans, Hispanics, Asian Americans, and Native Americans in the USA have a higher prevalence and disease burden than White Americans
When considering immigration as a factor, other issues related to language, bilingualism, acculturation, and immigration contribute to cognitive [133] and brain [134] reserves.
Some of these variables may promote cognitive resilience in the presence of neurodegeneration.
In contrast, other health outcomes, such as high blood pressure and diabetes, are more prevalent in the African American and Hispanic populations, heightening the risk of developing AD in those groups
Table

Genetic Biomarkers
The most salient genetic factor associated with AD is the Apolipoprotein epsilon 4 gene (APOE-ε4), which has been associated with increased susceptibility to developing AD in approximately 50% of patients [136] and increases the risk across ethnicities (Caucasian, African American, Hispanic, and Japanese)
There are three forms (alleles) of the APOE gene (ε2, ε3, or ε4) and consequently, six possible combinations (ε2/ε2, ε2/ 3, ε2/ε4, ε3/ε3, ε3/ε4, and ε4/ε4).
Carriers of the ε4 allele have an increased risk of developing AD.
While carriers of having the ε2 allele have a decreased risk
The prevalence of the higher-risk ε4 allele seems to differ across ethnicities, with a higher frequency African Americans, as compared to Caucasians, who in turn have higher ε4 frequencies than in Asian populations, in Hispanics
Low frequencies of the ε4 allele have also been found in Southern European populations
A high frequency of the ApoE-ε4 allele has also been found among Dominicans, Puerto Ricans, and Cubans, as compared to Central Americans, Mexicans, and South Americans, who had relatively low frequencies [127], while dominantly inherited AD (DIAD) was found to have the highest prevalence in Colombia, Puerto Rico, and
This allele is more strongly associated with AD risk in Japanese populations [137, 139] while
This heterogeneity remains today and indicates the need for further research with larger, more diverse samples
Choctaw Native Americans also have a lower frequency of the tau H2 haplotype than Whites
These findings suggest that specific ancestries might lower the probabilities of developing AD.
Another allele has been found to correlate with the age of onset of AD and performance in neuropsychological tests, the deoxythymidine-homopolymer (poly-T, rs10524523) in intron 6 of the TOMM40 gene is adjacent to APOE on chromosome 19.
In Caucasians, the three predominant alleles at this locus are short (S), long (L), or very long (VL).
On an APOE ε3/3 background, the S/VL and VL/VL genotypes are more protective than S/S [144].
The co-occurrence of the different APOE and TOMM40 alleles seems to differ across ethnicities, highlighting the importance of investigating worldwide populations.
For instance, Whites presented a higher co-occurrence of the L with the ε4 [145, 146], and VL and S with the ε3 alleles, with Hispanics presenting a similar distribution
On the other hand, African Americans presented the S and the ε4 linkage more often
In addition, compared to Whites, African-Americans with the VL genotype presented a higher frequency of the ε4 allele.
These findings suggest the relationship between genotype and phenotype as expressed under the influence of sociocultural and other environmental factors is complex and requires extensive research, including more diverse samples and controlling for said factors.

Beta-amyloid and Tau
Beta-amyloid (Aβ) depositions in the extracellular space form neuritic plaques, which interfere with neural communication and result in cell death and the neurodegeneration seen in AD.
In addition, Tau pathology also contributes by disrupting intracellular transport mechanisms, resulting in cell death
However, the levels of Aβ were similar between ethnic/racial groups.
In the fifth study [156], African Americans with normal cognition had higher p-tau and t-tau than Whites but lower levels of Aβ1-42.
Among patients with cognitive impairment, the results were similar to those among participants with normal cognition, except for the levels of CSF ptau181 and t-tau, which were higher in Whites than in African Americans
In one study
The authors concluded that the discrepancies in these results might be related to differences in clinical evaluation and diagnosis between races, but it remains unclear if the differences can be attributed to biological interracial differences

Brain Volumetric Biomarkers
Structural MRI provides volumetric biomarkers that can detect the presence of neurodegeneration in AD and track disease progression.
For instance, Zahodne et al. [159] used hippocampal volume as predictors of performance on a cognitive composite (including scores in four domains: memory, language, speed/executive functioning, and visuospatial processing) in an ethnically diverse sample (non-Hispanic Whites, African Americans, and Hispanics) without dementia.
They also derived an AD signature measure by calculating four cortical thickness composites: (1) rostral medial temporal lobe (entorhinal cortex and parahippocampus), (2) angular gyrus (inferior parietal lobe), (3) inferior frontal lobe (pars opercularis, pars orbitalis, and pars triangularis), and (4) inferior temporal lobe, temporal pole (temporal pole), precuneus (precuneus), supramarginal gyrus (supramarginal gyrus), superior parietal lobe (superior parietal lobe), and superior frontal lobe (superior frontal lobe).
These measures were used as predictors of cognitive measures across African Americans, Hispanics, and Whites without dementia.
They found that greater hippocampal volume was a significant predictor of cognitive performance among African Americans and Whites, but for Hispanics, it only trended towards significance; this indicates that hippocampal atrophy affects ethnic groups differentially and that additional factors that also differ across the groups play a role in cognitive performance.
For this particular sample, immigrant status in the Hispanic sample may have acted as a modifying factor
However, in another study, among both Hispanics and Whites, there was a progressive decrease in volume of the hippocampus and entorhinal cortex and an increase in the volume of the inferior lateral ventricle (indicating increasing atrophy in the regions surrounding the ventricle) from cognitively normal to MCI and mild dementia.
They also found for equivalent levels of performance on cognitive and functional measures, whites had greater levels of neurodegeneration than did Hispanic subjects across diagnostic groups suggesting the possibility of over-diagnosis of cognitive impairment among Hispanics due to performance bias on cognitive testing among this group
However, when comparing hippocampal volume between African Americans and Whites,
Decreased hippocampal volumes have also been observed in African Americans compared to White Americans with a pathological diagnosis, but only when they had a family history of dementia

Neuropathology
Postmortem studies analyzing Braak staging of Tau pathology have not found consistent differences between African American and White descendants.
Some studies indicated that African Americans had higher Braak stage pathology than Whites [160], and others found no differences
In the Florida Autopsied Multi-Ethnic cohort (of 1625 pathologically verified Alzheimer's disease cases), Hispanic subjects were found to have a higher frequency of family history of dementia (58%), earlier age at onset, longer disease duration (median of 12 years), and lower MMSE score proximal to death compared with White and African American subjects.
Blacks were found to have a non-significantly lower Braak tangle stage but a higher frequency of coexisting hippocampal sclerosis than the other groups [163].
The Aβ42/Aβ40 ratio was increased by nearly 493%, and Aβ42 was elevated by 121% in African Americans when compared to Whites, while no significant differences were found in Aβ40.
In addition, levels of S100B, a calciumbinding protein involved in different cellular processes and produced mainly by astrocytes, also implicated in AD, were elevated in African Americans compared with Caucasians

Functional Connectivity
The default mode network (DMN) is a group of brain regions that are in a functionally correlated state of activation during resting wakefulness
The DMN corresponds to areas that are also vulnerable to amyloid pathology and neurodegeneration early in AD, including the precuneus, posterior cingulate cortex (PCC), the inferior parietal lobule (IPL), and the ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC)
Among cognitively normal participants, African Americans have been found to have reduced connectivity between the following pairs of brain regions: (1) precuneus-ventrolateral PFC, (2) IPL-parahippocampal gyrus, (3) temporal pole-the hippocampus, whereas the remaining 52 connectivity values were not significantly different.
Among Whites, greater cognitive impairment was associated with decreased connectivity, whereas among African Americans, more significant cognitive impairment was associated with increased connectivity between the following areas: (1) precuneuslateral temporal cortex, (2) precuneus-temporal pole
These findings suggest that neurodegeneration may progress at different rates in the involved brain areas [167] across races/ethnicities.

Conclusions
It is now clear ethnoracial disparities can result in differential presentations and long-term effects of AD.
We reviewed some of the problems these underrepresented groups face: for one, the Hispanic/Latino population is the fastest-growing in the USA but lags in educational attainment, a known factor in AD resiliency
These authors emphasize low educational attainment among the Hispanic/Latino population is linked to a lack of access to healthcare and screening tools due to language or cultural barriers, thereby suggesting many undiagnosed AD cases among this ethnoracial group.
Among various ethnoracial groups, severe psychological distress contributes disproportionately to the burden of AD and related disorders, more so for African Americans than non-Hispanic Whites
Furthermore, Novak et al.
These authors ventured that the higher occurrence of severe psychological distress in these minority groups, particularly for African Americans and Hispanics/Latinos, could be influenced by diagnostic barriers, racial bias in the healthcare field, or potentially even cultural norms around seeking and obtaining mental health assistance.
Given that depression, anxiety, and related mental health disorders are impactful risk factors for AD progression, a greater emphasis on understanding ethnoracial disparities in mental health among AD and normal populations should no longer be a recommendation but a requirement.
Outside of subjective-psychological distress, ethnoracial disparities have been examined in the pharmacological treatment of AD.
For example, in clinical trials of AD the reporting of demographic information regarding race/ethnicity has been deficient so that nearly half of the studies screened in a review did not report information about race [168], and only in three studies was information provided regarding how this was assessed (e.g., by the investigator or by self-report).
The issue of underrepresented reporting about race information has implications regarding the efficacy and safety of the drugs used in the treatment of AD and the external validity of some of these clinical trials across ethnoracial groups.
Research in AD needs much greater emphasis on assessment methods to resolve these drastic ethnoracial disparities.
Overall, the reviewed results highlight the need for diversity in all domains of AD research.
Even though most of the studies included in this revision compared non-Hispanic White participants with African American participants, the scientific literature is still far from inclusive, lacking not only in the inclusion of other groups, including Native Americans, Hispanic/Latinos, Asian Americans from different backgrounds, and much more detailed information regarding African Americans.
For instance, biomarker research findings that have been described so far suggest that there may be significant differences in how various biomarkers may be informative about the onset and progression of AD across ethnic/racial groups.
In addition, specific biomarker profiles might need to be defined for each ethnic/racial group to predict risk and disease progression adequately in each group.
There is much room for improvement in our methods of researching the field of AD, which would allow great representativeness of various ethnoracial groups.
Researchers and clinicians should consider some steps when examining ethnoracial factors in AD that have been suggested by Weiner
Such groups may provide a better understanding of how genetic and environmental factors influence the prevalence and progression of AD (e.g., NIA-funded Alzheimer's Disease Genetics Initiative)
(2) Considering the complexity involved in defining ethnoracial and cultural groups and clustering participants within those groups, another step in more effectively mapping the course of AD is to consider the diversity and heterogeneity within ethnoracial groups, rather than a strictly conventional, broad categorizations of race [169, 170]; (3) Another necessary direction is to better identify the variables that define the different groups, including sociocultural characteristics, attitudes toward other ethnic groups, and ethnic identity conceptualized as self-identification and a sense of belonging toward one's group
Additionally, better assessments of ethnoracial groups would include exploring the influence of educational and cultural background and immigrationrelated factors (i.e., acculturation and contextual factors, length of residence in a new country, and bilingualism)
Attempts have been made to develop cross-cultural neuropsychological assessment batteries adequately validated for use with ethnic minorities
By utilizing ethnoracial screening measures that accurately reflect the diversity of all minority groups, paired with increasing advertisement and incentivization for these groups to participate, it may soon be possible to better explain the complexities in ethnoracial disparities in the biology of AD, as defined by the NIA-AA research framework
Finally, socioeconomic disparities exist worldwide between countries, influencing the validity of results in cross-cultural research.
These socio-economic disparities are reflected in the variability in educational levels and the quality of education.
A universal socio-economic and educational assessment approach would improve reliability in comparing AD risk and progression in diverse groups, between and within countries.



Table 1
Studies aimed at analyzing the relevance of level of education in the diagnosis and progression of Alzheimer's disease



Table 2
Studies aimed to analyze ethnic/racial disparities in AD



Table 2 (



Table 3
Studies aimed to analyze biomarkers and ethnicity in Alzheimer's disease



Table 3 (



Table 3 (



Table 3 (



Table 3 (