Intermittent Theta Burst Stimulation Ameliorates Cognitive Deficit and Attenuates Neuroinflammation via PI3K/Akt/mTOR Signaling Pathway in Alzheimer’s-Like Disease Model
Neurodegeneration implies progressive neuronal loss and neuroinflammation further contributing to pathology progression.
It is a feature of many neurological disorders, most common being Alzheimer's disease (AD).
Repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS) is a non-invasive stimulation which modulates excitability of stimulated brain areas through magnetic pulses.
Numerous studies indicated beneficial effect of rTMS in several neurological diseases, including AD, however, exact mechanism are yet to be elucidated.
We aimed to evaluate the effect of intermittent theta burst stimulation (iTBS), an rTMS paradigm, on behavioral, neurochemical and molecular level in trimethyltin (TMT)-induced Alzheimer's-like disease model.
TMT acts as a neurotoxic agent targeting hippocampus causing cognitive impairment and neuroinflammation, replicating behavioral and molecular aspects of AD.
Male Wistar rats were divided into four experimental groups-controls, rats subjected to a single dose of TMT (8 mg/kg), TMT rats subjected to iTBS two times per day for 15 days and TMT sham group.
After 3 weeks, we examined exploratory behavior and memory, histopathological and changes on molecular level.
TMT-treated rats exhibited severe and cognitive deficit.
iTBS-treated animals showed improved cognition.
iTBS reduced TMT-induced inflammation and increased anti-inflammatory molecules.
We examined PI3K/Akt/mTOR signaling pathway which is involved in regulation of apoptosis, cell growth and learning and memory.
We found significant downregulation of phosphorylated forms of Akt and mTOR in TMT-intoxicated animals, which were reverted following iTBS stimulation.
Application of iTBS produces beneficial effects on cognition in of rats with TMT-induced hippocampal neurodegeneration and that effect could be mediated via PI3K/Akt/mTOR signaling pathway, which could candidate this protocol as a potential therapeutic approach in neurodegenerative diseases such as AD.

INTRODUCTION
Neurodegeneration is a complex pathological event characterized by a progressive loss of nerve cells and deterioration of neural functions, underlying many neurological disorders, most common being Alzheimer's disease (AD)
Neurodegenerative disorders are often accompanied by neuroinflammatory activation of astrocytes and microglia, which transit from a physiological, quiescent state to a reactive phenotype, releasing various inflammatory factors thus actively contributing to further neuronal degeneration
There is no known effective drug/treatment for any neurodegeneration and for many diseases the clear cause has not been fully discovered
One experimental approach that mimics behavioral and histopathological aspects of hippocampal degeneration seen in AD is trimethyltin-induced neurodegeneration
Trimethyltin (TMT) is a potent neurotoxicant specifically targeting human and animal limbic systems, particularly hippocampal formation
Animals exposed to a single dose of TMT develop a series of symptoms, including seizures, hyperactivity, hyperexcitability, aggression, and severe cognitive deficit as a consequence of neuronal death of CA3/CA1 pyramidal neurons
Neuronal damage begins 2-4 days post-exposure, primarily in medial and proximal CA3 region and CA1 and can be detected at the end of the first week.
It progressively worsens over the next 3 weeks
Neuronal loss is accompanied by early activation of astrocytes and microglia leading to sustained astrocyte-derived neuroinflammation
TMT activates pathogenic pathways resulting in excitotoxicity, oxidative stress, mitochondrial dysfunction, intracellular calcium overload, and gene expression associated with apoptosis and necrosis
Experimental data confirmed the significant roles of these mechanisms in the pathogenesis of human neurodegenerations, especially of Alzheimer's disease, making TMT-induced degeneration a useful and translatable model convenient for probing diverse neuroprotective strategies
Repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS) is a safe, non-invasive neuromodulatory technique based on stimulation of cortical structures via electromagnetic pulses which are administered in a predefined protocol-dependent pattern.
Stimulation at a certain frequency may lead to prolonged and increased cortical excitability after the period of stimulation
rTMS has already found use in clinical treatment for neurological and psychiatric diseases showing a beneficial effect in patients with drug-resistant depression
It has been reported that rTMS, especially in combination with cognitive training, could be effective for improving mild-to-moderate cognitive decline in AD
However, the full cellular and molecular mechanisms underlying these effects are largely unknown and the need for more comprehensive clinical trials still exists.
Previous studies have shown that rTMS can attenuate reactive gliosis
Observed neuroprotective effects have put rTMS on a list of promising therapeutic approaches in the treatment of neurodegenerative disorders such as AD, but very few studies on experimental models of neurodegenerations have been performed up to date.
The aim of this study was to examine effects of intermittent theta burst stimulation (iTBS), an rTMS paradigm, on different aspects of TMT-induced hippocampal neurodegeneration regarding changes in behavior and cognition, pro-and anti-inflammatory markers, oxidative stress parameters, potentially important signaling pathways which could regulate abovementioned processes.
iTBS is a form of rTMS protocol which has been shown to produce similar if not greater effects on brain activity than standard rTMS.
Its major advantage is reduction in administration duration and consistency in application across literature
Results in this field of study are crucial for understanding the mechanisms underlying iTBS effects, finding a new potential cellular and molecular treatment targets of this paradigm of rTMS which could candidate it as a new therapeutic approach in treatment of neurodegenerative disorders.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Animals
A total of 54 2-month-old male Wistar rats, bred in the animal facility at Centre of Veterinary Service, Ministry of Defence, Serbia, were used in this study.
Animals were housed (3-4 per cage) under the following conditions: 12 h light/dark regime, constant ambient temperature 23 ± 2

Treatment and Experimental Groups
Animals were randomly assigned into four experimental groups: Control (n = 12), TMT (n = 15), TMT + iTBS (n = 12), TMT + iTBSsh (n = 15).
On day 0, animals of the TMT, TMT + iTBS and TMT+ iTBSsh group received a single intraperitoneal injection of TMT (8 mg/kg, administered in the volume of 1 mL 0.9% saline).
Control group received an adequate volume of 0.9% saline solution.
The animals were monitored daily for 3 weeks, and sacrificed by decapitation (Harvard apparatus, Holliston, MA, United States).

Theta Burst Stimulation Protocol
Three days after intoxication intermittent protocol of theta-burst stimulation (iTBS) was applied.
We chose this particular time point as it coincides with the onset of TMT-induced symptoms
The stimulation was performed by MagStim Rapid 2 device and a 25-mm figureof-eight coil (MagStim Company, Whitland, United Kingdom).
Applied iTBS protocol consisted of 20 trains of ten bursts (3 pulses at a frequency of 50 Hz), repeated at 5 Hz (10 s intervals between trains, with the total duration of the procedure of 192 s).
Stimulation intensity (stimulator output) was set at 33%, which was just below/around the motor threshold value
The motor threshold value was defined as a stimulus intensity which induces a minimal visible motor response of treated animals, most usually manifested as repetitive movement of mandible muscles mimicking chewing.
The iTBS protocol did not induce any visible behavioral responses or distress to animals.
Animals were gently held during the stimulation process, while left to move freely during 10-s intervals between trains.
The stimulation was applied by holding the center of the coil gently above the frontal cranial bone, in close contact with the scalp.
TMT + iTBS sham group (TMT + iTBSsh) was subjected to noise artifact -cage with two animals was set next to the MagStim Rapid 2 device and the rats were allowed to listen to the sound of the stimulation followed by handling manipulation similar to TMT + iTBS group (Figure

Assessment of Behavioral and Aggression Severity Score
Aggressive behavior was monitored in freely moving rats and aggression severity score was determined as reported and described previously
Briefly, every day (at 8:00 am) animals in a clean cage with bedding were scored according to the 1-4 scale, during a 2-min interval.
The scores were as follows: (1) without symptoms, (2) shies from hand when grasped, mild tremor (3) avoids hand by running, struggles when captured or both, systemic tremor (4) leaps, struggles and bites when captured.
Several animals in the TMT and TMT + iTBSsh group developed epileptic seizures during scoring, mostly triggered by sound (Supplementary Video 1) and repetitive rotational movements when captured by the tail (Supplementary Video 2), while in TMT + iTBS group those events were observed only once during 3 weeks.

Open Filed and Object Recognition Test
The observation of spontaneous behavior was evaluated by the open field test (OFT).
Animals were transferred to the behavior analysis room on the last day of the experiment and left for habituation to the environment for 2 h before the analysis.
The behavioral observation room was completely separated from the cages to prevent acoustic and/or optic disturbance of the animals.
All materials that have been in contact with the tested animals were cleaned with 70% ethanol thereafter to prevent any olfactory cues.
The animals received one 5min session by placement in the center of the empty black arena (100 × 100 × 50 cm, Figure
The total movement was continuously recorded.
Rat activity during this period was analyzed for spontaneous, exploratory activity in the open field test (OFT).
Following the OFT and habituation with the apparatus, animals were placed in the center of the arena, at an equal distance from two identical rectangular objects (uniformly yellow-colored, diameter 5 cm, height 20 cm), left to freely explore for 5 min period, and returned to their home cages (sampling phase).
After each animal, both arena and objects were thoroughly cleaned with 70% alcohol to ensure complete removal of any olfactory cures which could interfere with the test.
After the 1 h-delay, animals were put in the center of the arena, at equal distance from objects, with one of the familiar objects being replaced by a new conical object (uniformly red-colored, diameter 15 cm, height 20 cm) and left to explore freely for another 5 min (testing phase).
The time spent with each object was set as a baseline criterion, provided that sniffing, climbing and exploration of the object lasted more than 2 s which was considered as an active exploration (animals that did not meet these criteria were omitted from the analysis).
Analysis of the sampling phase was also performed to examine whether animals showed preference toward any of two identical objects (Supplementary Figure
Recognition index (RI) represents the percentage of time spent at the novel object in respect to the total time spent at both objects
Two researchers, blind of treatment groups, analyzed the behavioral results.

Brain Tissue Preparation for Histological Techniques
Brains were carefully removed from the skull (n = 3-4/treatment group), fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA), cryoprotected and dehydrated in sucrose (10, 20, and 30%) in 0.2 M phosphate buffer pH 7.4 as described previously
25-µm thick coronal slices were cut on the cryostat, air-dried at room temperature (RT), and kept at -20 • C until use.

Histochemical and Immunohistochemical Staining
The coronal sections were stained with thionine and micrographs were taken on Leitz light microscope equipped with a Leica DFC320 camera.
For each experimental group, several sections at different stereotaxic anterior-posterior (AP) coordinates were taken.
Immunofluorescent staining procedures were performed as described previously
Briefly, sections were washed in PBS, blocked in 5% normal donkey serum, incubated with primary antibodies (Table
Micrographs were taken by a confocal laser scanning microscope (LSM 510, Carl Zeiss, GmbH, Jena, Germany), with Ar multi-line
On day 0, animals of the TMT, TMT + iTBS, and TMT + iTBS sham group received a single intraperitoneal injection of TMT (8 mg/kg dissolved in 0.9% saline).
The control group received an adequate volume of saline solution.
The animals were daily scored for signs of unusual behavior for 3 weeks.
Intermittent theta-burst stimulation (iTBS) was applied on 3-dpi using MagStim Rapid 2 device and a 25-mm figure-of-eight coil.
Applied iTBS protocol consisted of 20 trains of ten bursts (3 pulses at a frequency of 50 Hz), repeated at 5 Hz (10 s intervals between trains, total duration of the procedure is 192 s), twice a day for 15 days in total.
On the 20-/21-dpi, the behavior was evaluated by using the open field test (OFT) and novel object recognition (NORT) tests.
After behavioral tests, animals were sacrificed.
Whole brains and hippocampal tissue were isolated for immunohistological and immunoblot analyses.
(543 nm), HeNe (643 nm) laser at 40× and 63× (×2 digital zoom) DIC oil objectives, 40× and monochrome AxioCam ICm 1 camera (Carl Zeiss, GmbH, Jena, Germany).

Image Analysis and Semi-Quantification
Hippocampal regions of interest (CA1, mCA3, and hilus/DG region) were captured at the same region levels (ranging from AP -2.70 to -5.30 mm) and under the same conditions (40× magnification, 1024 × 1024, laser gain and exposure).
The images (10-16/animal) were analyzed with ImageJ software (free download from
Correlation and interdependency between red-green channels were estimated by calculating Pearson's correlation coefficient (PCC).
PCC values range from +1 (two fluorescent channels which are perfectly, linearly related) to -1 (two fluorescent channels which are perfectly, but inversely related).
Values near 0 reflect distribution of two probes that are uncorrelated with one another
The number of cells expressing the protein of interest was counted in the high-power field (HPF), based on an unequivocally visible cellular body with a few thicker branches and co-localization with analyzed protein.
Immunoreactivity of the green signal was obtained by measuring fluorescence intensity in arbitrary units (AU).
All manual quantification was performed by two independent researchers, blind of treatments.
All three parameters were calculated from micrographs obtained at 40× magnification for each hippocampal region of every experimental group.

Tissue Isolation and Western Blot Analysis
Hippocampal membrane and cytosolic fractions were separated using Subcellular Protein Fractionation Kit for Tissues (Cat.
No. 87790, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, United States), according to the manufacturer's instructions.
Briefly, homogenization of the frozen tissue samples was performed by a handheld homogenizer (Ultra-Turrax, Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, United States) in an ice-cold cytoplasmic extraction buffer containing protease and phosphatase inhibitors.
Supplied tissue strainers were used to filter tissue homogenate and obtained filtrates were centrifugated at 500 × g (Sorvall SL-50 T Super T21, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, United States) for 5 min at 4 • C. Cytoplasmic fraction remaining in supernatant was collected and the pellet was resuspended in an ice-cold membrane extraction buffer containing protease and phosphatase inhibitors, incubated on ice for 10 min and centrifuged at 3,000 × g for 5 min at 4 • C to obtain membrane fraction remaining in supernatant after centrifugation.
Protein concentration was determined using Pierce TM BCA Protein Assay Kit (Cat.
No. 23225, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, United States) according to the manufacturer's instructions.
Western blot analyses (20-30 µg of sample proteins, n = 4-5 animals/group) were performed as previously described
Briefly, all samples were diluted in 6 × Laemmli buffer [4% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), 0.02% bromophenol blue, 20% glycerol, 125 mmol/L Tris-HCl] and electrophoresis was run on a 10% SDS-polyacrylamide gel and proteins were transferred to PVDF membrane (0.45 mm, Millipore, Germany) using Trans-Blot R Turbo TM Transfer System (Cat.
No. 1704150, Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, United States) according to the manufacturer's instructions.
Membranes were blocked in 5% non-fat dry milk (Cat.
No. 42590.01,
SERVA, Germany) in Tris-buffered saline containing 0.1% Tween-20 (TBST), incubated overnight at 4 • C with appropriate primary antibody in TBST (Table
Chemiluminescent signals were detected using ECL solution (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, United States) by ChemiDoc-It Imager (Ultra-Violet Products Ltd., Cambridge, United Kingdom).
Primary and secondary antibodies were removed by stripping protocol using mild-stripping buffer (pH 2.2) containing 0.2 mmol/L glycine, 0.1% SDS and 1% Tween-20
Optical density (OD) of the specific band and actin band in each lane were quantified using the ImageJ program 2 , and the ratio in each lane was expressed relative to the control, arbitrarily defined as 100% ± SEM, from n = 2-4 technical replicates.

Measurement of the Oxidative Stress
Oxidative stress was assessed by measuring several parameters in appropriate hippocampal fraction (n = 4-5 animals/group) as described in detail elsewhere
Briefly, total superoxide dismutase activity (tSOD) was assessed by spectrophotometric determination of spontaneous epinephrine autooxidation decrease rate at 480 nm and expressed as units per milligram of total protein (U/mg).
One unit is defined as an amount of enzyme required for 50% inhibition of epinephrine autooxidation
Levels of free O 2 •-were determined by reaction based on the O 2
•mediated reduction of nitroblue tetrazolium to monoformazan (µmol/mg protein), which is measured spectrophotometrically at 550 nm
Malondialdehyde (MDA) was quantified spectrophotometrically as a measurement of colored pigment formed after incubation with TBA reagent (water solution of 15% trichloroacetic acid and 0.375% TBA) at 95 • C at pH 3.5.
Absorbance was measured at 532 nm and results were expressed as µmol/mg protein
Levels of NO were evaluated from the deproteinized samples and determined by directly measuring nitrite concentrations spectrophotometrically at 492 nm, and nitrates were converted into nitrites by cadmium reduction
Total sulfhydryl groups were spectrophotometrically measured at 412 nm by Ellman's method
Total glutathione levels (GSH + 1 /2 GSSG, in GSH equivalents) were determined by a DNTB-GSSG reductase recycling assay.
The rate of 5-thio-2-nitrobenzoic acid (TNBA) formation, which 2

Statistical Analysis
All data were analyzed for normality and appropriate parametric statistical tests were used.
One-way analysis of variance (One-way ANOVA) was performed for statistical comparison between groups, followed by Tukey's post hoc test for multiple comparisons between experimental groups.
All values are presented as mean ± SD or SEM as indicated in Figure
The values of p < 0.05 were considered statistically significant.
For all analysis and graphical presentation GraphPad Prism 9.0 (San Diego, CA, United States) software package was used.
Results of post hoc tests are described in detail in figure legends.

RESULTS

Intermittent Theta Burst Stimulation Significantly Reduced
Trimethyltin-Induced Hyperactivity, Aggressive Behavior, and Tremor
Animals were scored daily for signs of the "TMT syndrome, " which include hyperactivity, aggressive behavior, and tremor (Figure
TMT-treated animals exhibited first symptoms on the 3-day post-intoxication (dpi), which progressed over 3 weeks with several peaks and partial recoveries (Figure
We have chosen 3-dpi to start iTBS stimulation as it was the time point of the onset of the first symptoms.
Control animals did not exhibit any unusual behavior and kept a score of 1 for 3 weeks (X-axis value).
Animals treated with iTBS (Figure
TMT + iTBSsh group (Figure
The total score for each experimental group was obtained by averaging individual scores determined as the area under the curve (AUC) and the means were analyzed by One-way ANOVA (F 3,51 = 7.95, p < 0.0001, Figure
Significant difference was obtained for the comparison between TMT and TMT + iTBS (p < 0.05) TMT (p < 0.001), and iTBSsh and control (p < 0.01), whereas no differences were found detected between intact control group and TMT + iTBS.

Intermittent Theta Burst Stimulation Reduces Trimethyltin-Induced Hyperactivity and Anxiety-Related Behavior
The open-field test is used to evaluate the effects of iTBS on TMT-induced hyperactivity and anxiety-related behavior (Figure
Significant changes were observed regarding anxietyrelated behavior, which is expressed as the number of entries (Figure
iTBS-treated animals showed increased number in both entries and time spent in central quadrants (Figures
Changes in general locomotor activity was also observed following TMT intoxication and iTBS treatment (Figure
p < 0.0001).
Following TMT intoxication, rats exhibited increased locomotion, while iTBS treatment reverted it to control levels (Figure

Intermittent Theta Burst Stimulation Improves Trimethyltin-Induced Cognitive Impairment
The effect of iTBS treatment on TMT-induced cognitive impairment was assessed by the object recognition test (Figure
No difference was observed in exploration time and the number of approaches to the objects during the sampling phase (Supplementary Figure
A significant difference was observed during the test phase (F 3,42 = 19.35,
p < 0.0001), which suggested a notable improvement of impaired cognitive abilities in iTBS-treated animals after TMT intoxication (Figure

Intermittent Theta Burst Stimulation Reduced Trimethyltin-Induced Neuronal Death and Inflammation
The overall changes in the hippocampal cytoarchitecture were assessed with the use of Nissl histological staining (Figure
Animals that received iTBS treatment (Figure
The changes observed at the histological level were confirmed by determining the Bax/Bcl-2 abundance in the cytosolic fractions (F 3,16 = 16.62 p < 0.0001), which pointed toward increased Bax/Bcl-2 levels in TMT and TMT + iTBS sham groups, and near the control level in TMT + iTBS group (Figure
iTBS treatment also reverted to near control level protein expression of complement 3 (C3), which was markedly increased in TMT and iTBSsh (Figure
C3 was confined to reactive astrocytes, as previously shown (Figure
Since no differences were observed between TMT and TMT + iTBSsh group at behavioral, histopathological and molecular, it has been excluded from further figures.

Intermittent Theta Burst Stimulation Alters Trimethyltin-Induced Astrocytic Inflammation
Trimethyltin induces pronounced astrocytic activation and release of IL-1β or
Treatment with iTBS did not alter the morphology of GFAP + cells but reduced the TMT-induced increase in IL-1β-immunoreactivity (ir) (Figure
To evaluate regional changes of IL-1β expression we calculated PCC (Figure
We found that TMT significantly increased all examined parameters in all three regions when compared to control, while iTBS treatment reduced the inflammation to levels similar to control, although astrocytes remained reactive phenotype (Table
The increase in all examined parameters measuring co-localization of GFAP and IL-10 was observed following iTBS treatment, especially in the hilus/DG (Figure

Intermittent Theta Burst Stimulation Reduces Trimethyltin-Induced Oxidative Stress
Trimethyltin intoxication is accompanied by changes in oxidative status which is the driving factor of neurodegeneration and neuroinflammation
iTBS reverted TMTinduced reduction in tSOD activity (Figure
p < 0.0001) to near control levels.
The treatment had no impact on TMT-induced decrease in CuZnSOD activity (Figure
The levels of pro-oxidative parameters O 2-, MDA and NO 2 -were examined (Figures
The enhanced levels of free O 2-(Figure
p < 0.0001), MDA (Figure
p < 0.0001) and NO 2 -(Figure
p < 0.0001) following TMT intoxication were reverted by iTBS to near control level.
Finally, we examined two-non enzymatic antioxidant parameters -levels of SH -and total GSH content (Figures
In TMT-treated animals, levels of SH -did not change, but iTBS significantly increased SH level (Figure
iTBS also overcompensated the TMT-induced reduction of total GSH for about 50% in respect to control (Figure
p < 0.001).

Intermittent Theta Burst Stimulation
Rescues Trimethyltin-Attenuated PI3K/Akt/mTOR and ERK1/2 Signaling PI3K/Akt/mTOR and ERK1/2 signaling have a critical role in neurodegenerative/neuroinflammatory
Therefore we investigated changes in protein expression of PI3K/Akt/mTOR and ERK1/2 in cytosolic fraction following TMT-induced neurodegeneration and iTBS treatment (Figure
The expression of the regulatory subunit of PI3K (p85) was slightly decreased in TMT animals, whereas iTBS significantly increased the expression (Figure
The downstream signaling protein kinase B/Akt showed a marked decrease in p-Akt/t-Akt following TMT, while iTBS treatment reverted it to the levels similar to control (Figure
A significant reduction in phosphorylation levels of mTOR was found after TMT-induced neurodegeneration, which was restored following iTBS treatment (Figure
iTBS significantly increased levels of phosphorylated ERK 1/2 form, while TMT remained without the effect (Figure

DISCUSSION
In the present study, we evaluated the potential therapeutic use of iTBS protocol on a behavioral, histopathological, and molecular level in the Alzheimer's-like disease model induced by TMT intoxication.
Acute TMT intoxication results in a well-described model of the neurodegeneration in the hippocampus and associated limbic and cortical regions
That makes a model a perfect tool for studying diverse neuroprotective strategies
Given that behavioral changes occur in the initial stages after TMT exposure, they might be used to follow the efficacy of novel therapeutic strategies
We used a battery of neurobehavioral tests to screen behavior in non-stressful (activity monitoring in a cage) and a stressful environment (open field and novel object recognition test).
Behavioral changes in a non-stressful environment manifested as tremor, hyperactivity and aggression became apparent at 3dpi and peaked at 4-dpi, which is in agreement with previous data
Thereafter, behavioral scores in TMT and iTBSsh animals spontaneously declined toward partial recovery, with two lower peaks at 10-dpi and 14-dpi, indicating ongoing neuronal degeneration
The next set of neurobehavioral tests assessed animal behavior in stressful environments using OF and NORT after 21dpi, when hippocampal neurodegeneration was shown to be at peak
Animals exhibited  anxiety-like behavior and hyperlocomotion, which are typical for TMT-induced hippocampal neurodegeneration
Since TMT-induced hippocampal degeneration results in severe cognitive deficits
As anticipated, animals exposed to TMT showed a severe reduction in recognition index demonstrating impairment in processes involved in memory retention
The neurotoxin primarily affects CA3 pyramidal neurons and partially CA1 pyramidal neurons, thus severing the anatomical connections between the entorhinal cortex -dentate gyrus and hippocampus proper
Disruption of these excitatory/inhibitory connections  critical for information flow in hippocampal formation is most likely responsible for aggression, hyperactivity, hyperexcitability, and cognitive impairment
The behavioral data were corroborated with histopathology which showed extensive loss of CA3 and CA1 pyramidal neurons and consequent ventricular dilatation
As previously shown, main pro-apoptotic and anti-apoptotic markers, as well as markers of inflammation (C3, IL-1β), were dramatically increased, the latter being restricted to astrocytes as the main source of inflammatory factors
Another consequence of massive neuronal death such as that seen after TMT intoxication inevitably leads to increased production of reactive oxidative and nitrosative species
We demonstrated significant disturbance in pro-oxidative and anti-oxidative parameters following TMT intoxication, which are in agreement with previous results
Oxidative stress has been implicated in TMT-induced apoptosis and inhibition of PI3K/Akt/mTOR signaling pathways, which are important regulators of growth and cell survival as well as in the memory process
Accordingly, we found a significant reduction in phosphorylated forms of Akt and mTOR, which are also seen in other models of toxin-induced neurodegeneration
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study to demonstrate that iTBS treatment notably improves motor behavior, emotional expression, cognitive abilities, and histopathological and inflammatory status after TMT-induced neurodegeneration, although some beneficial effects on cognition have been demonstrated for other rTMS protocols in animal models
One of the main problems with various rTMS paradigms is that it hugely varies pre-set parameters such as machine output strength, length of session, duration of application which makes it difficult to compare obtained results.
iTBS paradigm is a powerful excitatory protocol of rTMS with consistent parameters in literature and with equal or higher efficacy with reduced time of exposure
In our study, animals stimulated with iTBS had less severe symptoms with a much shorter period without seizures and aggression.
Following repeated iTBS, the animals expressed less frequent and milder symptoms of "TMT syndrome, " probably due to the beneficial effects on hippocampal formation, which is involved in all aspects of the behavioral expression of emotions, including aggressiveness
Our results showed that animals stimulated with iTBS had normal locomotor behavior and reduced anxiety levels, which was previously shown in animal models of epilepsy and post-traumatic stress disorder with the use of rTMS stimulation protocols
It has been suggested that rTMS induces neuronal plasticity, modulates neurotransmitter and neurotrophic factors leading to LTP-like changes in stimulated areas
Prolonged stimulation with iTBS could evoke similar mechanisms and alter neuronal excitability and levels of neurotrophic factors, thus improving cognitive status in the TMT model of neurodegeneration.
The cognitive and behavioral improvements can be explained by iTBS-induced changes at a cellular level.
Namely, iTBS reduced apoptotic cell death in mCA3 and CA1 sectors and attenuated astrocyte-driven inflammation.
Previous data demonstrate that rTMS prevents neuronal death by inhibiting several members of the Bcl-2 family, particularly pro-apoptotic factors Bax, Bad, and Bcl-xS
Attenuated neuronal death following iTBS was accompanied by a reduction in pro-inflammatory factors and an increase in anti-inflammatory factors.
Anti-inflammatory effects of rTMS have been demonstrated in neurological disorders and animal models
Furthermore, rTMS was found to inhibit the polarization of astrocytes toward neurotoxic (A1-like) phenotype
Reduced expression of inflammatory factors could be a result of reduced neuronal death following iTBS, but also a result of the direct effect of iTBS on glial cells
It has been shown that rTMS affects astrocytes both in vitro and in vivo, implicating astrocytes as cellular effectors of rTMS
Inflammatory phenomena are tightly coupled with the overproduction of reactive oxygen and nitrogen species, which may produce neuronal degeneration.
Improvement in oxidative status following iTBS, and its antioxidative potential
Previous studies reported that TMS increases the expression of Nrf2 in neuroinflammatory conditions
To dissect molecular changes that could underlie favorable effects of iTBS, we investigated PI3K/Akt/mTOR and ERK 1/2 signaling as key players in the regulation of several processes, including proliferation, apoptosis, learning, and memory
An increase in all these kinases could be put in perspective of reduction of TMT-induced anxiety-like behavior and improvement of cognitive functions following iTBS.
It has been shown that Akt2 knockout and heterozygote mice exhibit anxiety-like behavior and impaired hippocampaldependent learning
Thus, an iTBS-induced increase in phosphorylated Akt could be a significant contributor to the reversal of selective behavioral impairments seen after TMT intoxication.
Furthermore, mTOR, as a downstream target of Akt and ERK 1/2, is directly implicated in protein synthesis and involved in the process of learning and memory
An increase in phosphorylated mTOR and improved cognitive performance have been observed in the pharmaco-resistant model of depression following iTBS
Numerous studies have demonstrated that rTMS induces an increase in BDNF [for review see
Therefore, some of beneficial effects of iTBS may be mediated through BDNF-TrkB signaling.
Increased release of BDNF and enhanced TrkB signaling may be responsible for the induction of PI3K/Akt/mTOR and favorable effects on inflammation, apoptosis, anxiety-related behavior, and cognitive improvement seen in the present study after iTBS
At the end, although the results of present study demonstrate significant beneficial effects of iTBS, it is noteworthy to mention some technical limitations which concern the size and manual placement of the coil, which do not allow focal stimulation of specific cortical areas; therefore the effects induced by iTBS stimulation may be the result of stimulation of both cortical and subcortical structures and their interconnections.
Furthermore, due to this technical limitation it is not possible to conclude definitive mechanism and/or structures fully or partially involved in the recovery observed in this experimental paradigm.
However, this approach may provide information about the potential effects of stimulation of deeper subcortical structures, which are inaccessible in human subjects.

CONCLUSION
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study demonstrating the beneficial effects of iTBS protocol on behavioral and cognitive performance and hippocampal cytoarchitecture in the Alzheimer's-like disease model.
Specifically, we found significantly reduces neuronal death, inflammation, and oxidative stress, reduced hyperactivity, aggressive behavior, and tremor, and improved cognitive status in TMT animals stimulated with iTBS protocol.
Among critical signaling pathways, we demonstrated that iTBS rescued PI3K/Akt/mTOR signaling, which acts in favor of cell survival and recovery.
Therefore, iTBS protocol as a paradigm of rTMS may be an excellent candidate for efficient, painless and non-invasive therapy of neurodegenerative disorders associated with cognitive deficits such as Alzheimer's disease.



FIGURE 2 |
FIGURE 2 | Effect of iTBS treatment on behavior of TMT rats.
(A) Graphic and (B) quantitative analysis of behavioral animal scoring.
Bars represent the mean AUC ± SD. (C,D) Anxiety-like behavior and (E) motor activity, assessed in the open-field test.
Bars represent (C) a mean number of entries, (D) a mean duration spent in central squares (s), and (E) a mean total movements, ±SD.
(F) Recognition index determined by the novel object recognition test.
Bars represent mean recognition index ± SD.
Interrupted line represents 50% of recognition index, where animals showed no discrimination between novel and familiar object.
Results of post hoc Tukey's test and significance shown inside graphs, * p < 0.05, * * p < 0.01, * * * p < 0.001, * * * * p < 0.0001, ns, no significance.
(G,H) iTBS coil placement.
(I) The behavioral testing arena.
Dots in the graphs represent values of individual animals.



FIGURE 3 |
FIGURE 3 | Effect of iTBS treatment on TMT-induced neuronal death and inflammation.
(A) Thionine-stained coronal sections at different stereotaxic anterior-posterior (AP) coordinates.
Arrowhead indicates thinned neuronal cell layers, while asterisk marks the position of the lateral ventricle for a comparison.
Scale bar = 500 µm, applies to all micrographs.
Representative membrane and semi-quantitative Western blot analysis showing (B) relative Bax/Bcl-2 and (C) C3 protein abundance, expressed relative to control, arbitrary defined as 100%.
Bars in (B) represent the ratio between Bax and Bcl-2 relative abundance, determined as mean OD ratio of the specific protein band to actin band for each group ± SEM (from n = 5 individual animals, in 2-4 technical replicates).
Bars in (C) represent the mean OD of the C3 band and actin band in each group normalized to control (arbitrarily defined as 100%) ± SEM (from n = 5 individual animals, in 2-4 technical replicates).
Results of post hoc Tukey's test and significance shown inside graphs: * p < 0.05, * * p < 0.01, * * * p < 0.001, * * * * p < 0.0001, ns, no significance.
Dots in the graphs represent values of individual animals.
(D) Double immunofluorescent staining of coronal hippocampal sections captured in the same region levels directed to GFAP (red) and C3 (green).
Scale bar = 50 µm.



FIGURE 4 |
FIGURE 4 | Effect of iTBS treatment on TMT-induced astrocytic inflammation.
(A) Double immunofluorescence staining directed to GFAP (red) and IL-1β (green) of coronal hippocampal sections captured in the same region levels.
Scale bar = 50 µm.
Integration of immunofluorescence intensity and quantitative analyses showing (B) Pearson's correlation coefficient (PCC), (C) number of GFAP + /IL-1β + cells in high power field (HPF), and (D) fluorescence intensity of IL-1β in arbitrary units (AU).
Bars represent the mean value ± SEM of specific parameters calculated from acquired images (10-16/animal).
Results of post hoc Tukey's test and significance shown inside graphs: * p < 0.05, * * p < 0.01, * * * p < 0.001, * * * * p < 0.0001, ns, no significance.



FIGURE 5 |
FIGURE 5 | Effect of iTBS treatment on the inflammatory status of reactive astrocytes.
(A) Immunofluorescence staining directed to GFAP (red) and IL-10 (green) of coronal hippocampal sections captured in the same region levels and.
Scale bar = 50 µm.
Integration of immunofluorescence intensity and quantitative analyses showing (B) Pearson's correlation coefficient (PCC), (C) number of GFAP + /IL-10 + cells in high power field (HPF), and (D) fluorescence intensity of IL-10 in arbitrary units (AU).
Bars represent the mean values ± SEM of specific parameters calculated from all acquired images (10-16/animal).
Results of post hoc Tukey's test and significance shown inside graphs: * p < 0.05, * * p < 0.01, * * * p < 0.001, * * * * p < 0.0001, ns, no significance.



FIGURE 6 |
FIGURE 6 | Effect of iTBS treatment on TMT-induced oxidative stress.
Spectrophotometric analysis of antioxidant parameters: (A) total SOD, (B) MnSOD, (C) CuZnSOD, and pro-oxidant parameters: (D) O 2 •-, (E) MDA (malondialdehyde), (F) NO 2 -and non-enzymatic antioxidant parameters-(G) SH -and (H) total GSH level, measured in hippocampal protein homogenates (n = 4-5 animals/group).
Bars represent mean activity, expressed as U/mg protein (A-C), µmol/mg protein (D-H), ±SEM.
Results of post hoc Tukey's test and significance are shown inside graphs: * p < 0.05, * * p < 0.01, * * * p < 0.001, * * * * p < 0.0001, ns, no significance.



FIGURE 7 |
FIGURE 7 | Effect of iTBS treatment on TMT-attenuated PI3K/Akt/mTOR signaling.
Representative support membrane and quantitative data of Western blot analysis showing relative protein abundance of (A) PI3K (p85) or phosphorylated/non-phosphorylated (B) p-Akt/t-Akt ratio, (C) p-mTOR/t-mTOR, (D) p-ERK/t-ERK ratio in the hippocampal cytosol.
Bars represent mean value of target protein (A) or ratio of phosphorylated and non-phosphorylated forms (B-D) normalized to β-actin abundance ± SEM (from n = 4-5 individual animals, in 2-4 technical replicates), expressed relative to control (arbitrary defined as 100%).
Results of post hoc Tukey's test and significance are shown inside graphs: * p < 0.05, * * p < 0.01, * * * p < 0.001, * * * * p < 0.0001, ns, no significance.
Dots in the graphs represent values of individual animals.



TABLE 1 |
List of used primary and secondary antibodies.



TABLE 2 |
Results of one-way ANOVA analysis.



TABLE 3 |
Results of one-way ANOVA analysis.