Quantitative Proteomic Profiling of Cerebrospinal Fluid to Identify Candidate Biomarkers for Alzheimer's Disease
Purpose-Development of novel biomarkers for AD is important for early diagnosis, monitoring disease progression and therapeutic response.
The aim of this study was to identify the potential CSF biomarkers for Alzheimer's disease (AD) and evaluate these markers on independent CSF samples using a parallel reaction monitoring mass spectrometry (PRM-MS) assay.
Experimental design-In this study, we employed high-resolution mass spectrometry and tandem mass tag (TMT) multiplexing technology to identify proteins that might serve as candidate biomarkers for Alzheimer's disease.
Identified potential biomarkers were validated using a parallel reaction monitoring mass spectrometry (PRM-MS) assay.
Results-We identified 2,327 proteins in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) of which 139 were observed to be significantly different in their abundance in the CSF of AD patients versus controls.
The proteins whose abundance was altered in AD included a number of known AD marker proteins such as MAPT, NPTX2, SCG2, VGF, GFAP, SST and NCAM1 as well as novel biomarkers such as GSN, PKM and YWHAG.
We then sought to validate these findings in a separate set of CSF specimens from AD dementia patients and controls.
For the AD group, significant increases were found for YWHAG and PKM, and a significant decrease was observed for VGF by multiplexed targeted parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) experiments.
NPTX2

Introduction
Alzheimer's disease is the most common progressive neurodegenerative disorder with substantial memory loss, executive dysfunction, disorientation and psychiatric symptoms, the most prominent symptoms, even in mildly demented patients.
As the number of people afflicted by AD increases due to an aging population worldwide, it is becoming one of the biggest healthcare challenges of the 21st century
The major pathological changes observed in AD brain are deposition of amyloid-β (Aβ) extracellularly as plaques and accumulation of hyper-phosphorylated tau (p-tau) intracellularly as neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs), which lead to neuronal death
Although AD is associated with a distinct histology, the pathologic and metabolic alterations occurring during the onset and progression of AD are only beginning to be defined.
Attempts to develop new therapies have been hampered due to gaps in our current knowledge about the pathogenesis of the underlying neurodegeneration in AD.
In addition, limitations in biomarkers that can be used for early diagnosis and tracking response to treatment seriously hampers progress.
Neurodegenerative changes in the brain (fibrillar amyloid-β and phosphorylated tau) in Alzheimer's disease are known to be reflected in the CSF of affected individuals.
Thus, CSF has been considered to be a valuable source of potential biomarkers for both diagnosis and prognosis, with recent diagnostic criteria of the disease incorporating CSF measurements to improve diagnostic accuracy.
Although many studies of CSF have shown that Aβ42, total tau (t-tau) and p-tau can be used reliably to differentiate between CSF of AD dementia patients and controls, additional markers are also needed for understanding disease mechanisms and pathology of disease and to identify targets for pharmacotherapy.
Several groups have used proteomics approaches to discover biomarkers for AD
Recent technological advances have led to an improved ability to identify and quantify low abundance proteins.
In this study, we employed Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer -the latest generation mass spectrometer -coupled with advanced sample preparation to increase the depth of the CSF proteome, which has hitherto not been achieved so far.
After the discovery phase, immunoassays are traditionally used for validation of candidate biomarkers, although the availability of specific and sensitive antibodies becomes a limiting step in such characterization of novel biomarkers
Mass spectrometry-based targeted assays have the advantage of not requiring antibodies and the ability to multiplex, which allows measurement of several markers in a single analysis and high reproducibility coupled to high accuracy and precision
Thus, these assays are ideal in cases where specific antibodies are not available especially as development of a reliable immunoassays is expensive and time consuming
PRM assays have already been successfully used for biomarker analysis of lung adenocarcinoma, ovarian cancer and Alzheimer's disease
We employed high-resolution mass spectrometry and TMT-based multiplexing after CSF samples were depleted of high abundance proteins.
Our analysis led to identification of 2,327 proteins of which 139 proteins were significantly altered in the CSF of AD patients as compared to sex and age-matched controls.
Based on the current literature, this is the largest quantitative CSF proteome for Alzheimer's disease reported thus far.
Among the proteins that were differentially expressed in patients with AD were neuronal cell adhesion molecule-1
Multiplexed parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) assays developed to quantitate a subset of these candidate biomarkers in CSF confirmed the alterations that were observed in the discovery experiments.
The novel markers that were validated by PRM included gelsolin (GSN), pyruvate kinase -muscle (PKM) and 14-3-3 protein gamma (YWHAG), which were differentially expressed in the CSF of patients with AD dementia.
These findings suggest that this approach has the potential to identify novel molecules with no previously reported association with AD.

Material and Methods

Collection of CSF Samples
The CSF specimens were collected from AD dementia patients and cognitively normal individuals evaluated by investigators at the Center for CSF Disorders at Johns Hopkins Hospital or as part of an ongoing project known as Biomarkers for Older Controls at Risk for Dementia (BIOCARD) study.
The details of this study and criteria for inclusion and exclusion are provided in Supplementary file 1.
The subjects underwent lumbar puncture and the CSF was collected in polypropylene vials and stored at -80 °C.
All individuals selected for inclusion within the study provided informed consent prior to sample collection and were evaluated and had neurological and cognitive assessment by the participating clinical team.
For the AD group an additional criterion for inclusion was a low CSF Aβ42 level, to ensure that patients have brain amyloid deposition.
The CSF Aβ42 levels were determined using Fujirebio Lumipulse abeta42 electrochemiluminescence assay.
CSF Aβ42 levels was 402.11 ± 189.62 pg/ml for AD group and 1185.86 ± 389.29 pg/ml for the control group.
AD subjects met criteria for probable AD dementia based on NIA-AA criteria.

Depletion of top 14 abundant proteins and concentration of CSF Samples
A total of 5 AD and 5 control CSF samples were immunodepleted for the 14 most abundant proteins using a Human 14 MARS column (4.6 × 100 mm; Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA) as per vendor instructions.
Unbound proteins from depleted CSF samples were collected and desalted using 3 kDa MWCO filters (Millipore, San Diego).
The total protein amount was determined by BCA assays and protein normalization was confirmed using SDS-PAGE

In-solution trypsin digestion of proteins from CSF and TMT labelling
An equal amount of protein from each CSF sample was reduced and alkylated as described previously
Protein digestion was carried out using lys-C (1:100) for 4 h.
followed by trypsin (1:20) at 37°C for 12-16 h.
Peptides were purified using Sep-Pak C 18 material.
Peptides from the CSF samples were labeled using TMT as per the manufacturer's instruction (Catalog # 90110, Thermo Fisher Scientific).
Peptides derived from control CSF samples were labeled with TMT tags as 126, 127N, 127C, 128N and 128C and patient samples with TMT tag as 129N, 129C, 130N, 130C and 131.

Basic-pH RPLC fractionation
The labeled peptides were subjected to bRPLC fractionation to generate 96 fractions, as described previously
Briefly, TMT labeled peptides mixture was resuspended in 1 ml of bRPLC solvent A (7 mM TEABC, pH 8.5) and fractionated by bRPLC chromatography on a C 18 , 250 x 4.6 mm column, 5 µm, XBridge (Waters, Milford, MA) by employing an increasing gradient of bRPLC solvent B (7mM TEABC, pH 8.5, 90% acetonitrile) on an Agilent 1260 HPLC system.
A total of 96 fractions were collected which were then concatenated into 24 fractions and vacuum dried.

LC-MS/MS analysis
The peptides were analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) interfaced with Easy-nLC 1200 nanoflow liquid chromatography system (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany).
Vacuum dried basic RPLC fractionated peptide digests were reconstituted in 0.1 % formic acid and loaded onto trap column (100 µm × 2 cm, Nanoviper) at a flow rate of 3 µl/min.
Peptides were separated on an analytical column (75 µm × 50 cm, RSLC C 18 ) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min using a gradient of 5-30 % solvent B (0.1 % formic acid in 95 % acetonitrile) for 80 min.
The total run time was set to 90 min.
The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent acquisition mode.
A survey full scan MS (from m/z 350-1500) was acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 120,000 at 200 m/z.
The AGC target for MS1 was set as 2 X 10 5 and ion filling time set 50 ms.
The most intense ions with charge state ≥2 were isolated in 3 sec cycle and fragmented using HCD fragmentation with 38% normalized collision energy and detected at a mass resolution of 30,000 at 200 m/z.
The AGC target for MS/MS was set as 5 X 10 4 and ion filling time set 100 ms dynamic exclusion was set for 30 s with a 10 ppm mass window.

Database Searches for Peptide and Protein Identification
The acquired mass spectrometry data were searched against Human RefSeq protein database (Version 73, containing protein entries with common contaminants) using SEQUEST search algorithm through Proteome Discoverer platform (version 2.1, Thermo Scientific).
The search parameters included a maximum of two missed cleavages, carbamidomethylation at cysteine, TMT 10-plex (+229.163)
modification at N-terminus of peptide and lysine were set as fixed modification while oxidation of methionine as variable modifications.
For MS data, monoisotopic peptide mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and MS/MS tolerance to 0.1 Da.
False discovery rate of 1% was set at the PSM level as well as at 1% at protein level.
The mass spectrometry data from this study have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium (
via PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD008098 and PRM data to the Panorama.

Sample preparation for targeted PRM analysis
100 µl of CSF samples from each individual were used for targeted analysis.
The CSF samples were diluted with 100 mM TEABC and proteins reduced using 10 mM DTT followed by alkylation with 20 mM IAA.
Proteins were double digested using Lys-C (1:00) for 4 h.
followed by trypsin (1:20) for 12-14h.
Resulting peptides were purified using Sep-Pak column C 18 material and samples were dried in a speed vac.

PRM analysis of CSF samples
The digested peptides were reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid and analyzed on Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) interfaced with RSLC nanoflow liquid chromatography system (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA).
Peptide digests were loaded onto a trap column (100 µm × 2 cm, Nanoviper) at a flow rate of 3µL/min.
For PRM analysis, 5 µl of unfractionated CSF peptides from each group were separated on an analytical column (75 µm × 50 cm, RSLC C 18 ).
Linear gradient ranging from 4% to 35% buffer B over 75 min was used.
For each target protein, multiple peptides were monitored using a targeted inclusion list.
The settings for PRM scan were set as: Orbitrap resolution of 35,000, AGC target value of 5 x 10 5 , injection time of 100 ms, isolation window of 2 m/z, HCD normalized collision energy of 27 and starting mass of m/z 110.

Data analysis
Acquired PRM data were processed using the Skyline software package
Peak integration was performed within the platform and reviewed manually; results were exported for additional data and statistical analysis.
PRM data were assessed for (i) peak symmetry and baseline; (ii) consistency of retention times (iii) retention time consistency across transitions of the same analyte; and (iv) signal: noise ratio.
To minimize run-to-run variability during assay screens, it has become common practice to normalize data acquired across sample batches using an External Standard (ES).
Here, all data was adjusted for potentially confounding instrument performance variations using heavy hemoglobin proteotypic peptide measurements.

Statistical analysis
TMT data analysis was performed with the Perseus software package
The statistical analysis of PRM data was carried out using Graph Pad Prism version 5.04 (GraphPad Software Inc., San Diego, CA, USA).
Students t-test was used to examine group comparisons in the validation studies described below.
Proteins with p-value <0.05 were considered significantly different in AD.
Logistic regression and ROC curve analysis for the selected markers and in combinations was carried out using R packages

Results and discussion

Proteomic analysis of CSF
To identify CSF proteins whose abundance is altered in AD dementia patients, we compared the CSF proteome of cognitively normal individuals with AD patients using TMT-based quantitative proteomics approach.
First, we depleted abundant proteins from individual CSF samples using an antibody-based depletion column, MARS 14.
It is known that serum albumin level is lower in the cognitively impaired population and shows a dose-response relationship
Although serum albumin is a marker for cognition, there is no published report regarding CSF albumin.
Albumin is an abundant protein in the CSF and depletion with MARS-14 column enables removal of albumin along with IgG, IgA, transferrin, haptoglobin, antitrypsin, fibrinogen, alpha2-macroglobulin, alpha1-acid glycoprotein, IgM, apolipoprotein AI, apolipoprotein AII, complement C3, and transthyretin.
Removal of these high abundance proteins from biological fluids such as CSF helps enrich low abundance proteins and provide better coverage in mass spectrometry-based proteomic analyses as compared to crude samples.
The workflow for the experiment is shown in Figure
After MARS 14 depletion, equal amounts of protein were subjected to in-solution digestion and TMT labeling according to the manufacturer's instructions.
The TMT-labeled peptides were pooled and subjected to basic pH reversed-phase liquid chromatography fractionating the peptides into 96 fractions followed by concatenation into 24 fractions.
Each fraction was analyzed by LC-MS/MS which led to 62,138 PSMs corresponding to 21,849 peptides from 2,327 proteins (Supplementary file 2).
Out of the 2,327 proteins identified, 139 proteins were differentially expressed in CSF of AD individuals as compared to controls (Figure . 2 A and 2B).
From these significantly altered proteins, 68 proteins were upregulated, and 71 proteins were downregulated in CSF of AD patients as compared to controls (Supplementary file 3).

Bioinformatics analysis of CSF proteins
We categorized significantly altered proteins in AD cerebrospinal fluid based on their subcellular localization and biological functions as annotated in the manually curated Human Protein Reference Database
Our analysis revealed that the majority of the significantly altered proteins were localized to the plasma membrane (37%), followed by extracellular (31%), cytoplasmic and Golgi complex localization.
Among these proteins, 49% proteins possessed a signal peptide and 18% proteins contained a transmembrane domain (Figure

Known AD biomarkers
Since the goal of this study was identification of novel AD biomarkers based on CSF, we delved into the list of the differentially regulated proteins.
First, we investigated the list of known biomarkers to ascertain whether they are differentially regulated in the same direction as other studies.
Microtubule associated protein tau (MAPT) showed a 2.4-fold upregulation in AD CSF as previously reported
Glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) is also known as a marker of astrocytosis in neurodegeneration associated with neurological disorders.
Higher levels of GFAP in CSF have been reported in neurodegenerative disorders including AD, dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB), and frontotemporal dementia (FTLD)
GFAP levels in CSF are also elevated in Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (sCJD) patients
GFAP showed a 2.6-fold upregulation in AD CSF.
Somatostatin affects neurotransmission rates in the central nervous system.
Strittmatter et.
al used high pressure liquid chromatography (HPLC) and a radioimmunoassay for measurement of somatostatin
It was observed that somatostatin was significantly decreased in AD and also correlated with dementia scores
Our study corroborates this downregulation of somatostatin in the CSF of AD patients.
A partial list of proteins previously reported to be AD markers is provided in Table
MS/MS spectrum for one of the known markers, MAPT, is shown in Fig.

Proteins involved in neurodegeneration
In our analysis, we identified several significantly deregulated proteins involved in neurodegeneration and cognition.
We observed 1.8-fold increase of beta-2 microglobulin (B2M) in AD.
Downregulation of B2M expression has been described to reverse the agerelated cognition decline and to induce neurogenesis.
B2M accumulation in blood also promotes age-related cognitive dysfunction and impairs neurogenesis
We also detected a decrease of mesencephalic astrocyte-derived neurotrophic factor (MANF) in AD patients.
MANF has neuroprotective and neurorestorative effects in a PD experimental rat model
We identified another molecule, CD74, involved in neurodegeneration in our study.
CD74 is 3.7fold more abundant in AD and is known to bind APP and inhibit the production of Aβ42
CD74 has been reported to be overexpressed in the microglia of patients with AD.
Its expression is also increased in neurofibrillary tangles and amyloid-beta plaques
We also observed a significant increase in the abundance of thimet oligopeptidase (THOP1) in AD.
THOP1 expression in the brain increases with age and it localizes with amyloid plaques.
Its increased expression has also been reported in the AD brain
There are reports that suggest that THOP1 has a neuroprotective role against amyloid toxicity and that the increase in its expression is part of a compensatory defense mechanism against an increased amyloid load

Targeted PRM analysis
We identified novel candidate biomarkers as well as known biomarkers for AD from our proteomic analysis of CSF from 5 cognitively normal controls and 5 subjects with AD dementia.
From this subset of proteins, gelsolin (GSN), pyruvate kinase (PKM), 14-3-3 Gamma (YWHAG), neuronal pentraxin 2 (NPTX2), VGF nerve growth factor inducible (VGF) and secretogranin II (SCG2) were selected for PRM analysis in undepleted CSF samples from 20 cognitively normal controls and 20 subjects with AD.
Of these six candidates selected for PRM analysis, neuronal pentraxin 2 (NPTX2), VGF nerve growth factor inducible (VGF) and secretogranin II (SCG2) are known AD markers
We used isotopically labelled heavy hemoglobin for normalization of sample handling, digestion efficiency as well as to determine red blood cell contamination from blood (Supplementary file 4).
We monitored multiple peptides for each candidate protein as well as a peptide from endogenous hemoglobin along with its heavy counterpart that was spiked in.
These peptides were monitored using PRM with scheduled retention time windows.
Each sample was analyzed in the PRM mode in triplicate.
The transitions used for the quantification are provided in Supplementary file 5. a) Known AD CSF markers analyzed by PRM-VGF is induced by various neurotrophins including nerve growth factor (NGF), brain derived growth factor (BDNF) and glial derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF).
VGF is downregulated in bipolar disorder in the CA region of the hippocampus
Lower VGF expression has been reported in the leukocytes of depressed patients and is restored by effective antidepressant treatment
VGF is also involved in the pathogenesis of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS)
Several studies have reported lower levels of VGF in AD.
Our discovery experiment showed lower levels of VGF in CSF of AD subjects as compared to age matched controls
We verified our results in an independent CSF cohort and again found significantly lower levels of VGF in AD patients (Figure
NPTX2 is synaptic protein that belongs to the neuronal pentraxin family.
It involved in excitatory synapse formation and is upregulated in the Parkinsonian substantia nigra
NPTX2 also predicts medial temporal lobe atrophy and memory decline in AD
NPTX2 expression levels have been reported to be reduced in cortical regions including those areas showing classical neuropathological changes in AD.
CSF NPTX2 levels are also lower in AD subjects making it a potential biomarker for AD
Our discovery experiments also showed lower levels of NPTX2 in the CSF of AD subjects.
We verified our results in an independent CSF cohort and found significantly lower levels of NPTX2 in AD patients (Figure
Apart from VGF and NPTX2, we also found another known CSF AD marker, SCG2, to be significantly lower in AD in discovery experiments.
SCG2 is a neuroendocrine secretory protein, which belongs to the chromogranin/secretogranin family.
It is involved in the packaging of neuropeptides into secretory vesicles
The level of secretogranin-2 in CSF have been quantified using parallel reaction monitoring and reported to be significantly lower in individuals with AD
Although our discovery experiments showed lower levels of SCG2 in CSF of AD subjects, we did not find the level of SCG2 to be significantly altered in an independent cohort.
We believe that additional larger studies will be required for a more definitive conclusion about the utility of SCG2 levels as a biomarker for AD (Figure
b) Novel AD CSF markers analyzed by PRM-YWHAG belongs to the 14-3-3 family of proteins and is involved in signal transduction by interacting with phosphorylated serine of the protein
It is highly expressed in the brain
Recurrent distal deletion of YWHAG has been identified in patients with intellectual disability, epilepsy, and neurobehavioral problems
YWHAG is also reported to be involved in neurodevelopmental disorders and disruption in 14-3-3 gamma expression may contribute to the pathogenesis of neurodevelopmental disorders
In our discovery studies, we identified significantly higher abundance of YWHAG in AD (1.9-fold).
Based on this, we measured the YWHAG level in 40 independent CSF samples (20 controls and 20 AD) using parallel reaction monitoring.
We again observed significantly higher levels (2.2-fold) of YWHAG in the CSF of AD patients.
The unique peptides were monitored -NVTELNEPLSNEER have a higher abundance in AD CSF compared to controls with a significant P value p < 0.0001 shown in Figure
The MS/MS spectra for the same peptide is shown in Figure
Pyruvate kinase M (PKM) regulates glycolysis by catalyzing phosphoryl group transfer from phosphoenolpyruvate to ADP generating ATP and pyruvate.
PKM plays an important role in the maintenance of different forms of persistent long-term synaptic plasticity
It has been reported that pyruvate kinase M is the substrate of Parkin, a ubiquitin E3 ligase mutated in autosomal recessive, early onset Parkinson's disease
We detected higher levels (2.2-fold) of PKM in AD patients using five peptides for targeted analysis (Figure
The MS/MS spectra for the PKM peptide is shown in Figure
Gelsolin (GSN) is an actin binding protein which also controls amyloid-beta protein fibrillization.
Its expression has been reported to be upregulated in SH-SY5Y, PC-12 and HEK-293 cells when they are subjected to oxidative stress
It is also a potential biomarker for aging-related neurodegeneration
Although our discovery experiments revealed higher levels of GSN in CSF of AD subjects, we did not find the level of GSN to be significantly altered in an independent cohort.
We believe that additional larger studies will be required for a more definitive conclusion about the utility of GSN levels as a biomarker for AD (Figure
Assessment of biomarker(s) performance needs to be determined based on the levels of proteins in AD and control subject groups.
Logistic regression analysis are measures for evaluating biomarker(s).
To identify the best performing biomarker(s), we carried out regression analysis of protein levels in AD and control groups.
Logistic regression followed by ROC curve analysis identified suboptimal performance (except for YWHAG alone) when individual biomarkers were used (Figure
When biomarkers were evaluated by ROC curve analysis in pairs, NPTX2 in combination with PKM or with YWHAG led to the best results with AUCs of 0.935 and 0.933, respectively.
The AUC estimates for individual and as pairs of biomarkers is listed in Table
This analysis showed that ratio of YWHAG to NPTX2 levels in CSF were better at differentiating AD subjects from controls as compared to any of the individual markers.

Conclusions
We used antibody-based multiple affinity removal of the top-14 abundant proteins, followed by in depth characterization of the CSF proteome and identified 2,327 proteins from the CSF of subjects with AD using high resolution mass spectrometry.
This study identified 139 proteins that showed statistically significant alterations in CSF from subjects with AD.
We validated levels of YWHAG, PKM, GSN, VGF, NPTX and SCG2 in a set of independent CSF samples from AD subjects using parallel reaction monitoring.
In validation experiments using PRM, we could verify statistically significant increased levels of YWHAG and PKM proteins and decreased levels of VGF and NPTX2 in CSF samples from subjects with Alzheimer's disease.
Statistical analysis of these markers showed that YWHAG levels were able to differentiate controls from AD dementia subjects and that combining it with NPTX2 levels was even better.
There are several limitations that should be noted regarding this study.
The initial number of samples used in the discovery phase is small.
Because of this, we conducted our follow-up analyses in an independent set of samples, through which we were able to validate our initial findings in most cases.
Nevertheless, from our discovery dataset, we identified several known and novel significantly altered proteins in AD CSF.
The potential proteomic markers identified in our study will require better characterization by further testing in larger and longitudinal cohorts.

Clinical Relevance
In this study we have used TMT multiplexing combined with high resolution mass spectrometry to identified altered protein in CSF of AD patients.
Based on the current literature, this is the largest quantitative CSF proteome for Alzheimer's disease reported thus far.
We have identified several known as well as novel proteins altered in AD-CSF.
This shows that our approach is useful for identification of novel markers.
This identified new markers may will be useful for early diagnosis, monitoring disease progression and therapeutic response.
From discovery analysis we have selected subset of markers and validated on independent CSF samples using parallel reaction monitoring.
A schematic of the workflow used to study the proteomic changes in CSF of AD patients.
The CSF samples were depleted of high abundance proteins using an antibody-based MARS-14 depletion column.
The proteome of CSF from cognitively normal individuals was compared with that of AD patients using a TMT-based quantitative proteomics approach in the discovery step.
Validation was carried out using parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) assays for a subset of molecules that were found to be significantly altered in abundance in AD.



Figure 1 .
Figure 1.



Figure 2 .
Figure 2. Summary of TMT-based discovery experiments (A) Distribution of fold-change values (log 2 ratios) (AD/Controls) for proteins identified in the study (B) Volcano plot of identified proteins (c) Localization of proteins that are differentially abundant in CSF of AD patients, Representative MS/MS spectra of peptides identified from D) Microtubule associated protein tau (MAPT) (E) 14-3-3 gamma (YWHAG) (F) Pyruvate kinase (PKM)



Figure 3 .
Figure 3. Validation of known candidate proteins by parallel reaction monitoring assays: (A) Neuronal pentraxin 2 (NPTX2); (B) VGF nerve growth factor inducible (VGF); (C) Secretogranin 2 (SCG2).
Peptide sequences and p-values are shown.



Figure 4 .
Figure 4. Validation of novel candidate proteins by parallel reaction monitoring assays: (A) 14-3-3 gamma (YWHAG); (B) Pyruvate kinase (PKM); (C) Gelsolin (GSN).
Peptide sequences and p-values are shown.



Figure 5 .
Figure 5.ROC analysis for selected proteins to evaluate the utility of the markers: (A) ROC curve for individual markers (B) ROC curve with combination of markers; The area under the curve (AUC) is indicated.



Table 1 A list of previously reported AD biomarkers identified in this study Gene Symbol Protein Fold-change (This study) Reference Fold-change (Published)



Table 2 Calculated AUC values from the ROC analysis of biomarker levels in AD patients and controls