ProNGF and Neurodegeneration in Alzheimer’s Disease
Profound and early basal forebrain cholinergic neuron (BFCN) degeneration is a hallmark of Alzheimer's disease (AD).
Loss of synapses between basal forebrain and hippocampal and cortical target tissue correlates highly with the degree of dementia and is thought to be a major contributor to memory loss.
BFCNs depend for their survival, connectivity and function on the neurotrophin nerve growth factor (NGF) which is retrogradely transported from its sites of synthesis in the cortex and hippocampus.
The form of NGF found in human brain is proNGF.
ProNGF binds to the NGF receptors TrkA and p75 NTR , but it binds more strongly to p75 NTR and more weakly to TrkA than does mature NGF.
This renders proNGF more sensitive to receptor balance than mature NGF.
In the healthy brain, where BFCNs express both TrkA and p75 NTR , proNGF is neurotrophic, activating TrkA-dependent signaling pathways such as MAPK and Akt-mTOR and eliciting cell survival and neurite outgrowth.
However, if TrkA is lost or if p75 NTR is increased, proNGF activates p75 NTR -dependent apoptotic pathways such as JNK.
This receptor sensitivity serves as a neurotrophic/apoptotic switch that eliminates BFCNs that cannot maintain TrkA/p75 NTR balance and therefore synaptic connections with their targets.
TrkA is increasingly lost in mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and AD.
In addition, proNGF accumulates at BFCN terminals in cortex and hippocampus, reducing the amount of trophic factor that reaches BFCN cell bodies.
The loss of TrkA and accumulation of proNGF occur early in MCI and correlate with cognitive impairment.
Increased levels of proNGF and reduced levels of TrkA lead to BFCN neurodegeneration and eventual p75NTR-dependent apoptosis.
In addition, in AD BFCNs suffer from reduced TrkAdependent retrograde transport which reduces neurotrophic support.
Thus, BFCNs are particularly vulnerable to AD due to their dependence upon retrograde trophic support from proNGF signaling and transport.

BASAL FOREBRAIN CHOLINERGIC NEURONS IN ALZHEIMER'S DISEASE
The Alzheimer's disease (AD) brain undergoes progressive dysfunction, degeneration and loss of neurons and synapses in selective areas of the brain
Amyloid-β, a component of plaques, has long been targeted as a precipitating insult in AD, triggering a cascade that leads to tau aggregation, impaired synaptic communication and neuronal death
Tau, the primary component of neurofibrillary tangles, promotes the assembly and stabilization of microtubules in the cytoskeleton.
When tau is abnormally phosphorylated, it detaches from microtubules and polymerizes into soluble oligomers, straight and paired helical filaments that assemble into neurofibrillary tangles.
This tau disrupts axonal transport and is thought to lead to neuronal atrophy by loss of normal tau function and/or by gain of pathological function through toxicity of phosphorylated, truncated or aggregated forms of tau
As the disease progresses, both tau and amyloid pathology impact significant areas of the cortex and hippocampus.
Efforts aimed at determining where the pathology begins have implicated TrkA-expressing cholinergic neurons in the basal forebrain in the very early stages of the disorder
Basal forebrain cholinergic neurons (BFCNs) are extremely important for learning, memory, and attention
They are among the first to degenerate and the most severely affected in aging and AD
BFCN degeneration correlates strongly with the degree of dementia and with AD pathology
The vulnerability of BFCNs in AD may be related to disrupted communication with target neurons in the hippocampus and cortex, regions that also display pathology and neurodegeneration in AD.
Basal forebrain cholinergic neurons are dependent upon the neurotrophin nerve growth factor (NGF) for survival and proper function.
They do not make NGF themselves and must obtain it through retrograde transport from their targets.
Older literature focused on the mature form of NGF, demonstrating that it is highly expressed in developing and adult hippocampus and cerebral cortex and is retrogradely transported from these target areas by BFCNs
NGF supports differentiation and survival of BFCNs in vitro
NGF increases acetylcholine (Ach) synthesis and release
NGF also increases expression of its own receptor, TrkA, in BFCN
Because BFCN rely on neurotrophins for their survival and function, it has been proposed that BFCN loss in aging and AD arises from lack of neurotrophic support
In fact, significant literature supports deficits in BDNF expression in AD
However, contrary to initial hypotheses
We and others showed some years ago that despite normal levels of NGF mRNA expression in human brain tissue from AD subjects
This immunoreactive material is entirely present as proNGF
ProNGF protein is increased in BFCN target tissues both in AD
In AD, the accumulation of proNGF in cortex and hippocampus and its reduction in basal forebrain suggest a deficit in retrograde transport of proNGF leading to a lack of survival signaling and eventual neurodegeneration.
Animal models of AD further support the role of dysfunctional proNGF trafficking in AD, as the Ts65Dn mouse exhibits cholinergic degeneration and deficits in retrograde transport of proNGF
However, this mouse also exhibits deficits in the NGF metabolic pathway responsible for processing proNGF to mature NGF
This is consistent with an alternative hypothesis of proNGF accumulation in AD that suggests the accumulation of proNGF in AD is due to defective processing of proNGF into its mature form
This hypothesis is supported by decreases in tissue plasminogen activator and plasmin, which can process proNGF, and increases in the NGF degradative enzyme MMP-9 in MCI and in Down's syndrome
Both transport and processing mechanisms may be at work.
However, if proNGF were processed to NGF in the normal brain, mature NGF should be detectable in normal human brain tissue, but it is not (Figure
Further, it is not clear that plasmin and MMP-9 are the endogenous proNGF/NGF processing enzymes in brain.
Thus, although proNGF is acknowledged to be the form of NGF in the brain, the mechanism behind its accumulation in AD remains controversial.

BIOLOGICAL RELEVANCE OF NEUROTROPHINS
All neuronal cells require neurotrophic factors for their proper function and survival.
NGF belongs to the neurotrophin family of neurotrophic factors, secreted proteins that are required for maintenance of connectivity, synaptic plasticity and survival
It has been amply demonstrated both in vitro and in vivo that a deficit of neurotrophins can lead to cell dysfunction and death, and that neurotrophins can be used to rescue compromised neuronal populations from atrophy or death
The overlapping but distinct specificities of the neurotrophins for various subsets of neurons has been proposed to explain selective neuronal impairments in particular diseases, raising the possibility that individual neurotrophins may be used therapeutically to target specific types of neurons
However, neurotrophins are not simple survival factors and can trigger cellular dysfunction and cell death under certain conditions related to their processing and receptor availability.
This duality in neurotrophin function makes them critical for maintaining the balance of survival and death in the nervous system, a balance that is disrupted in AD.

POST-TRANSLATIONAL PROCESSING OF NEUROTROPHIN PRECURSORS TO PRODUCE MATURE NEUROTROPHINS
The first member of the neurotrophin family to be discovered was NGF
NGF supports the development, survival and function of PNS (sympathetic and sensory) and CNS (cholinergic) neurons
Murine NGF is translated from two major alternatively spliced transcripts to produce 34 and 27 kDa prepro species
Removal of the signal sequence reduces these translation products to proNGF species of 32 and 25 kDa
ProNGF can undergo further post-translational processing at both aminoand carboxyl-terminal ends to generate a mature, biologically active product of 13.2 kDa
Processing of proneurotrophins may occur either intra-or extracellularly.
The kallikrein γNGF, which in mouse submandibular gland is found intracellularly in a complex with NGF, processes proNGF to produce intermediate and mature forms of NGF
Furin and other prohormone convertases are able to process proNGF, proBDNF, and proNT-3 to their mature forms
ProNGF can also be processed extracellularly by plasmin and by matrix metalloproteases
In the CNS, proNGF is largely unprocessed
We now know that proNGF possesses biological activity independent from its mature isoform
Based on the mouse submandibular gland as a model, it was previously thought that proNGF is mainly processed into the mature form which accounts for the biological activity in most tissues
ELISA assays and immunohistochemistry for NGF are widely used and were thought to measure the mature 13.2 kDa NGF protein as the major form of NGF
Little had been done to study NGF biosynthesis in other species or tissues, particularly CNS tissue.
In 2001, we were the first to demonstrate
In rodent brain there is some but very little mature NGF, while mature NGF is completely absent from human brain.
The proNGF found in these tissues is not simply an intracellular precursor; it has since been accepted that secretion of unprocessed proNGF occurs from many cells and tissues, including neurons and astrocytes
This distinction between the pro and mature isoforms of NGF is extremely important, as they have the potential to activate different signaling pathways, a behavior completely contingent on the receptors they bind to.

TrkA AND p75 NTR RECEPTORS AND THEIR SIGNALING PATHWAYS
Neurotrophins are structurally related and bind similarly to two types of receptors (Figure
All neurotrophins bind with the same low affinity to the common neurotrophin receptor, p75 NTR , and with high affinity to a family of type I transmembrane receptor tyrosine kinases known as Trks (tropomyosin-related kinases;
TrkA is the primary receptor for NGF, although there is overlap in binding specificities
Trks are generally responsible for signaling survival, differentiation, synapse strengthening, and neurite outgrowth in response to ligand
The balance of Trks and p75 NTR is crucial to the functional outcome of neurotrophin binding; sufficient amounts of activated Trks, for example, can suppress apoptotic pathways activated by p75 NTR
In many cell culture systems including rat oligodendrocytes, Schwann cells, embryonic BFCN, and embryonic retinal ganglion cells which express little or no TrkA, p75 NTR mediates apoptosis
When complexed with sortilin, p75 NTR binds proNGF with a higher affinity than NGF, signaling cell death
p75 NTR can also cause growth cone retraction/neurite outgrowth inhibition when complexed with the Nogo-66 receptor (NgR) and its ligand Lingo-1
As a result, maintaining the proper balance between TrkA, p75 NTR and sortilin is critical for neuronal function and survival.
Several intracellular signaling pathways are activated by activated Trk receptors and by p75 NTR , including the Ras-MAP kinase, PLCγ, and PI3 kinase/Akt pathways for Trks, and the NF-κB and PI3 kinase/Akt, and the sphingomyelinase/ceramide and c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) pathways for p75 NTR (Dobrowsky et al., 1994;   Kaplan and Miller, 2000; Miller and Kaplan, 2001; Dechant  and Barde, 2002; Roux and Barker, 2002; Huang and Reichardt,  2003; Segal, 2003).
p75 NTR signaling in isolation activates apoptosis via JNK, c-Jun phosphorylation and caspases 3, 6, and 9
p75 NTR can signal survival through activation of NF-κB
Lastly, p75 NTR also limits neurite outgrowth via RhoA activation
These signal transduction pathways downstream of both receptors have been intensely investigated in the case of NGF due to the initial assumption of the biological inactivity of proNGF.
Once the biological significance of proNGF was made clear, it was found that many of the same Trk-and p75 NTR -induced pathways are activated by proNGF.

BIOLOGICAL ACTIVITY OF proNGF
We and others have shown that both native and recombinant proNGF, with or without amino acid substitutions or tags, has neurite outgrowth and neuronal survival activity
Many investigators
This cleavage-resistant proNGF binds to and activates TrkA and its downstream signal transducers, Erk1/2
Although proNGF has a lower affinity for TrkA than does NGF
In addition, endogenously expressed proNGF is similarly neurotrophic in vivo: transgenic mice over-expressing wild-type proNGF exhibit robust sympathetic and sensory axonal sprouting into brain parenchyma with no cell loss in peripheral ganglia
In contrast to these data,
Neither the many structural differences between the different cleavage-resistant proNGFs nor different expression systems or purification methods accounted for their differences in biological activity
However, cell culture conditions, which influence receptor complement, explain why some labs report apoptotic activity of proNGF whereas others report neurotrophic activity.
ProNGF exhibits neurite outgrowth and survival activity on newborn rodent superior cervical ganglion neurons, which maintain relatively high TrkA levels compared to little or no p75 NTR
ProNGF is also neurotrophic for rat pheochromocytoma (PC12) cells differentiated (primed) by growth in NGF, which express
When complexed with sortilin, p75 NTR binds proNGF with a higher affinity than NGF, signaling cell death through the same pathways.
p75 NTR can also cause growth cone retraction/neurite outgrowth inhibition when complexed with the Nogo-66 receptor and its ligand Lingo-1.
The balance of Trks and p75 NTR is crucial to the functional outcome of neurotrophin binding.
high levels of TrkA vs. p75 NTR , whereas unprimed PC12 cells (grown in serum), which express high levels of p75 NTR compared to TrkA, respond to proNGF with increased apoptosis
Importantly, this contrasts with NGF, which is neurotrophic under both growth conditions
Supporting the importance of relative TrkA vs. p75 NTR levels, apoptotic activity of proNGF in vivo has been shown only in situations where TrkA is missing or downregulated and p75 NTR is up-regulated
Furthermore, knocking down TrkA in PC12 cells changes proNGF's neurotrophic activity to apoptotic activity
Lastly, proNGF is apoptotic for TrkAdeficient PC12 nnr5 cells but is neurotrophic for TrkA-overexpressing PC12 nnr5 -B5 cells
It was reported that proNGF requires intracellular proteolysis to activate TrkA
However, the MAPK and Akt assays that were carried out to establish this occurred for 1 h, a longer time period than usual for these assays and sufficient to allow proNGF endocytosis and cleavage.
In contrast, we demonstrated that cleavage-resistant proNGF robustly activates MAPK after 5 min.
Furthermore, proNGF activates TrkA even when incubated for 1 h in the presence of a furin inhibitor which allows uptake but not cleavage
These results demonstrated that cleavage to mature NGF is not required for proNGF signaling and implicate proNGF as the form of NGF that normally signals and is endocytosed.
Thus, proNGF binds to TrkA and is internalized without cleavage, and endocytosed proNGF activates MAPK.
Furthermore, this internalized proNGF associates with signaling endosomes in PC12 cells
In sum, proNGF can signal without cleavage, and the balance between TrkA and p75 NTR determines whether proNGF is neurotrophic or apoptotic.
This is of critical importance because TrkA is lost in AD

RETROGRADE SIGNALING AND TRANSPORT
Axonal transport defects are common characteristics of many neurodegenerative diseases, and mutations in components of the axonal transport machinery have demonstrated that impaired axonal transport can cause neurodegeneration
Lack of retrograde neurotrophic support has been postulated to cause neurodegeneration and death of BFCNs in AD
BFCN cell bodies may receive a neurotrophic signal from their distal axon terminals in the cortex and hippocampus by binding of ligand to receptors at axon terminals to produce local signals within axon terminals and retrograde signals to the cell body
Both mechanisms of neurotrophic signaling may be compromised in AD.
Reduced proNGF signaling and transport may be due to disrupted transport machinery or to reduced TrkA, or both.
In animal models, unilateral fimbrial transection, which severs cholinergic projections from the medial septum to the hippocampus, and colchicine, which disrupts axonal transport, increase hippocampal NGF-immunoreactivity but not NGF mRNA
Reduced retrograde transport of NGF has been demonstrated in animal models of aging and disease
TrkA mRNA is lost in the basal forebrain of persons with AD
This decreases the amount of TrkA protein destined for anterograde transport to BFCN distal axon terminals
TrkA protein levels are reduced in the cortex (BFCN terminal axons) of AD patients
Internalization and retrograde transport of mature NGF requires TrkA
p75 NTR is not required for NGF transport
Interestingly, the PI3K pathway may be required for TrkA-mediated retrograde transport, since inhibition of TrkA-mediated PI3K activity blocks retrograde transport of NGF in sympathetic neurons
Recently, TrkA has been shown to bind APP, the precursor to amyloid-β, resulting in its non-pathological processing
Thus, loss of TrkA may be an early event in AD underlying toxic amyloid buildup, consistent with the idea of basal forebrain degeneration being a possible initiating occurrence in AD.
In addition, both aggregated Aβ and tau impede the bidirectional transport of TrkA in hippocampal neurons
Tau reduction prevents Aβ-induced impairment of transport of TrkA but not of BDNF
Thus, both Aβ and tau may regulate neurotrophin and neurotrophin receptor axonal transport.
Reduced retrograde transport of NGF has been demonstrated in animal models of aging and Down's syndrome
Animal models of AD exhibit reduced TrkA as well as defective NGF retrograde transport
Reduced TrkA and/or retrograde transport may lead to neurodegeneration and cell death in the presence of increased proNGF
Thus, multiple mechanisms may be at work to reduce the trophic support of BFCNs in AD.

SUMMARY
ProNGF is abundant in the CNS and can have both neurotrophic and apoptotic activities, depending on the receptor complement.
ProNGF binds strongly to p75 NTR , but it also binds to TrkA and elicits survival signaling through the MAPK and Akt pathways.
ProNGF controls survival and death of NGF-dependent neurons in the basal forebrain, depending on the balance of TrkA and p75 NTR .
This is particularly important because TrkA receptors are lost in AD.
Axonal transport defects are common characteristics of many neurodegenerative diseases, and mutations in components of the axonal transport machinery have demonstrated that impaired axonal transport can cause neurodegeneration.
BFCNs are uniquely dependent upon a constant supply of target-derived proNGF for their survival and function, and therefore reduced retrograde axonal transport of proNGF may cause degeneration and death of BFCNs.
These neurons are crucial for learning, memory and attention, they are among the most vulnerable neurons in aging and AD, and they depend upon target-derived proNGF for their survival and function.
Multiple mechanisms may limit survival of BFCNs in AD.
ProNGF accumulates in cortex and hippocampus in AD but is reduced in basal forebrain, suggesting a retrograde transport defect.
The transport deficit may be the result of AD pathology or loss of TrkA, or both.
The accumulation of proNGF, along with loss of TrkA, reduces retrograde survival signals and switches proNGF signaling to p75 NTR apoptotic pathways, thus initiating a neurodegenerative cascade.
Rescue of axonal transport of signaling endosomes carrying cargoes such as BDNF, which supports motor neurons, ameliorates disease progression in a mouse model of ALS
Thus, restoring retrograde transport of proNGF, for example by increasing TrkA levels, may inhibit disease progression in AD.
Understanding proNGF biological activity and metabolism will aid in designing treatments to prevent degeneration of BFCNs.



FIGURE 1 |
FIGURE 1 | Western blot probing for NGF immunoreactivity in human brain tissue (A) and peripheral targets (B) demonstrating the presence of proNGF and the absence of mature NGF in the indicated areas (ec, external carotid; sm, submandibular gland; pin, pineal gland; bv, extracerebral blood vessels).
(A) Reprinted from Fahnestock et al. (2001), with permission from Elsevier.
(B) Reprinted from Bierl et al. (2005), with permission from Elsevier.



FIGURE 2 |
FIGURE 2 | Diagram of the various pathways activated by TrkA and p75 NTR .
TrkA in isolation activates pro-survival pathways including the Ras-MAP kinase, PLCγ, and PI3 kinase/Akt pathways.
p75 NTR , when complexed with TrkA, increases pro-survival signaling through TrkA.
p75 NTR in isolation can also signal survival via the NF-κB and PI3/Akt pathways.
p75 NTR in isolation activates apoptosis via sphingomyelinase/ceramide, JNK, c-Jun phosphorylation andcaspases 3, 6, and 9.
When complexed with sortilin, p75 NTR binds proNGF with a higher affinity than NGF, signaling cell death through the same pathways.
p75 NTR can also cause growth cone retraction/neurite outgrowth inhibition when complexed with the Nogo-66 receptor and its ligand Lingo-1.
The balance of Trks and p75 NTR is crucial to the functional outcome of neurotrophin binding.