Association of education with Aβ burden in preclinical familial and sporadic Alzheimer disease
To determine whether years of education and the e4 risk allele at APOE influence β-amyloid (Aβ) pathology similarly in asymptomatic individuals with a family history of sporadic Alzheimer disease (AD) and presymptomatic autosomal dominant AD mutation carriers.
We analyzed cross-sectional data from 106 asymptomatic individuals with a parental history of sporadic AD (PREVENT-AD cohort; age 67.28 ± 4.72 years) and 117 presymptomatic autosomal dominant AD mutation carriers (DIAN cohort; age 35.04 ± 9.43 years).
All participants underwent structural MRI and Aβ-PET imaging.
In each cohort we investigated the influence of years of education, APOE e4 status, and their interaction on Aβ-PET.
Asymptomatic individuals with a parental history of sporadic AD showed increased Aβ burden associated with APOE e4 carriage and lower level of education, but no interaction between these.
Presymptomatic mutation carriers of autosomal dominant AD showed no relation between APOE e4 and Aβ burden, but increasing level of education was associated with reduced Aβ burden.
The association between educational attainment and Aβ burden was similar in the 2 cohorts.
While the APOE e4 allele confers increased tendency toward Aβ accumulation in sporadic AD only, protective environmental factors, like increased education, may promote brain resistance against Aβ pathology in both sporadic and autosomal dominant AD.
Risk of Alzheimer disease (AD) in its sporadic form (sAD) has been suggested to be influenced by both environmental (e.g., education) and genetic (e.g., APOE e4) factors.
]
7]
We sought to evaluate whether factors known to affect sAD risk also affect presymptomatic ADAD mutation carriers.
We examined whether level of education and APOE e4 status are associated with Aβ burden similarly in asymptomatic individuals at risk of sAD and in presymptomatic ADAD mutation carriers.

Methods

Participants
We studied 106 asymptomatic elderly individuals with a parental history of sAD from the PREVENT-AD cohort and 125 presymptomatic ADAD mutation carriers from the DIAN network.
Presymptomatic Evaluation of Experimental or Novel Treatments for AD (PREVENT-AD) is a single-center longitudinal cohort of cognitively normal older adults at elevated risk of AD, as described elsewhere.
Data analyzed here came from PREVENT-AD data release 5 (November 30, 2017).
Briefly, between September 2011 and November 2017, PREVENT-AD enrolled 399 cognitively normal older individuals having at least one parent or multiple siblings with sAD.
Inclusion criteria included (1) age 60 and above, or 55 and above for individuals less than 15 years younger than their index relative's age at symptom onset, (2) normal cognition, and (3) no history of major neurologic or psychiatric disease.
Normal cognition was defined as a Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR)
In the few cases of ambiguous results, participants were evaluated further with a more extensive neuropsychological test battery, which was carefully reviewed by neuropsychologists and physicians to ensure normal cognition.
At each follow-up, cognitive examinations were also reviewed and individuals whose performance was questionable were further evaluated with an extensive neuropsychological battery.
Only individuals who did not show cognitive decline according to the norms and the clinician review were kept in the study.
Participants underwent clinical and cognitive examinations, blood tests, and MRI annually.
Between February 2017 and April 2018, a subset of the cohort underwent an Aβ-PET scan using 18 F-NAV4694.
Participants with a parental history of sAD who were less than 15 years from the age of their parent at symptom onset (irrespective of their actual age) and for whom structural MRI and Aβ-PET were available were included in the analyses, resulting in a sample of 106 individuals.
The multisite longitudinal Dominantly Inherited Alzheimer Network (DIAN) study enrolls individuals age 18 and older who have a biological parent bearing a mutation responsible for ADAD.
All participants undergo clinical and cognitive assessment, genetic testing, and imaging (MRI and PET, including a 11 C Pittsburgh compound B (PiB) PET to quantify Aβ pathology).
We studied baseline data from 125 cognitively normal (i.e., presymptomatic, defined as a CDR global score of 0) 6 mutation carriers archived in the DIAN data freeze 10 (January 2009 to May 2016) having both structural MRI and Aβ-PET of suitable quality for investigation.
We estimated expected years to symptom onset (EYO)
During the medical interview, PREVENT-AD participants were asked to report the age of the parent at which the family observed significant cognitive/memory changes.
Each participant's age at assessment was subtracted from his or her parent's age at symptom onset.
In DIAN, EYO was calculated using (1) the mean age at dementia onset of the specific family mutation (calculated by integrating the age at onset reported in the literature across individuals with the same specific mutation)
When family mutation age at onset was not available (18% of cases in the present study), the parental age at onset was used (see reference 5 for similar procedure).
for PREVENT-AD, Washington University Human Research Protection Office and local institutional review boards of the participating sites for DIAN) and all participants gave written informed consent to the study prior to participation.

Standard protocol approvals

Genetics
APOE genotype in PREVENT-AD was determined using the PyroMark Q96 pyrosequencer (Qiagen, Toronto, Canada) and the following primers: rs429358_amplification_forward 59-ACGGCTGTCCAAGGAGCT G-39, rs429358_amplifica-tion_reverse_biotinylated 59-CACCTCGCCGCGGTACTG-39, rs429358_sequencing 59-CGGACATGGAGGACG-39, rs7412_amplification_forward 59-CTCCGCGATGCCGAT-GAC-39, rs7412_amplification_reverse_biotinylated 59-CCCCGGCCTGGTACACTG-39, and rs7412_sequencing 59-CGATGACCTGCAGAAG-39.
DIAN determined APOE genotype using an ABI predesigned real-time TaqMan assay.
Image acquisition T1-weighted images were acquired for PREVENT-AD using a Siemens (Munich, Germany) 3T scanner at the Brain Imaging Center of the Douglas Mental Health University Institute (Montréal, Canada) following Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI; adni-info.org)
protocol: sagittal, repetition time 2300 ms, echo time 2.98 ms, flip angle 9°, 176 slices, voxel size = 1 × 1 × 1 mm 3 , field of view 256 mm 2 .
Aβ-PET scans were performed at the Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI; Montréal, Canada) on a Siemens high-resolution research tomograph at a mean interval of 257 ± 138 days from the MRI session.
A 30-minute PET acquisition scan started 40 minutes after intravenous injection of ;6 mCi of 18 F-NAV4694.
Transmission scans were acquired for attenuation correction.
DIAN acquired T1-weighted MRI scans on 3T scanners (multiple sites) by applying ADNI parameters and procedures.
Aβ-PET scans were acquired at different centers after intravenous injection of 8 to 18 mCi of 11 C-PiB.
Some participants underwent a 70-minute full dynamic acquisition following the time of injection, while the remainder underwent a 30-minute scan after a 40-minute rest period.
Transmission scans were obtained for attenuation correction.

Image processing
PREVENT-AD and DIAN data were processed similarly.
T1weighted MRI data were processed using FreeSurfer software version 5.3 (surfer.nmr.mgh.harvard.edu/).
Images were segmented and parceled in native space using the Desikan-Killiany atlas.
T1-weighted MRIs were further processed using the Segment routine of Statistical Parametric Mapping version 12 (SPM12; Wellcome Department of Imaging Neuroscience, London, UK), implemented in MATLAB (MathWorks, Natick, MA).
Briefly, images were segmented, normalized to the MNI template, and modulated for nonlinear warping.
MRI data were only used for PET preprocessing.
For PET processing, we applied a common pipeline (github.
com/villeneuvelab/vlpp) to the 40-to 70-minute postinjection frames of all individuals, exclusively, to obtain a uniform scanning window.
Aβ-PET images were realigned onto their respective MRI, masked to remove the scalp and CSF in an attempt to avoid contamination by nongray or nonwhite matter voxels, and smoothed using a full width at half maximum Gaussian kernel of 8mm.
Resulting images were scaled using whole cerebellum uptake values (whole cerebellum was preferred to cerebellum gray matter to account better for white matter off-target binding variability between tracers).
Global neocortical Aβ burden was quantified by extracting, in native space, the mean standardized uptake value ratio (SUVR) of the frontal, temporal, parietal, and posterior cingulate cortex of the Desikan-Killiany atlas.
urthermore, bilateral precuneus SUVR was extracted, because this region appears to be among the most sensitive to changes in both ADAD
Finally, bilateral striatum SUVR was also extracted because it shows early accumulation in ADAD
Finally, PET scans were reprocessed following the Centiloid guidelines to allow between-cohort comparisons.
Full processing pipelines are fully described elsewhere.
Briefly (and after validation of the implementation of the Centiloid pipeline in our laboratory using the Global Alzheimer's Association Interactive Network [GAAIN] data), 50-to 70-minute postinjection frames were averaged and registered to their respective MRIs.
T1weighted image normalization parameters (see above) were used to move the PET images into the MNI space.
Images were then scaled using the whole cerebellum reference volume of interest (VOI) downloaded from the GAAIN website (gaain.org/centiloid-project).
The cortical SUVR was finally extracted in the cortex VOI from the same source.
To obtain the Centiloid values, SUVRs were modified using the equation provided in the previous publication: Centiloid value = 100 × (PiB SUVR -1.009)/1.067
for PiB-PET images
for NAV4694-PET images.
l images underwent strict visual quality control through the processing procedure.
Images showing questionable preprocessing, including normalization, were removed from the analyses.
All PREVENT-AD participants passed quality control, while 8 DIAN participants were removed due to quality control failure, reducing the DIAN sample to 117 individuals.

Statistical analysis
Analyses were performed using the Statistical Package for Social Sciences (SPSS) version 22, and results were considered significant at p < 0.05.
General linear models (GLMs) were run separately in PREVENT-AD and DIAN cohorts.
We assessed the association of years of education and APOE e4 status with the mean neocortical SUVRs in both cohorts, adjusting for age, sex, and MMSE, as well as site and mutation type (PSEN1/PSEN2/APP) for DIAN.
We then tested for interaction between years of education and APOE e4 status.
All analyses were repeated using the precuneus and striatum SUVRs.
3]
Significant results were further explored voxel-wise using SPM12 to assess the regional distribution of these effects.
Results were considered significant at p < 0.005 uncorrected with a minimum cluster size of 200.
Complementary GLMs, including the same covariates except MMSE, were run on the mean neocortical SUVRs to assess modulation of the association between EYO and Aβ burden by years of education and APOE e4 status (i.e., EYO × education and EYO × APOE e4 status interactions).
The confounding effect of reverse causation on the findings involving education (i.e., ongoing pathology preventing achievement of higher levels of education) was also explored.
To do so we investigated the possibility, in DIAN, of a simple cooccurrence of early school abandonment and early Aβ due to an early expected age at onset by assessing the association between parental and specific family mutation age at onset, education level, and Aβ burden.
We also assessed the role of age and genetic predisposition on educational achievements by testing the association between (1) age and APOE e4 status with years of education in both cohorts and (2) the presence of ADAD mutations and years of education in DIAN, taking advantage of an independent set of mutation noncarriers from DIAN.

Data availability
Qualified researchers may obtain de-identified imaging and clinical PREVENT-AD data used for this study from the corresponding author and the study team upon reasonable request.
De-identified imaging and clinical data from the DIAN study used in the preparation of this manuscript are available upon request to qualified researchers.
Information can be found at dian.wustl.edu/our-research/observationalstudy/dian-observational-study-investigator-resources/datarequest-terms-and-instructions/.

Results

Study participants
Participants' demographics are detailed in the table.
DIAN presymptomatic mutation carriers were younger than PREVENT-AD asymptomatic individuals, and were further away from their expected onset (i.e., lower EYO).
Proportion of women was higher in PREVENT-AD when compared to DIAN.
The cohorts did not differ in terms of years of education, proportion of APOE e4 carriers, or Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) performance.
The proportion of Aβ-positive individuals (determined by Gaussian mixture models each cohort)

Years of education and APOE «4 status in each cohort
In PREVENT-AD, higher educational attainment was associated with lower mean neocortical SUVR (F 1,99 = 4.04, p = 0.05), while APOE e4 carriers had a higher mean neocortical SUVR than noncarriers (F 1,99 = 6.63, p = 0.01).
There was no education × APOE e4 status interaction on the mean neocortical SUVR (F 1,98 = 1.44, p = 0.23; figure
Of note, controlling for the delay between MRI and PET did not affect these effects (education: F 1,98 = 4.32, p = 0.04; APOE e4 status: F 1,98 = 5.57, p = 0.02; education × APOE e4 status interaction: F 1,97 = 1.86, p = 0.18).
Effects of education and APOE e4 status were also replicated when using nonparametric tests (education: Spearman ρ = -0.22,
p = 0.03; APOE e4 status: Mann-Whitney U = 882, p = 0.003; residuals were computed to control for age, sex, and MMSE scores).
Results were when focusing on the precuneus SUVR (education: F 1,99 = 4.35, p = 0.04; APOE e4 status: F 1,99 = 5.20, p = 0.03; education × APOE e4 status interaction: F 1,98 < 1, p = 0.32), but only the association with APOE e4 status remained for the striatum (education: F 1,99 = 1.21, p = 0.28; APOE e4 status: F 1,99 = 5.33, p = 0.02; education × APOE e4 status interaction: F 1,98 = 2.22, p = 0.14).
Voxel-wise analyses suggested that the association with education was most apparent in the lateral temporal and parietal regions, the left lateral prefrontal and right orbitofrontal cortices, and the precuneus (figure
APOE status effect was localized mainly in the medial and lateral prefrontal regions, extending to the precuneus (figure
Analyses in DIAN presymptomatic ADAD mutation carriers revealed that the mean neocortical SUVR was associated with years of education (F 1,94 = 5.04, p = 0.03) such that a higher level of education was associated with lower Aβ burden in presymptomatic ADAD mutation carriers.
There was no association of Aβ burden with APOE «4 status (F 1,94 < 1, p = 0.39) or education × APOE «4 interaction (F 1,93 < 1, p = 0.33; figure
Nonparametric tests provided similar effects of education and APOE «4 status (education: Spearman ρ = -0.18,
p = 0.05; APOE e4 status: Mann-Whitney U = 1,301, p = 0.40; residuals were computed to control for age, sex, MMSE scores, site, and mutation).
Results were similar when focusing on the precuneus SUVR (education: F 1,94 = 4.56, p = 0.04; APOE e4 status: F 1,94 = 1.42, p = 0.25; education × APOE e4 interaction: F 1,93 < 1, p = 0.73), while no effect survived when looking at the striatum SUVR (education: F 1,94 < 1, p = 0.34; APOE «4 status: F 1,94 = 1.49, p = 0.23; education × APOE «4 interaction: F 1,93 < 1, p = 96).
Voxel-wise analyses revealed that the effect of education was largely distributed, higher education being associated with lower binding in the bilateral prefrontal rostral, lateral frontal, parietal, and right temporal regions as well as in the posterior cingulate and precuneus; while no voxel-wise association was found with APOE e4 (figure
To ensure that the apparent difference of APOE e4 association with Aβ burden in PREVENT-AD and DIAN was not attributable to limited power in the latter, we repeated analyses after removing covariates specific to DIAN (i.e., site and mutation type).
Results remained similar.

Comparison between cohorts
In an attempt to compare the magnitude of the effect of years of education found in PREVENT-AD and DIAN, we standardized Aβ-PET values following the Centiloid recommendations.
The previous analyses were repeated using Centiloid values instead of SUVRs and results remained similar.
There was no years of education × cohort interaction (F 1,212 < 1, p = 0.70; figure

Complementary analyses
Complementary analyses were performed to further understand the effect of education and APOE e4, and more specifically whether they were able to modulate the relationship between the mean neocortical SUVR and EYO in the 2 cohorts, separately.
To do so, we assessed in a first step the relationship between EYO and the mean neocortical SUVR for each cohort.
In a second step, we evaluated the EYO × education and EYO × APOE e4 status interactions.
Due to power issues, the tripleway interaction (i.e., EYO × education × APOE e4 status) was not tested.
All analyses were done using GLMs, controlling for age and sex and, for DIAN only, site and mutation type.
In PREVENT-AD, the sporadic parental EYO was related to the mean neocortical SUVR (F

Discussion
Increasing efforts have been made toward understanding the preclinical phase of AD and identifying effective prevention strategies.
Given its predictability and the low prevalence of age-related confounders ADAD is considered a privileged condition to study the preclinical phase of the disease.
However, it remains unclear whether the preclinical phase of ADAD can be influenced by environmental and genetic factors, as seems to be the case in sAD.
Our results suggest that higher education may delay Aβ accumulation similarly in both variants of the disease, while APOE e4 allele seems to influence Aβ burden in people at risk of sAD only.
Education has been widely used as a proxy of cognitive reserve and related, in cognitively normal individuals, to a lower incidence of AD dementia
Higher levels of education might thus promote brain resistance (i.e., capacity to avoid brain pathology).
Our study showed that the effect of education notably affects the precuneus, which is among the most sensitive brain regions, and potentially one of the earliest regions to show pathologic Aβ accumulation in sAD and ADAD.
By contrast, the striatum, which shows Aβ pathology early in ADAD
While this remains to be further understood in ADAD, the absence of influence of education in the striatum in sAD might be due to the fact that education protects against early accumulation, and does not influence later stages of amyloidosis.
Using the Centiloid scale, we were able to compare the effect of education between the 2 cohorts.
Although the conversion in Centiloid values needs to be taken carefully as this standardization might be imperfect, our findings suggest that education has a similar effect on Aβ deposition in asymptomatic individuals at risk of sAD and presymptomatic ADAD mutation carriers.
enriched environment might protect against or delay Aβ accumulation, even in mutation carriers who are known to have a very aggressive form of the disease.
This is in line with recent studies showing an association between physical activity and Aβ-PET in DIAN ADAD mutation carriers,
Another study, from the Antioquia cohort (Colombia), found that education was protective against the onset of cognitive impairment in PSEN1 E280A mutation carriers, a higher level of education being able to delay their onset by 3 years.
Thus healthier lifestyle seems able to influence Aβ pathology and delay AD onset, even in the presence of fully penetrant mutations responsible for ADAD.
To further investigate this question, we next assessed if education modulates the association between EYO and Aβ accumulation by testing the interaction between education and EYO on Aβ burden.
While EYO was associated with higher Aβ burden in the 2 cohorts,
The absence of interaction between EYO and education suggests that higher education could delay Aβ pathology, without affecting its rate of accumulation once the process has started.
In this scenario, the strength of the association between Aβ burden and EYO would be similar in individuals with high and low education, but the ones with higher education would be able to resist pathology
Alternatively, this absence of interaction could suggest that the presence of genetic mutation or Aβ pathology prevents higher educational achievements.
Thus lower education would simply cooccur with, or be due to, the presence of Aβ pathology.
Whereas we cannot completely rule out the possibility of reversed causation, we found insufficient evidence for a simple cooccurrence of early parental/specific family mutation age of onset-Aβ burden and early school dropout, and no direct effect of mutations (APOE e4 or ADAD) or age on educational achievements, suggesting that age and genetic mutations cannot fully account for our findings.
Finally, this a priori negative finding could also be related to the nature of EYO, which is only an approximation of time to symptom onset.
The differential relationship between EYO and Aβ burden in DIAN according to whether this index is calculated based on the family mutation mean age at onset or the parental age at onset supports this idea.
EYO is also limited by the imprecision of the measurement itself.
As age at parental onset was directly reported by the participants in each cohort, this index is likely to be contaminated by bias recall.
Follow-up studies, using the actual age of conversion, will help determine whether the association found between education and Aβ burden were related a delayed age at conversion in both cohorts.
In sAD, a large body of research has evidenced that not only environmental but also genetic factors influence the disease progression.
Thus the role of APOE e4 genotype on AD risk and its association with earlier and higher Aβ accumulation in cognitively normal older individuals has already been widely shown.
The influence of APOE e4 in ADAD is less clear.
Some studies suggested that APOE e4 influences ADAD progression 7,40-42 while others did not.
4]
The fact that this population already carries a gene that massively disrupts Aβ production might reduce the influence of any other genes, like APOE e4, involved in amyloidosis.
APOE e4 status, like education, did not modulate the relationship between EYO and Aβ pathology.
While the limited role of APOE e4 in ADAD is consistent with this finding, such an interaction in individuals at risk of sAD has been published previously by our group, when using CSF Aβ 1-42 rather than Aβ-PET (overlap of 35 participants between the 2 studies).
Longitudinal studies are needed to further understand these results.
Neither in PREVENT-AD nor in DIAN did the effect of APOE e4 status interact with education on Aβ burden.
While this is in line with previous findings in ADAD,
7]
In the present study, all PREVENT-AD participants were already at risk of sAD, which might have provided sufficient sensitivity or variability to detect an effect of environmental factors in APOE e4 noncarriers.
Whether the absence of an education × APOE e4 status interaction on Aβ burden is generalizable to other cohorts or is due to our cohort's preexisting risk will need further evaluation.
Some limitations should be acknowledged.
First, important differences persist preventing the direct comparison of the 2 cohorts (i.e., uncertainty that PREVENT-AD participants will develop sAD later on, use of different Aβ-PET tracers, multisite vs singlecenter cohorts, different age range of the 2 cohorts).
Even if it might be imperfect, the Centiloid standardization used to compare directly the effect of education on Aβ burden between the 2 cohorts circumvents some of these limitations.
The sample size remains relatively small and it did not allow us to assess triple-way interactions (education × APOE e4 × EYO) or further divide the sample according, for instance, to their Aβ status.
Evaluating the influence of education in Aβ-positive vs Aβ-negative individuals would notably allow us to better characterize the effect of education.
We used years of education as a measure of modifiable factors.
Whereas our objective was more exploratory than mechanistic, it is important to acknowledge that the use of education alone prevents clear interpretation of the specific role of education.
First, education differs according to various social factors, including generations, country, ethnicity/race, and socioeconomic status, making it difficult to consider years of education to be rigorously identical across individuals.
The relative homogeneity of the 2 cohorts (e.g., mainly Western world, White individuals) suggests that the influence of these factors is limited in the present study, but also limits the generalization of the results to other racial/ethnic groups.
In addition, higher education is likely to be associated with other positive lifestyle factors (e.g., better socioeconomic status, lifetime cognitive activity, diet) or nonmodifiable protective factors (e.g., more efficient neural processing may be correlated with pursuing advanced education), all being potential factors underlying resistance to Aβ pathology.
Future studies, with appropriate designs, should focus on teasing apart whether the protective effects are actually attributable to years of education or whether they are due to early-life socioeconomic status, biological predisposition, or later-life exposures associated with higher educational ascertainment.
Although some of these education correlates might be modifiable, others might not, which would limit the effect of education as a target for interventions.
Finally, the cross-sectional nature of the present study prevents us from drawing a strong conclusion on the causal relationship between years of education and Aβ pathology in preclinical AD.
Future studies, including longitudinal ones, should be designed to assess these questions and understand further the influence of genetic and environmental factors on the preclinical phase of ADAD and sAD.
Overall, our results suggest that a higher level of education delay Aβ burden in both variants, suggesting the existence of reserve mechanisms not only in individuals at risk of sAD, but also in individuals carrying aggressive ADAD variants.
By contrast, while APOE e4 is strongly related to Aβ burden in asymptomatic individuals at risk of sAD, it does not influence Aβ load in preclinical ADAD.
These results add to the growing literature suggesting that preventive strategies targeting environmental/ modifiable risk factors could prevent, or at least delay, AD.


, registrations, and patient consents PREVENT-AD and DIAN studies were approved by regional ethics committees (institutional review board at McGill University Glossary Aβ = β-amyloid; AD = Alzheimer disease; ADAD = autosomal dominant Alzheimer disease; ADNI = Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative; CDR = Clinical Dementia Rating; DIAN = Dominantly Inherited Alzheimer Network; EYO = expected years to symptom onset; GAAIN = Global Alzheimer's Association Interactive Network; GLM = general linear model; MMSE = Mini-Mental State Examination; MNI = Montreal Neurological Institute; pEYO = parental expected years to symptom onset; PiB = Pittsburgh compound B; PREVENT-AD = Presymptomatic Evaluation of Experimental or Novel Treatments for AD; sAD = sporadic Alzheimer disease; SUVR = standardized uptake value ratio; VOI = volume of interest.



Figure 1
Figure 1 Association between years of education, APOE e4 status, and their interaction on β-amyloid (Aβ) pathology



Figure 2
Figure 2 Voxelwise associations among years of education, APOE e4 status, and β-amyloid (Aβ) pathology



Figure 3
Figure 3 Comparison of the association between education and β-amyloid (Aβ) pathology in Presymptomatic Evaluation of Experimental and Novel Treatments for AD (PREVENT-AD) vs Dominantly Inherited Alzheimer Network (DIAN)


5or 21 DIAN participants, the specific family mutation age at onset was not available, thus the parental age at onset was used to calculate EYO.5Statistical values were obtained by comparing family mutation EYO values of DIAN to the parental EYO ones of PREVENT-AD.