Alzheimer's Disease: Tau Pathology and Dysfunction of Endocytosis

INTRODUCTION
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the most common form of dementia.
Its prevalence will significantly increase in the coming decades, whereas no efficient treatment is currently available.
AD has two main neuropathological lesions: amyloid plaques and neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs).
Amyloid plaques are composed of amyloid ß (Aß) peptides cleaved from the Amyloid Precursor Protein (APP)
NFTs, present in the brain of AD and related neurodegenerative diseases, are constituted of tau proteins

ENDOLYSOSOMAL ABNORMALITIES IN AD
Evidence from both genetic and biochemical studies supports the involvement of endolysosomal abnormalities in the development of Alzheimer brain lesions
Enlargement of endosomes in neurons and peripheral cells is observed at early stage of AD and of Down syndrome (DS) individuals who are at high risk for AD
The endocytic machinery may thus be a highly vulnerable cascade that undergoes alterations at the early stages of AD.
Importantly, endocytosis is closely linked to the development of both Aß and tau pathologies.
On one hand, it is believed that modifications of the endolysosomal compartment in AD and DS are mostly linked to increased Aβ production as the amyloidogenic processing of APP occurs in the endosomal pathway
On the other hand, uptake of abnormal tau by endocytosis is an important step to sustain tau spreading from cell to cell
Tau pathology is strongly correlated to functional deficits in AD brains
The brain propagation of tau pathology in AD follows neuroanatomical pathways and can reflect transmission of abnormal tau proteins from cell to cell in a "prion-like" manner.
This transcellular transfer of abnormal tau is thought to induce recruitment and seeding of the normal soluble tau proteins into pathological aggregated tau and would need cellular internalization of abnormal tau through endocytic mechanisms
In this review, we mainly focus on endocytic abnormalities in AD brains, the underlying potential mechanisms, and the relationship with tau pathology.

GENETIC RISK FACTORS FOR LATE-ONSET AD (LOAD) AND LOAD-RELATED ENDOLYSOSOMAL PROTEINS
Familial AD (FAD) accounts for <5% of AD cases and is well characterized by mutations in three genes (APP, PSEN1, and PSEN2).
Although genetic factors are estimated to represent 60% of the risk to develop LOAD, they remained largely unknown for a long time except for APOE
Genomewide association studies (GWAS) and whole genome sequencing studies (WGS) have identified more than 45 genes/loci increasing or decreasing the susceptibility to develop LOAD
Some GWAS hit genes encode key proteins involved in endocytosis and membrane dynamics such as INPP5D (SHIP1), Bridging Integrator 1 (BIN1), Phosphatidylinositol Binding Clathrin Assembly Protein (PICALM), Ras and Rab Interactor 3 (RIN3), CD2 Associated Protein (CD2AP), Sortilin Related Receptor 1 (SORL1), Cas scaffolding protein family member 4 (CASS4)
In addition, several independent studies have reported the involvement of genes encoding endolysosomal proteins in AD such as INPPL1 (SHIP2)
The pathophysiological mechanisms by which these genes may modulate the risk for LOAD are still not fully understood.

DYNAMIN-DEPENDENT ENDOCYTOSIS AND LOAD-RELATED ENDOLYSOSOMAL PROTEINS
The endolysosomal proteins listed above play critical roles at various steps of dynamin-dependent endocytosis and further steps (Figure
Endocytosis starts with the recruitment of endocytic proteins to the plasma membrane subdomain enriched with phosphatidylinositol (PI) 4,5-bisphosphate [PI(4,5)P2] to form a clathrin-coated pit (CCP)
SHIP2 negatively regulates the dynamics of CCP formation
Membrane invagination starts from this pit by assembling clathrin and AP-2 with the adaptor protein PICALM
BIN1 is involved in membrane curvature and remodeling but BIN1 is also detected in the early endosomes of axons in neurons and is also implicated in recycling BACE1, a ß-site APP cleaving enzyme present in early endosomes
Deep invagination of the bud and narrow neck formation are assisted by actin polymerization where SYNJ1 and dynamin interact with their protein partners possessing BAR domains
After scission of newly formed vesicles by dynamin, SYNJ1 plays a critical role in clathrin-coated vesicle uncoating
Then, RIN3 joins in the transport pathway from plasma membrane to early endosomes
Similarly, CD2AP is detected in the early endosomes of the dendrites in cultured neurons and is involved in actin remodeling, membrane trafficking
SORL1, directly interacting with APP, is localized primarily to early endosomes and the trans-Golgi network, shuttling between these two membrane compartments
Lastly, PLD3 is implicated in endolysosomal system
CASS4 is rather implicated in focal adhesion integrity and tau toxicity
Most of these proteins are directly or indirectly involved in interactions with actin networks as described for dynamin
Tau itself is also involved in organizing actin networks
Given that many of these endocytic proteins are also implicated in synaptic vesicle endocytosis and focal adhesion formation at the synaptic cleft, they are assumed to be involved in synaptic dysfunctions observed in AD

INVOLVEMENT OF ENDOCYTIC PROTEINS WITH PROLINE-RICH DOMAIN (PRD) AND SRC-HOMOLOGY3 (SH3)-DOMAIN IN ENDOCYTIC ALTERATIONS IN AD
Dynamin-dependent endocytosis is regulated by the interplay of the interactions between PRD of dynamin and SH3 domaincontaining proteins
Some of the endocytic proteins discussed above possess SH2 or SH3 domains and/or PRD (Figure
These endocytic proteins form an interconnected protein network by direct or indirect proteinprotein interactions.
For example, BIN1 directly interacts with PICALM, SYNJ1, dynamin, RIN3 and tau
We hypothesize that dynamin-dependent endocytosis could be highly vulnerable and sensitive.
Firstly, cyclin-dependent kinase 5 (CDK5), a kinase activated in AD brains
Secondly, the expression level of each of these endocytic proteins has a profound effect on endosomal structures.
For example, depletion of SHIP2 accelerates the maturation of CCPs
Likewise, depletion of BIN1, SYNJ1, CD2AP, and SORL1 results in an enlargement of early endosomes in cultured cells
In view of the fact that most of the LOAD-related SNPs reside in noncoding regions of the genome, they are supposed to play a role in regulating gene expression.
Long-term up-or down-regulation of even one of these endocytic proteins encoded by LOAD-susceptibility genes might thus provoke endosomal abnormalities.
In other words, endocytic alterations might begin much earlier than the appearance of AD lesions in the individuals bearing risk alleles of these GWAS-hit genes.
The schematic illustration of the endolysosomal proteins.
Some of them possess SH2, SH3 domains, or PRD.
PRD, proline-rich domain; MTR, microtubule binding repeats; PH, pleckstrin-homology; SH2, Src homology 2; 5-Ptase, phosphoinositide 5-phosphatase domain; SAM, sterile alpha motif; NPxY, a conserved tyrosine phosphorylation motif (Asn-Pro-x-Tyr); ANTH, AP180 N-terminal homology (ANTH) domain; CLAP, clathrin-associated protein-binding; AD CLAP, A second sub-domain without clearly crucial motifs for clathrin binding.
CNS, central nervous system; BAR, BIN/Amphiphysin/Rvs; SH3, Src homology 3; SAC1, suppressor of actin 1; RH, RIN-homology; Vps, vacuolar protein sorting; RA, Ras-association (RA); CC, coiled coil; TM, transmembrane; PDE, phosphodiesterase; SH2 Binding, tyrosine phosphosite-enriched domain containing binding sites for partners with SH2 domains; FLSR, central serine rich region; FAT, focal adhesion targeting domain; EGF, epidermal growth factor; CR cluster, complement-type repeat domains; FNIII, fibronectin type III repeats.
*It has to be noted that tau, dynamin, SHIP2, SYNJ1, and PLD3 are not GWAS hits.
(C) Schematic summary of our hypothesis.
Genetic factors are linked to both APP processing (Aß production) and tau pathology via actin network, PI metabolism and endolysosomal pathway/autophagy, leading to neuronal dysfunctions.
PI metabolism is modulated by both Aß
Aß is linked to tau by accelerating brain tau-seeded pathology

INTERACTIONS BETWEEN TAU, ENDOCYTOSIS REGULATION, AND PHOSPHOINOSITIDES
Given that endocytic proteins such as SHIP1, SHIP2, and SYNJ1 are PI-5-phosphatases involved in PI metabolism
PIs act as signaling molecules in several biological functions, including membrane dynamics, cell adhesion, autophagy, and endocytosis.
The homeostasis of PIs, tightly regulated by PI kinases and phosphatases in healthy cells
While Aß modulates PI(4,5)P2 metabolism
PI(4,5)P2 directly interacts with tau
Indeed, PI(4,5)P2 is abnormally concentrated with lipid raft markers in NFTs and in granulovacuolar degeneration bodies in postmortem brain tissues of AD and other tauopathies
Furthermore, tau possesses a PRD composed of seven Pro-X-X-Pro (PXXP) motifs, in its central domain (Figure
Tau interacts with various SH3-containing proteins including phospholipase C (PLC) γ1
PLC hydrolyses PI(4,5)P2 to generate diacylglycerol (DAG) and inositol
Tau modulates cellular signaling by interacting with PLC γ1 thereby enhancing the cleavage of PI(4,5)P2
In vitro phosphorylation of tau by GSK3ß, a kinase abnormally activated in AD brains
This implies that interactions between tau and its SH3-containing partners including PLC γ1 are likely to be disrupted in AD brains.
Tau hyperphosphorylation may thus trigger dysregulation of PI metabolism and the upstream cascade of endocytosis
It is also speculated that some of the proteins possessing SH2 and SH3 domains and/or PRD may be influenced by the release of "free" SH3 domains of tau partners due to tau detachment.
On the other hand, the somatodendritic tau concentration is ∼8-fold higher in AD compared to age-matched controls
Tau is associated with some of these endocytic proteins such as BIN1
By direct interaction with tau, these endocytic proteins may (i) play roles in internalization of pathological tau during endocytosis by directly binding to tau, (ii) undergo a significant alteration in their subcellular localizations due to sequestration by tau.
Some endocytic proteins interacting with phosphorylated tau are significantly decreased from the soluble fraction of AD brain lysates as observed for PICALM
While PICALM and SYNJ1 play critical roles in endocytosis, they also modulate autophagy
It is presumed that tau sequestration of such endocytic proteins could also lead to defects in both endolysosomal and autophagy pathways, central network to clearance of cellular macromolecules including Aß and tau.

DISCUSSION
Many of the endocytic machinery proteins implicated in AD risk possess SH2, SH3 domains, and/or PRD and are involved in actin dynamics as well as in regulation of PIs.
Because the endocytic machinery needs fine-tuned regulation of PIs and endocytic protein-protein interactions, the endocytic pathway must be highly vulnerable.
Dysregulation of even one of these endocytic proteins could lead to significant endocytic abnormalities.
Hyperphosphorylation of tau may further accelerate endocytic dysregulation.
Genetic risk factors and tau pathology might well have profound impacts on synaptic functions, endolysosomal/autophagic pathways, and APP processing via dysfunction of endocytosis, actin network, and PI metabolism (Figure
Endolysosomal/autophagic abnormalities are also linked to both Aß and tau pathologies.
Aß and tau are also tightly linked: Aß inhibits proteasome pathway
Several genetic risk factors for LOAD may have pathological effects by inducing endocytic abnormalities leading to Aß production, tau pathology progression, synaptic failure, and deficits in membrane dynamics, all events observed in the progression of AD.



FIGURE 1 |
FIGURE 1 | (A) Schematic representation of the associations of Alzheimer key proteins in CCP formation and dynamin-dependent endocytosis.
Some of the recently identified AD susceptibility factors are involved in the early and late stages of dynamin-dependent endocytosis.
GWAS-hits are shown in pink.
SHIP1 is rather implicated in phagosome formation in macrophages and CASS4 in focal adhesion.
SHIP1 and CASS4 are not included in (A).
*SHIP2, SYNJ1, and PLD3 are endolysosomal proteins involved in AD pathogenesis but not categorized as GWAS hits and shown in red.
Dynamin is shown in orange.
(B)The schematic illustration of the endolysosomal proteins.
Some of them possess SH2, SH3 domains, or PRD.
PRD, proline-rich domain; MTR, microtubule binding repeats; PH, pleckstrin-homology; SH2, Src homology 2; 5-Ptase, phosphoinositide 5-phosphatase domain; SAM, sterile alpha motif; NPxY, a conserved tyrosine phosphorylation motif (Asn-Pro-x-Tyr); ANTH, AP180 N-terminal homology (ANTH) domain; CLAP, clathrin-associated protein-binding; AD CLAP, A second sub-domain without clearly crucial motifs for clathrin binding.
CNS, central nervous system; BAR, BIN/Amphiphysin/Rvs; SH3, Src homology 3; SAC1, suppressor of actin 1; RH, RIN-homology; Vps, vacuolar protein sorting; RA, Ras-association (RA); CC, coiled coil; TM, transmembrane; PDE, phosphodiesterase; SH2 Binding, tyrosine phosphosite-enriched domain containing binding sites for partners with SH2 domains; FLSR, central serine rich region; FAT, focal adhesion targeting domain; EGF, epidermal growth factor; CR cluster, complement-type repeat domains; FNIII, fibronectin type III repeats.
*It has to be noted that tau, dynamin, SHIP2, SYNJ1, and PLD3 are not GWAS hits.
(C) Schematic summary of our hypothesis.
Genetic factors are linked to both APP processing (Aß production) and tau pathology via actin network, PI metabolism and endolysosomal pathway/autophagy, leading to neuronal dysfunctions.
PI metabolism is modulated by both Aß
Aß is linked to tau by accelerating brain tau-seeded pathology