Dementia and CSF‐biomarkers for Alzheimer's disease predict mortality after acute hip fracture
Background: Mortality is high after an acute hip fracture (AHF) surgery.
Are cognitive impairment and/or altered levels of Alzheimer's Disease (AD)-biomarkers in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) predictors of mortality in AHF-patients, as retrospective studies indicate?
Methods: Prospective single-center study including 373 AHF-patients, operated in spinal anesthesia.
Cognitive status was evaluated by Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR); CSF was analyzed for AD-biomarker concentrations (total tau (T-tau), phosphorylated tau (P-tau), amyloid beta ratio (A42/A40).
CDR and biomarker levels were related to mortality up to one-year post-surgery, using univariate logistic regression analysis.
Results: Survival analyses showed that mortality was associated to the degree of dementia.
In the entire patient cohort 30-, 90-, and 365-day mortality rates were 7.2%, 15.5%, and 25.5%, respectively, but only 2.7%, 5.5%, and 12.6%, for cognitively intact vs. 16.3%, 31.7%, and 42.3% for demented patients (OR=2.2-2.8 [CI=1.6-4.9];
p=0.0001).
High CSF T-tau (OR=1.19
[CI=1.05-1.33];
p=0.004) and low A42/A40-ratio (OR=0.85
[CI=0.74-0.97];
p=0.017) were associated with increased 90-day mortality.
Analysis of 4 subgroups (Cognitive impairment +/-and Biomarkers +/-) showed significant associations of dementia and CSF biomarker concentrations to mortality after an AHF.
Even cognitively intact patients presenting with abnormal AD-biomarkers showed an increased 90-day mortality which, however, was statistically insignificant.
Conclusions: Cognitive impairment and altered CSF biomarker concentrations indicative of AD pathology can predict increased mortality in patients with an AHF, and so probably even before clinical dementia diagnosis by early biomarker analysis; a notion that may have substantial clinical implications by improving perioperative treatment and postoperative rehabilitation.

INTRODUCTION
An acute hip fracture (AHF), the second most common orthopedic fracture type in Scandinavia (and other regions), represents a major trauma, affecting elderly, often frail, patients,
Mortality is high, 7-11% at 30 days, 10-20% at 90 days, 25-40% at one year, and about 50% three years after surgery.
6]
The majority of these patients have an American Society of Anesthesiologists Physical Status (ASA-SP)
There is a considerable prevalence of cognitive impairment, dementia or acute delirium, often enhanced by the fracture pain.
Cognitive impairment increases per se the risk of falling,
Dementia seems to be associated with increased mortality after AHF-repair,
esently, we have well established cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) biomarkers for Alzheimer's disease (AD), the most common form of dementia.
Reflecting the core pathology of the disease, they include total tau (T-tau), a marker of neuronal and axonal degeneration, phosphorylated tau (Ptau), a marker of neurofibrillary tangle pathology,
CSF T-tau and P-tau, as well as the A42/A40 ratio, are used to verify underlying AD pathology in patients with cognitive symptoms.
1]
We know that abnormal reduction of CSF A42-concentration can be seen decades before clinical AD-onset,

Accepted Article

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Ethical Considerations
This study, conducted in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki and the guidelines on Good Clinical Practice, was registered in Clinical Trials (NCT02409082) and approved by the Regional Ethical Committee of Gothenburg, Sweden (Dnr.350-13).
Informed written consent was obtained from the participating patients, or their next-of-kin, if the patient was unable to give consent.

Patients
All patients admitted with an AHF to Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Mölndal, Sweden, from October 2013 to June 2015, were eligible for this study, if receiving spinal anesthesia and being operated -for laboratory accessibility -on weekdays (7 am to 6 pm) outside vacation periods.
Patients with peri-prothetic, pathological, or conservatively treated fractures were excluded.
Data on mortality were collected from the Swedish national patient registry.
We had no control group in this study, but compared our results with an age-and gender-matched cohort, based on statistic data from the Swedish population registry.

Assessments of cognitive impairment and somatic status
Before premedication and surgery, the patient or -for cognitively impaired patients -their next-ofkin, were interviewed regarding the patient's pre-fracture cognitive status, using the Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR),
The CDR, originally developed for AD,
At admission to the hospital, patients were assessed by the Abbreviated Mental Test (AMTS).
TS, mainly validated in the elderly,
By omitting psychometric components, it is easier to conduct in these patients, than the Mini Mental Test.
e somatic status at admittance was evaluated according to the ASA-PS-class

Accepted Article
This article is protected by copyright.
All rights reserved ASA-PS-class 10 is a five-category physical status classification system for assessing the fitness of patients before surgery, where ASA:1 indicates a completely healthy person and ASA:5 a moribund patient, not expected to survive 24 hours.
NHFS is a 10-points scale, scoring 0-4 points for "age" and 1 point each for: "male sex", "AMTS less than 7" (i.e.
dementia), "admission hemoglobin less than 100 g/l", "living in institution", "at least two comorbidities", and "malignancy".
Scores over 6 predict a significantly higher 30-day mortality.
rebrospinal fluid (CSF) collection and analyses CSF samples of 4-5 ml were obtained by lumbar puncture with a 24-G spinal needle in the L3-L4 or L4-L5 intervertebral space immediately before injection of the local anesthetic agent.
CSF was collected in polypropylene tubes and transported directly to our biochemical laboratory, close to the operating center.
After cell count, CSF was centrifuged at 1800 g.
The supernatant was aliquoted in polypropylene vials, immediately frozen and stored at -80°C until analysis in the Clinical Neurochemistry Laboratory at Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Mölndal, Sweden.
CSF T-tau and P-tau concentrations were measured using INNOTEST enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (Fujirebio, Ghent, Belgium).
Aβ40 and Aβ42 concentrations were measured using the MSD Abeta Triplex assay (MSD, Rockville, Maryland) that specifically measures A fragments ending at amino acid 38, 40, and 42.
The results were used to calculate the A42/A40-ratio, which by normalizing each individual's A production, performs better than A42 alone to detect A-pathology in the brain.
All CSF measurements were performed in one round of experiments using one batch of reagents, by board-certified laboratory technicians, who were blinded to clinical data.
Intra-assay coefficients of variation were below 10%.

Statistical analyses
Data analysis with SAS for Windows (version 9.4) was performed by statistical consultants (Statistiska Konsultgruppen, Gothenburg).
Descriptive statistics are shown as number of cases and percentages for categorical variables, or mean (± standard deviation) and median (min-max) for continuous variables.
The Spearman Correlation Coefficient was used for correlation analysis between CDR and biomarkers.
Biomarker cut-offs were based on an earlier study for CSF T-tau
(R Core Team, 2013.
R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing.
R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria.).
Values for the Aβ42/Aβ40-ratio > 0.064 were defined as normal, and

Accepted Article
This article is protected by copyright.
All rights reserved ≤ 0.064 as abnormal.
This unsupervised cut-off was established at the point that best separated the two groups defined in the bimodal histogram distribution.
The Kaplan-Meier curve was used to illustrate postoperative mortality in different patient groups.
To determine the effect on overall survival, both demographic and clinical variables were evaluated with Univariate Cox Proportional Hazards Regression Analysis.
The effect of survival at 30-, 90-, and 365-days was determined by logistic regression and presented as odds ratio (OR) and its 95% confidence interval (CI).
A two-tailed p-value of <0.05 was considered significant.

Accepted Article
This article is protected by copyright.
All rights reserved

RESULTS

Patients
Totally 440 patients were eligible for this investigation.
We excluded 67 patients, who were operated outside office hours (n=36), had missing CSF samples for technical (n=17) or medical (n=11) reasons, were re-operated on the other hip (n=2), or demanded a study withdrawal (n=1).
Finally, 373 patients were enrolled into the study (Figure
There was no difference in demographic or clinical characteristics between enrolled (n=373) and excluded (n=67) patients.
The average time between fracture diagnosis and surgery was 26 hours.
Table
High predictable risk for surgery (ASA:3-4) was found in 47% (n=175).
Further, 36% (n=135) had a NHFS score of at least 6, while 18% (n=68) scored 7 or more.
Most patients (49%) were cognitively intact (CDR:0), while 23% presented a mild cognitive impairment (CDR:0.5),
and 28% had a mild to severe dementia (CDR:1-3).

Mortality
The overall post-surgical mortality rate was 7% at 30 days, 16% at 90 days, and 25% at 365 days, respectively.
We noticed a 2.6 times higher mortality in our patient cohort vs. an age-and gendermatched Swedish control group (Table

Mortality and Clinical Dementia Rating
CDR-related mortality (Figure
and even more in patients with manifest dementia (CDR:1-3).
The 90-day mortality rate was 5.5% in the cognitively intact group (CDR:0) vs. 17% in patients with MCI (CDR:0.5),
and finally 32% in patients with manifest dementia (CDR:1-3).
Subgroup analysis (Table
2.75 (CI=1.9-3.9), and 2.33 (CI=1.7-3.0)
(p=0.0001 for all 3 groups).

Mortality and CSF biomarkers
When comparing CSF biomarker concentrations, we found a difference of mean and median values in T-tau and the A42/40 ratio, between patients alive and dead at 90-and 365-days post-surgery (Table
Univariate logistic regression analysis (Table
[CI=1.05-1.33];
p=0.004, and OR=0.85

Accepted Article
This article is protected by copyright.
All rights reserved [CI=0.74-0.97];
p=0.017, respectively).
Further, one year after surgery, this analysis showed a significant association between mortality rate and concentrations of T-tau (OR=1.14
[CI=1.03-1.27];
p=0.014).
There was no correspondence found between the mortality rate and CSF-concentrations of p-tau.
Finally, we could not show any significant association between CSF biomarker concentrations and 30-day mortality.

Mortality rate in subgroups
To exclude any impact of eventual head trauma on measured T-tau concentrations, we distributed patients into 4 subgroups (A-D), referring to the results in CDR and Aβ42/Aβ40-ratio:
Mortality at 30-and 90-days post-surgery was low (2-3%) in group A, but twice respectively three times higher in group B (Table
The 30-and 90-day mortality was 5 respectively 8 times higher in the groups showing various degrees of cognitive impairment (groups C, D), compared to those cognitively intact (group A).
Furthermore, the 365-day mortality was 3 times higher in patients with dementia.
Univariate logistic regression showed statistically significant Odds Ratios of 6.5, 11, and 4.5 for 30-, 90-, and 365-day-mortality for demented patients (groups C, D) related to cognitively intact patients (group A).
These differences were less prominent, but still statistically significant for 90and 365-day-mortality, when adjusted for age (Table

Accepted Article

DISCUSSION
Mortality is high after operation of acute hip fractures.
Retrospective studies indicate that dementia increases the risk to die in patients with AHF.
This prospective study investigated the relations between cognitive impairment, AD-biomarkers, and mortality in patients operated for AHF.
Specifically, we demonstrated significant associations between 1) cognitive impairment (i.e.
MCI or dementia classified by CDR) and mortality, as well as 2) concentrations of AD biomarkers in CSF (i.e.
A42/A40 and T-tau) and mortality, where decreased Aβ42/A40-ratio and enhanced T-tau CSF concentrations -corresponding to changes found in AD -positively corresponded to increased mortality.
Further, subgroup analysis revealed that patients with CDR>0 and positive ADbiomarkers had eight-fold higher mortality at 90 days, and three-fold higher mortality at one year, compared to cognitively intact patients.
All study patients received spinal anesthesia (with Bupivacaine and Fentanyl), as is routine for 85% of AHF-patients in our department.
There are no large prospective studies demonstrating any advantage of neuro-axial or general anesthesia on mortality
Overall mortality in our study corresponded to mortality rates observed by others after an AHF.
]
Dementia renders one out of ten points in the NHFS,
However, clinical observations and previous retrospective studies
One unique prospective study
Thus, to combine ASA-PSclass -focusing on somatic status -with other screening models, could more accurately predict post-operative mortality risk for AHF.
In accordance with this, our prospective study demonstrated a strong congruence between degree of cognitive impairment and mortality after an AHF.
We found that mortality in mentally intact patients was 2.7% at 30 days and 12.6% at one year, but for demented patients six times higher at

Accepted Article
This article is protected by copyright.
All rights reserved 30-and 90-days, and 3.5 times at one year.
The highest impact of cognitive impairment was seen during the first three months.
This observation confirms the results from other studies
We were surprised to find a 2-3 times enhanced mortality in the subgroup with MCI (CDR:0.5),
reflecting a level of cognitive impairment, which generally remains unnoticed in the social context.
This observation highlights even more the importance of assessing cognitive function in patients with AHF.
For the most common form of dementia, AD, analysing biomarkers could state more precisely, if a CDR:0 corresponds to a pre-AD condition or simply a mental decline by age.
However, altered concentrations of biomarkers can be seen in early stages of AD -and like A42 -even years before diagnosis.
This might explain the results noted in subgroup B-patients, where the trauma per se could have accelerated the development of cognitive symptoms, enhancing mortality.
We examined in our cohort, if these markers' concentrations were related to dementia by itself, thus being a surrogate marker of this phenomenon (i.e.
AD), and if these concentrations could serve as predictor for mortality after AHF surgery.
We found positive associations between decreased A42/A40 as well as increased T-tau concentrations and postoperative 90-and 365-day mortality.
These altered concentrations are similar to those found in AD.
This was not surprising, as age, comorbidities, and peri-operative care probably influence early mortality more than cognitive impairment per se.
Mortality increased with higher T-tau-and lower Aβ42/Aβ40-levels.
In this study, we could not discriminate for the individual patient, if the increase of T-tau, a biomarker for brain injury,
Therefore, we focused only on Aβ42/Aβ40-levels, when investigating 4 subgroups (table
Here, cognitively intact patients without altered AD-biomarkers (subgroup A) had considerably lower mortality than cognitively impaired patients with altered AD-biomarkers (D), confirming previous results from retrospective studies.
Our results in the intermediary groups (B and C) were especially interesting, where cognitively intact patients with abnormal AD-biomarkers (group B) had a threefold higher mortality at 90 days, than those with normal AD-biomarkers (A).
Although this difference was not significant, it might indicate an accelerated cognitive decline, like pre-AD, after the hip trauma.
That makes these patients more vulnerable in the rehabilitation phase and could explain the poor outcome.
We believe that this emphasizes the importance of analysing biomarkers, as they may reveal a difference in prognosis in these cognitively intact patients at admission.
We also found a high

Accepted Article
This article is protected by copyright.
All rights reserved mortality in group C (cognitive impairment and normal AD-biomarkers) at all investigated timepoints.
This group might represent other types of dementia, which are not captured by the tested AD-biomarkers, but indicates that cognitive impairment per se, independent of origin, enhances mortality.
Our results demonstrate that mortality is significantly higher in demented patients, and particularly in those with biochemical evidence for AD.
These results are still significant when adjusted for age.
Surprisingly, even in patients with preclinical AD, (confirmed by a normal CDR-score in combination with positive biomarkers), a higher absolute level of mortality is noted after AHF surgery.
The question is, how to recognize those patients in time, to improve their outcome.
To measure tau in blood samples is already possible and probably even the A42/A40-ratio in the near future.
Thus, geriatricians, anaesthesiologists, or orthopaedic surgeons may pre-operatively be able to evaluate the mortality-and morbidity-risk for AHF-patients with a combined evaluation of dementia coupled to biomarker concentrations.
A limitation of our study is that we investigated different degrees of dementia, but not the rate and extent of delirium, which is a common condition seen in elder patients with AHF.
Distinction between dementia and delirium can be difficult in the preoperative setting.
To omit this uncertainty in the present study, we contacted next-of-kin of all patients that were not mentally intact.
This allowed us to evaluate the patient's cognitive status of the period immediately prior to the hip trauma.
Thereby we captured all patients that had dementia pre-trauma and could probably exclude delirium as cause of high pre-operative CDR-scores.
But our results could be influenced by peri-operative delirium, which we did not examine.
Another limitation is the absence of a control group in our study, and we only refer to the standardized mortality ratio in Sweden to assume the mortality risk for all patients of the same age-and gender.
We collected registered dates of death, but not their official causes, which most often are multifactorial and related to advanced age and comorbidities.
Further, we did not investigate the impact of different surgical therapies (and types of osteosynthesis) for AHF on mortality, which may have effected mortality during the first 30 days.
Future prospective studies will reveal whether the choice of surgical procedure may have a special impact on demented patients.

CONCLUSION
We corroborate that individuals with cognitive impairment have a higher risk of mortality following an acute hip fracture.
We extend this result by showing that there is an association of biomarker

Accepted Article
evidence of AD pathology and mortality, and that this association might be present also in individuals in pre-dementia stages of the disease.
The CSF levels of the biomarkers T-tau and the ratio A42/A40 may be used to enhance the accuracy of risk scoring models for predicting mortality in patients with AHF.
22.9 (12.6 -34.9)

Accepted Article

Accepted Article
This article is protected by copyright.
All rights reserved

Accepted Article
This article is protected by copyright.
All rights reserved The table shows the mortality rates at 30, 90, and 365 days post-surgery for patients with AHF presenting different degrees of cognitive impairment at admission to the hospital: CDR 0, CDR 0.5, and CDR 0-3.
OR is the ratio for the odds for an increase of the predictor of a defined unit, referring to group I (CDR 0).
p-values and OR are based on original values and not on stratified groups.
All tests are performed with univariate logistic regression, and adjusted for age using logistic regression.
Variables presented are: Biochemical neuromarkers Aβ42, T-tau, P-tau and the ratio Aβ42/Aβ40 x 10.
The ratio Aβ42/Aβ40 x 10 is shown in 4 quartiles and in a modified analysis with normal vs. pathological values (cut-off: 0.64).

Accepted Article
This article is protected by copyright.
All rights reserved OR is the ratio for the odds for an increase of the predictor of a defined unit.
p-values and OR are based on original values and not on stratified groups.
All tests are performed with univariate logistic regression.
CI = Confidence Interval.
*significant p-value.

Accepted Article
This article is protected by copyright.
All rights reserved  OR is the ratio for the odds for an increase of the predictor of a defined unit, with 95% CI = 95% Confidence interval.
*significant p-value.

Accepted Article



Figure 1 .Figure 2 .
Figure 1.
Flowchart: Enrollment of patients in the study Accepted Article


Definition of subgroups.
Cognitive normal: CDR=0, abnormal: CDR≥0.5 Biomarker normal: Aβ42/Aβ40-ratio > 0.064; Biomarker abnormal: Aβ42/Aβ40-ratio ≤ 0.064 Presented in (a): number of patients (n) and % of lethal events in each group.
Presented in (b and c): OR and p-values.



Table 1 .
Baseline table



Table 2 .
Standardized mortality ratio (SMR)



Table 3 .
CDR and mortality



Table 4 .
Descriptive table of selected variables between patients alive/dead at 30 days, 3 months and 1 year



Table 5 .
Neuromarkers and mortality at 30, 90 and 365 days



Table 6 .
Mortality rates for subgroups a) Observed mortality for subgroupsThe tables show the mortality rate at 30, 90 and 365 days vs. subgroups.