Cognitive Outcomes of Long-term Benzodiazepine and Related Drug (BDZR) Use in People Living With Mild to Moderate Alzheimer's Disease: Results From NILVAD
Objective: Benzodiazepines and related drugs (BDZRs) have been associated with an increased risk of Alzheimer's disease (AD) in later life.
Despite this, it remains unclear whether ongoing BDZR use may further accelerate cognitive decline in those diagnosed with mild to moderate AD.
Design: This study was embedded within NILVAD, a randomized controlled trial of nilvadipine in mild to moderate AD.
Cognition was measured at baseline and 18 months using the Alzheimer Disease Assessment Scale, Cognitive Subsection (ADAS-Cog).
We assessed predictors of long-term BDZR use and analyzed the effect of ongoing BDZR use on ADAS-Cog scores at 18 months.
Additionally, the impact of BDZR use on adverse events, incident delirium, and falls over 18-month follow-up was assessed adjusting for relevant covariates.
Setting and Participants: 448 participants with mild to moderate AD recruited from 23 academic centers in 9 European countries.
Results: Overall, 14% (62/448) were prescribed an ongoing BDZR for the study duration.
Increasing total number of (non-BDZR) medications was associated with a greater likelihood of BDZR prescription (odds ratio 1.16, 95% confidence interval 1.05-1.29).
At 18 months, BDZR use was not associated with greater cognitive decline on the ADAS-Cog controlling for baseline ADAS-Cog scores, age, gender, study arm, and other clinical covariates (b ¼ 1.62, À1.34 to 4.56).
However, ongoing BDZR use was associated with a greater likelihood of adverse events [incidence rate ratio (IRR) 1.19, 1.05-1.34],
incident delirium (IRR 2.31, 1.45-3.68),
and falls (IRR 1.66, 1.02-2.65)
over 18 months that persisted after robust adjustment for covariates.
Conclusions and Implications: This study found no effect of ongoing BDZR use on ADAS-Cog scores in those with mild to moderate AD over 18 months.
However, ongoing use of these medications was associated with an increased risk of adverse events, delirium, and falls.
Thus, BDZR use should be avoided where possible and deprescribing interventions should be encouraged in older adults with AD.
Ó 2019 AMDA e The Society for Post-Acute and Long-Term Care Medicine.
Benzodiazepines and related drugs (BDZRs) remain one of the most frequently prescribed classes of psychotropic medication in older adults and are commonly used as anxiolytics, sedatives, hypnotics, and anticonvulsants. 1 Long-term use of BDZRs has been found to be associated with an increased risk of dementia and Alzheimer's disease (AD) in several large case-control studies and subsequent meta-analyses.
2e10  The American Geriatrics Society has recommended to avoid all use of BDZRs in older adults, and in particular in those with dementia or cognitive impairment. 11
Despite this, a significant minority of patients with dementia remain on BDZRs.
12e15 However, it is not clear what specific effects ongoing BDZR use has
on cognitive function in AD, where those affected may be more vulnerable to the adverse cognitive consequences of these drugs.
Few studies have specifically examined cognitive performance (as opposed to AD diagnoses) in adults exposed to BDZRs.
In a German study for instance, there was no link between BDZR use and cognitive performance.
A further study of more than 5000 participants concluded that although BDZR use was associated with poorer baseline cognition, and overall cognitive decline was similar in those using BDZRs and non-users.
Similarly, in the "Three City Study," chronic use was associated with poorer cognitive function, but users did not show an accelerated rate of decline at 7 years.
Thus, although lifetime BDZR use appears to be a risk factor for developing AD, the effect of BDZRs on cognitive trajectories is less clear and has not been explored in AD.
BDZRs have many adverse effects beyond those on the central nervous system (CNS).
BDZR use has been linked to an increased risk of falls, fractures, and syncope.
BDZRs are associated with falls owing to their effects on reaction time, effects on balance and gait as well as impaired vision,
Further, BDZRs have also been associated with an increased risk of mortality in older patients (although causality remains difficult to prove).
lthough the long-term cognitive effects of BDZRs are unclear from the literature, a significant body of work has demonstrated that BDZR use is associated with an increased risk of delirium, an acute disturbance in cognitive function.
This is particularly true for vulnerable older patients on admission to acute hospital settings.
Although this has been well assessed in acute hospital environments in unselected older patients, the specific association between BDZRs and delirium in those with a diagnosis of dementia, who may represent a particularly vulnerable group, is less well explored.
The aim of the current study was to evaluate whether ongoing BDZR use was associated with accelerated cognitive decline in mild to moderate AD.
To our knowledge, the impact of ongoing long-term BDZR use on cognition in mild to moderate AD has never been assessed.
Additionally, we sought to assess if the potential association between BDZRs and accelerated cognitive decline was dependent on APOE ε4 carrier status, one of the most significant AD risk factors.
Further, we aim to explore whether previous associations observed between ongoing BDZR use and both delirium and falls are seen in those with mild to moderate AD, who may represent a particularly vulnerable group.

Methods
This is a longitudinal analysis of data from NILVAD, a Europe-wide, multicenter randomized clinical trial of the antihypertensive nilvadipine in mild to moderate AD.
We examined the relationship between ongoing BDZR use and cognitive function at 18-month follow-up in addition to the effect of BDZR use on adverse events, delirium, and falls at 18 months.

Study Design
Participants with mild to moderate AD were recruited from 23 academic centers (universities) across 9 European Countries (France, Greece, the Netherlands, Hungary, Italy, Sweden, the United Kingdom, Ireland, and Germany).
The NILVAD trial (Clincaltrials.gov
NCT02017340; EudraCT number 2012-002764-27) assigned patients to either nilvadipine 8 mg once daily or placebo for a total duration of 18 months.
The full trial protocol in addition to the main trial results has been published elsewhere.
The full study protocol was granted ethical approval from the appropriate national competent authorities, independent ethics committees, and institutional review boards for all study sites.

Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria
Detailed inclusion and exclusion criteria were published as part of the main study protocol.
Briefly, inclusion criteria were men and women aged 50 years or older with a diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease [as per the National Institute of Neurological and Communicative Disorders and Stroke/Alzheimer's Disease Criteria (NINCDS-ADRDA)].
Included patients had a standardized Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) score between 12 and 26.
Patients were excluded if they had comorbid dementia due to other neurologic disorders, history of significant head trauma, known structural brain abnormalities, or any other condition known to interfere with cognitive function.
Patients taking a beta-blocker/calcium channel blocker or with significant cardiovascular disease were excluded (because of the nature of the study drug).
Similarly, patients currently (or within the past year) meeting criteria for drug or alcohol abuse or dependence were excluded.
Finally, patients with significant renal impairment (estimated glomerular filtration rate <30 mL/min) or severe hepatic impairment (liver cirrhosis) were also excluded.

Medication and Benzodiazepine Use
Medication lists were obtained from patients at baseline and reviewed at each study visit to assess whether patients were continuing to use the same medications.
Anatomical Therapeutic Classification (ATC) codes were assigned to each medication.
BDZRs were identified by study investigators using the classes N03AE, N05BA, N05CD, and N05CF, which include benzodiazepine drugs and related sedative hypnotics (or "z-drugs").
For the current study, ongoing BDZR use was defined as the use of 1 of these agents for the entire 18-month duration of the study.
We excluded short-term/ intermittent BDZR use from the current analysis.
Finally, to calculate the total number of non-BDZR medications, BDZR medications were removed from each participant's medication list, and the total number of medications excluding BDZRs calculated.

Cognitive Assessment
Cognitive assessment was performed at baseline and follow-up using the Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale, Cognitive Subsection (ADAS-Cog).
Change in the ADAS-Cog score over 18 months was the primary cognitive outcome for the current analysis.

Adverse Events, Falls, and Delirium
Given previous evidence for the adverse effects of BDZR use in older patients, we assessed the impact of BDZR use on adverse events, falls, and delirium.
The total number of adverse events was calculated for each participant using the main trial adverse events log.
This log was updated at each trial visit where new adverse events were reported using the adverse events reporting interview.
Delirium was identified retrospectively by interview at each follow up study visit in relation to all reported adverse events between study visits.
This was done using an adapted version of the Family Confusion Assessment Method.
Based on this assessment, a trained study assessor concluded whether it was likely or not that the patient had delirium at the time of the adverse event.
Incident delirium events were calculated individually for each patient.
Adverse event logs were reviewed in duplicate by 2 gerontologytrained research physicians (A.H.D. and C.M.) in order to identify incident falls over the study period.
The number of fall-related events was again summed for each participant to examine the relationship between ongoing BDZR use and incident falls.
Records of serious adverse events were also extracted and the relationship between BDZR use and serious adverse events was analyzed based on standard definitions previously detailed.

Other Measures
Baseline demographic and medical history variables were obtained from each patient at initial assessment and included a full medical history, ongoing medical comorbidities, and ongoing medications, as above.
Briefly, patients and caregivers were asked for a list of current medical comorbidities, which were cross-checked with medical records.
Comorbidities were then coded as per the International Classification of Diseases (ICD) coding.
The total number of medical comorbidities was then calculated for each patient.
Additionally, variables known to impact on cognition were obtained, such as years since AD diagnosis ("diagnosis duration"), in addition to total years of formal education.
Further, AD severity was assessed using the Clinical Dementia Ratingesum of boxes (CDR-sb) scale.
This was considered separate from the ADAS-Cog and was a gated co-primary endpoint in the initial trial.
We used CDR-sb score as an indicator of overall dementia severity in the current study.

Statistical Analysis
All analysis for the current study was carried out using Stata, version 15.0 (StataCorp, College Station, TX).
Statistical significance was considered as P < .05.
We reported descriptive statistics as means and standard deviations or as medians with interquartile ranges.
We calculated the overall prevalence of BDZR use based on those prescribed a BDZR for the entire 18-month duration of the study as detailed above.
For univariate analysis of between-group differences comparing those with ongoing BDZR use to nonusers, we used t tests, Wilcoxon rank-sum, and chi-square tests as appropriate.
A chi-square statistic was used to assess between-country differences.
In order to analyze the predictors of ongoing BDZR use, we used binary logistic regression and presented results as adjusted odds ratios (ORs) with 95% confidence intervals (CIs) and P values.
We analyzed the effect of ongoing BDZR use on ADAS-Cog score at 18 months using mixed effects linear regression models with country included as a random effect.
In the first instance, we tested this association alone with BDZR use as the independent variable and ADAS-Cog score difference at 18 months as the dependent variable (model 1).
This was followed by minimal adjustment for age, baseline ADAS-Cog score, gender, and study group (nilvadipine vs placebo, to control for potential effects of study drug) (model 2).
Following this, we adjusted for other AD (diagnosis duration, years of education) and general health covariates (total comorbidities and total number of medications) based on known impact on cognitive function (model 3).
Analysis was repeated separately in those with mild and moderate AD (based on MMSE score classification) to assess if the effect of BDZR use on cognitive function varied with AD severity.
Results of linear models were reported as coefficients with 95% CIs and the associated P value.
In order to analyze any APOE alleleedependent effect of ongoing BDZR use on cognition, we performed a subgroup analysis in those with APOE genotype data available as per the main study protocol.
APOE ε4 carrier status was defined as carrying 1 or more APOE ε4 allele.
We reran models 1 to 3 above and created an interaction term between APOE ε4 carrier status and ongoing benzodiazepine use.
The interaction was tested as the association between the APOE ε4 carrier status Â ongoing BDZR use interaction term as the independent variable and the change in ADAS-Cog score at 18 months as the dependent variable.
In order to assess the relationship between BDZR use and adverse events, serious adverse events, falls, and delirium, we used multivariate Poisson regression.
We first tested associations unadjusted (model 1).
Following this, we adjusted for age, gender, study group, duration of AD, baseline cognition (ADAS-Cog score), and AD severity (CDR-sb score) (model 2).
Finally, we adjusted for total number of medications (excluding BDZRs) and total number of medical comorbidities (model 3).
Incidence rate ratios were calculated and 95% CIs reported.
In each instance where Poisson regression was used, we carried out a negative binomial regression to compare model fit and assess for overdispersion.

Results

Study Participants
Of 448 participants, just under two-thirds (62.28%) were female and mean age was 72.46 years [standard deviation (SD) 8.2].
Median number of years since AD diagnosis was 1.09 years [interquartile range (IQR) 0.47-2.26]
and the median years since AD symptom onset was 3.7 years (IQR 2.45-5.42).
In terms of cognitive profile, the median MMSE score of included patients at initial assessment was 21 (IQR 18-24) and the mean baseline ADAS-Cog score was 34.08 (SD 10.53).
Based on initial MMSE assessment (where MMSE score 10-20 ¼ moderate and >20 ¼ mild), the majority of patients had mild AD (63.53%, n ¼ 284), with the remainder having moderate AD.
With regard to dementia severity, the median CDR-sb score was 4.5 (IQR 3-6.5).
The overall median number of medications per patient was 5 (IQR 3-7) and the median number of medical comorbidities was 4 (IQR 2-5).
Of the 448 who completed the study, 413 (92.19%) had a full ADAS-Cog assessment at 18 months.

Prevalence and Predictors of BDZR Use
Of the 448 participants, 62 (13.84%) were prescribed an ongoing BDZR.
Characteristics of patients prescribed an ongoing BDZR vs those not prescribed one are detailed in Table
Notably, the only significant difference Of those prescribed a BDZR, the most common drugs prescribed were as follows: alprazolam (n ¼ 13; 20.97%), oxazepam (n ¼ 10; 16.13%), zolpidem (n ¼ 9; 14.52%), lorazepam (n ¼ 8; 12.9%), and bromazepam (n ¼ 5; 8.06%).
No participant was prescribed multiple ongoing BDZRs.
These was a significant difference in ongoing BDZR use by country (c 2 ¼ 27.75, P < .001).
Ongoing BDZR use was highest in France (29.63%, 16/54), Ireland (15.69%, 16/102), the Netherlands (14.45%, 11/76), and Italy (14.29%, 7/49), whereas prevalence was lowest in the United Kingdom (2.63%, 2/55), Greece (6.25%, 5/80), and Sweden (6.25%, 1/16).
No patient was prescribed an ongoing BDZR in Germany (0%, 0/6), whereas 4 of the 10 patients from Hungary (40%) were prescribed an ongoing BDZR.

Effect of Ongoing BDZR Use on Cognitive Outcomes at 18 Months
Overall, 352 (78.57%) of patients had ADAS-Cog assessment completed at 18 months in addition to full clinical data available.
Overall, the mean change in ADAS-Cog score at 18 months for the whole cohort was þ9.07 (SD 9.23), indicating a greater dementia severity.
The mean ADAS-Cog score at baseline was 32.93 (SD 9.75), and the mean ADAS-Cog score at 18 months was 41.91 (SD 14.56).
Of those with ADAS-Cog completed at 18 months, 51 (13.28%) were prescribed a BDZR for the entire 18-month duration of the study.
There was no relationship between ongoing BDZR use and the difference in ADAS-Cog scores at 18 months (b ¼ 0.93, À2.05 to 3.92, P ¼ .54)
(model 1).
Similarly, there was no association under either adjusted model (b ¼ 1.84, À1.04 to 4.71, P ¼ .21,
for model 2; b ¼ 1.61, À1.39 to 4.56, P ¼ .28,
for model 3) (Table
Analysis repeated separately on those with mild vs moderate AD yielded no significant results.

Effect of BDZR Use-APOE ε4 Carrier Status Interaction on ADAS-Cog Score at 18 Months
Of the 352 patients with full follow-up data and ADAS-Cog assessment at 18 months, 275 had APOE genotype available.
Unadjusted, there was no association between APOE ε4 carrier status and BDZR use on cognitive outcomes at 18 months measured using the ADAS-Cog (b ¼ 1.24, À6.13 to 8.61, P ¼ .741).
Further, under both model 1 (b ¼ 0.51, À6.64 to 7.66, P ¼ .888)
and model 2 (b ¼ 0.51, À6.64 to 7.66, P ¼ .888),
there was no interaction between APOE ε4 carrier status and ongoing BDZR use on cognition at 18 months.

Effect of Ongoing BDZR Use on Adverse Events, Delirium, and Falls
Of participants enrolled in the study (n ¼ 448), 62 (13.84%) used a BDZR for the study duration.
The median number of adverse events in those with ongoing BDZR use was 5 (IQR 2-8), whereas in non-BDZR users the median was 3 (IQR 1-6).
The unadjusted IRR for ongoing BDZR use on adverse events was 1.26 (95% CI 1.12-1.42,
P < .001)
(model 1).
This association persisted after controlling under both models (IRR 1.26, 95% CI 1.12-1.42,
P < .001,
for model 2; IRR 1.19, 95% CI 1.05-1.34,
P ¼ .006,
for model 3) (see Table
Overall, 64 patients experienced a serious adverse event (14.29%).
There was no association between ongoing BDZR use and serious adverse events in either the unadjusted (IRR ¼ 1.14, 0.74-1.74,
P ¼ .56)
(model 1) or adjusted models (IRR 1.24, 0.81-1.91,
P ¼ .338,
for model 2; IRR 1.13, 0.73-1.75,
P ¼ .598,
for model 3) (see Table
Overall, 51 of the study participants (11.38%) experienced incident delirium identified retrospectively by caregiver interview.
Two-fifths of these (41.2%; 21/51) experienced more than 1 episode of delirium.
Ongoing BDZR use was significantly associated with incident delirium in the unadjusted model (IRR 2.44, 95% CI 1.56-3.81,
P < .001)
(model 1), which persisted under both adjusted models (IRR 2.45, 95% CI 1.55-3.89,
P < .001,
for model 2; IRR 2.31, 95% CI 1.45-3.68,
P < .001,
for model 3) (see Table
In total, 15.2% (68/448) of the participants reported a fall over the study period.
A little less than one-third (32.25%, 22/68) reported more than 1 fall.
Ongoing BDZR use was associated with incident falls using unadjusted Poisson regression (IRR 1.73, 1.08-2.78,
P ¼ .022)
(model 1).
This finding persisted on both minimal (IRR 1.66, 1.03-2.71,
P ¼ .037)
(model 2) and robust adjustment for covariates (IRR 1.66, 1.02-2.65,
P ¼ .041)
(model 3) (see Table
Increasing number of overall medications was the only significant predictor of benzodiazepine prescription.
*P < .05.

Discussion
This is the first study to our knowledge to assess the cognitive consequences of ongoing BDZR use in patients with mild to moderate AD.
We found no association between ongoing BDZR use and cognitive scores (ADAS-Cog) at 18 months.
However, ongoing use of BDZR medication was associated with adverse events, incident delirium, and falls.
Thus, consistent with previous literature, these results support avoidance of BDZR drugs (where possible) in older adults with AD.
The prevalence of ongoing BDZR use in the current study is noteworthy, and largely consistent with previous literature.
Although issues around dependence may make BDZR discontinuation difficult, guidelines for titrated reductions exist,
BDZR discontinuation has been associated with shorter lengths of hospitalization in older patients who are frail in addition to a decrease in dementia risk posed by BDZR medications.
A recent review advocates for a stepwise approach to discontinuation in cognitively intact individuals, with a lower threshold for discontinuation in those with dementia.
n the current study, we found no effect of ongoing BDZR use for 18 months on cognitive outcomes in those with mild to moderate dementia.
Although there is significant evidence that lifetime BDZR exposure may be a risk factor for AD in later life, no other study to date has examined the cognitive consequences of continuing these medications in those once a diagnosis of AD has been made.
Interestingly, our results are consistent with several well-conducted previous studies that have failed to demonstrate an effect on the rate of cognitive decline, even though BDZRs have been associated with poorer cognitive scores.
Strikingly, ongoing BDZR use was associated with overall adverse events, delirium, and falls in the current study.
These findings are in keeping with previous studies but are nonetheless highly clinically significant.
Our findings are consistent with recommendations such as those from the American Geriatrics Society that BDZR use should be continue to be avoided in older adults and particularly in those with AD.
An interesting observation from the current study is the significant variance between country BDZR prescribing, varying from, for instance, <3% in the United Kingdom to nearly one-third in France.
The reasons for this observation could be numerous.
One is differences in national guidelines and practice.
However, well-accepted criteria for potentially inappropriate medication use in older patients all discourage the long-term use of BDZR medications in older adults.
This study has several noteworthy strengths.
First, the high level of complete follow-up and the high proportion of patients with full cognitive assessment is a significant strength.
In particular, the detailed information available on BDZR use over the 18-month study period in addition to the detailed cognitive assessment that was available enabled us to specifically examine the effects of ongoing BDZR use on cognitive scores at 18 months.
Further, the detailed information available on adverse events and delirium obtained from informant interview (using the Family Confusion Assessment Method) enabled us to tease out the deleterious health consequences of ongoing BDZR use in this vulnerable population.
There are some limitations to the current study.
Although the study was conducted over 18 months, we cannot rule out that a longer duration of follow-up may yield different results.
Delirium occurrence was retrospectively reported by carers rather than directly observed, and given the subtleties of hypoactive presentations of delirium, this may have resulted in an underidentification of delirium by relatives and carers.
Despite this, our research question was to assess the impact of ongoing BDZR use on cognition at 18 months, which was quantifiable because of the high fidelity of the available information.
An important limitation of the current study is that a little more than one-fifth of patients did not have an ADAS-Cog assessment completed at 18 months, which may introduce a source of bias.
However, this is a common limitation of all longitudinal research studies and clinical trials.
Similarly, it is important to highlight that participants included in the current study represent those who met the inclusion criteria, and our findings may have limited applicability to more varied clinical populations.
However, in assessing those with mild to moderate AD, we aimed to assess a particularly vulnerable group and our study highlights the adverse effects of ongoing BDZR use in this population.

Conclusion and Implications
The current study found that ongoing BDZR use in those with mild to moderate AD was not associated with accelerated cognitive decline.
However, use was significantly associated with adverse events, incident delirium, and falls.
Our results add to the mounting evidence of the adverse consequences of ongoing BDZR use in this population and support previous guidelines aimed at discontinuation in older adults, particularly in those with AD.



Table 1
Baseline Characteristics of Those With Ongoing BDZR Use



Table 2 .



Table 2
Multivariate Analysis of Ongoing BDZR Use



Table 3
Analysis of the Association Between Ongoing BDZR Drug Use and ADAS-Cog Scores at 18 Months



Table 4
Analysis of the Association Between Ongoing BDZR Use and Adverse Events, Serious Adverse Events, Delirium, and Falls Over 18 Months