β-Amyloid Plaque Reduction in the Hippocampus After Focused Ultrasound-Induced Blood–Brain Barrier Opening in Alzheimer’s Disease
The blood-brain barrier (BBB) limits therapeutic delivery in Alzheimer's disease (AD) and other neurological disorders.
Animal models have demonstrated safe BBB opening and reduction in β-amyloid plaque with focused ultrasound (FUS).
We recently demonstrated the feasibility, safety, and reversibility of FUS-induced BBB opening in the hippocampus and entorhinal cortex in six participants with early AD.
We now report the effect of BBB opening with FUS treatment on β-amyloid plaque.
Six participants underwent 18 F-Florbetaben PET scan at baseline and 1 week after the completion of the third FUS treatment (60 days interval).
PET analysis comparing the hippocampus and entorhinal cortex in the treated and untreated hemispheres revealed a decrease in the ratio of 18 F-Florbetaben ligand binding.
The standard uptake value ratios (SUVr) reduction ranged from 2.7% to 10% with an average of 5.05% (±2.76) suggesting a decrease in β-amyloid plaque.

INTRODUCTION
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the most common form of dementia with progressive memory and cognitive decline.
The absence of any effective treatment for AD has led to experimental studies of immunotherapy targeting the amyloid-beta plaque and other novel therapeutics
A significant limitation in these treatments is the presence of the blood-brain barrier  (BBB).
Previously, it was reported that low-intensity MR-guided focused ultrasound (FUS) can open the BBB in the frontal lobe in patients with Alzheimer's disease
Recently, we demonstrated that FUS can safely and reversibly open a large portion (average 29%) of the hippocampus and entorhinal cortex (EC) BBB in patients with early AD
Animal studies have shown that FUS BBB opening reduced βamyloid plaque and improved memory
The impact of BBB opening on β-amyloid plaque remains unclear in humans.
In this study, we report the effect of FUS treatment in the hippocampus and EC on β-amyloid plaque in six participants.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Study Design
This is an open-label, prospective phase II clinical trial (NCT03671889) (Website) explicitly designed to target the memory structures of the hippocampus and EC in humans with early AD.
The overall objective of the study was to evaluate the safety, feasibility, efficacy, and effect on β-amyloid plaque from repeated BBB opening of the hippocampus and EC in AD.
The trial was sponsored by INSIGHTEC (Haifa, Israel).
The protocol was approved by the institutional review boards.
In this study, we use 18 F-Florbetaben as the PET β-amyloid imaging agent
Asymmetry is presented at baseline (a) and post-treatment (b).
Changes of asymmetry(c) are presented as percentage change between the baseline and post-treatment ratios of uptake value.
an objective measure of the FUS treatment on the β-amyloid plaque burden.
Each participant received three FUS-induced BBB opening sessions 2 weeks apart and underwent 18 F-Florbetaben PET-CT imaging at baseline and 1 week after the third session (approximately 60 days from baseline) (Figure
PET analysis was performed after alignment of PET/CT and MRI using an Automatic Mutual Information-based Registration
Pre-treatment MRI was used to segment the hippocampi and EC using a non-linear atlas-based algorithm
The standard uptake value (SUV) is a mathematically derived ratio of tissue radioactivity concentration at a point in time and the injected dose of radioactivity per kilogram of the participant's body weight and is used to assess the activity in PET imaging.
The ratio of the SUV from two different regions, a target and reference region, within the same PET image is commonly abbreviated as SUVr.
While other references have been studied
In addition, since the treatment was unilateral, we evaluated the ratios between the SUVr of the treated (SUVr(T)) and the untreated (SUVr(NT)) hippocampus/EC of each participant.
Given that SUVr(T) (SUV(T)/SUV(Cerebellum)) and SUVr(NT) (SUV(NT)/SUV(Cerebellum)), the ratios are computed as ratio (SUV(T)/SUV(CR))/(SUV(NT)/SUV(CR)) (SUV(T)/SUV(NT)), which is equivalent to computing the SUVr with the untreated side as the reference instead of the cerebellum.
To assess the impact of FUS treatment on βamyloid plaque upon the target region of a focal unilateral intervention, we evaluated the treated/untreated SUVr ratios, assessing differences among the two sides at baseline and after treatment.

RESULTS
Six participants (55-73 years of age, five females, one male) completed the trial.
For reference, in all 18 treatment sessions (three per participant), parenchymal contrast enhancement was demonstrated at each target with an average opening of 95% of the FUS target volume corresponding to 29% of the overall hippocampus volume and resolved in 24 h indicating opening and closure of BBB (Figure
Conventional cerebellar-based PET analysis on the treated hippocampus/EC shows after treatment a change from baseline of -12.44%, -5.78%, -1.83%, -1.70%, 0.11%, and -17.15%, respectively, for participants 1 to 6.
For reference, the change from baseline on the untreated hippocampus/EC is -9.36%, 0.49%.
0.94%, 3.17%, 3.34%, and -7.88% (Table
The PET analysis using the contra-lateral side as a reference revealed decreases in the SUV ratio of treated/untreated in all participants.
Post-treatment changes in the SUVr for participants one through six were -3.4%, -6.2%, -2.7%, -3.3%, -4.7%, and -10%, respectively (Table
Formal cognitive assessments did not reveal any clinically meaningful changes at the time of the PET imaging.

DISCUSSION
There is a crucial need for new treatment strategies for Alzheimer's disease as basic research and clinical trials exploring effective and novel treatment options have failed despite extensive efforts.
The BBB is an inherent challenge for systemic delivery of medication, immunotherapy, genetic treatment, and other therapeutics to the brain.
FUS disruption of the BBB alone in animal models has resulted in a reduction in β-amyloid plaque burden
The improvements and clearance of the plaque by FUS may result from structural opening of the BBB facilitating clearance, modulation of the immune system, or potentially enhanced lymphatic clearance.
This report presents the first human results of the effects of opening the BBB on the reduction of β-amyloid plaque in the hippocampus and EC.
In our PET analysis, the focal and unilateral nature of the treatment provided the opportunity to standardize the PET uptake value ratios using the untreated contralateral hippocampus as the control.
Reduced β-amyloid deposition was evident post-procedure in all six participants on the treated side.
A common approach for PET analysis is to standardize uptake value ratios (SUVr) using the cerebellar cortex as a reference region since this is often not subject to the same processes that affect supratentorial gray matter, particularly when global interventions may influence much of the brain.
Our approach for PET analysis is a validated approach and commonly used in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy seizure analysis (Neuroimaging Subcommision of the International League Against Epilepsy, 2000).
While it is possible that a change in the untreated hemisphere could confound this data, it is unlikely that any substantial natural progression of the disease would occur over the 60-day study period.
In addition, any natural variation in ligand binding would be unlikely to occur in the same direction in all six participants treated on different sides and at two different institutions.
It is possible that the same result could be obtained with stabilization of β-amyloid binding on the FUS treated side and an increase of β-amyloid binding on the untreated side.
While unlikely, this would also be of potential therapeutic value but would represent a mechanism of stabilization rather than improvement.
In summary, these preliminary results are encouraging and suggest that FUS BBB opening is not only feasible and safe but may induce reduction in β-amyloid plaque burden.
These findings are consistent with the animal studies.
If reproducible and sustainable in humans along with stabilization or improvement of the disease, FUS may hold promise for a new therapeutic option for AD in the future.



FIGURE 1 |
FIGURE 1 | One of the targets for one of the participants as a green square in the left hippocampus, overlaid on the baseline sagittal T1-weighted MRI.



FIGURE 2 |
FIGURE 2 | Timeline of the experiments.
The pair of PET and MRI images is acquired at baseline and 7 days after the third and last sonication treatment.
Cognitive state of the patient is assessed at baseline, 7, 30, and 90 days after the last sonication.
Each patient undergoes three sonication treatments 2 weeks apart.


Columns indicates, respectively, the SUVr for the treated and the untreated hippocampus/EC for each participants at baseline (a and d) and post-treatment (b and e).
The percentage change from baseline (c and f).



FIGURE 3 |
FIGURE 3 | Post-contrast axial T1-weighted images.
(A) Baseline; (B) Immediate post-FUS treatment demonstrating contrast enhancement (arrows) at target sites, indicating focal BBB opening; (C) 24-h post-sonication images show resolution of parenchymal contrast enhancement, indicating BBB closure.



TABLE 1 |
Impact of the FUS treatment through conventional analysis using the cerebellum as the reference region to compute the SUVr.



TABLE 2 |
Impact of the FUS treatment through SUVr asymmetry analysis.