Changes in Biothiol Levels are Closely Associated with Alzheimer's Disease
Background Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a progressive, neurodegenerative disease of the brain.
Serum homocysteine (Hcy) level is considered to be an important biomarker for AD, however, the status of Hcy in brain tissue and neuronal cells, and the association between brain and serum levels of Hcy in clinical AD patients currently remain unclear.
Methods: The levels of Hcy and other biothiols such as cysteine (Cys) and glutathione (GSH) in clinical blood samples were evaluated using a non-cytotoxic and stable multi-signal uorescent probe, ethyl (E)-3-
Results: Measurement by Probe 1 revealed a signi cant increase in Hcy level, and a decrease in Cys and GSH levels in PC12 cells treated with in Aβ 1-42 .
The hippocampus and whole brain of APP/PS1 mice also showed a signi cant increase in Hcy level alongside the accumulation of age-related AD symptoms, while levels of Cys and GSH decreased simultaneously.
This change was also observed in serum samples acquired from patients with AD.
The upregulation of Hcy and the downregulation of Cys and GSH were reversed in the Aβ 1-42 -treated PC12 cells and the brain of APP/PS1 mice when supplemented with VB 6 , an important coenzyme in Hcy metabolism.
Conclusions: Changes in Hcy, Cys and GSH levels in the brain of APP/PS1 mice and Aβ 1-42 -treated PC12 cells were observed in situ with a new uorescent probe, which were consistent with the abnormal changes in Hcy, Cys and GSH levels in the serum of AD patients.
VB 6 supplementation was successful in ameliorating abnormal upregulation of Hcy in the brain of APP/PS1 mice and in Aβ 1-42 -treated PC12 cells.

Background
Sulphur amino acids, like homocysteine (Hcy), cysteine (Cys) and glutathione (GSH) are metabolically interrelated, low molecular weight thiols that are potential indicators of health status and disease risk
Recent evidence has found that increased Hcy level is correlated with the onset of Alzheimer's disease (AD)
In analysis of 40 studies covering 2619 AD patients and 2390 controls, Liang et al. showed that AD patients may have higher levels of Hcy in their plasma compared to controls
Furthermore,
It was revealed that during the progression of AD, high levels of Hcy results in induction of a multitude of continuously generated reactive oxygen species (ROS)
The process discussed is thought to markedly enhance the vulnerability of neurons, further resulting in hippocampal neuron injury, in turning cumulating in disruption to intelligence and memory in patients with AD
Meanwhile, lower levels of VB 6 and VB 12 , the cofactors of enzymes for metabolizing Hcy, were found to be more often associated with AD patients when compared to healthy individuals
Therefore, Hcy is considered to be a potential biomarker to predict early AD.
At present, high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC), capillary electrophoresis and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) have been used to detect biothiols in clinical trial
Through use of these methods, a positive correlation between Hcy in blood and the progression of AD was con rmed.
An elevated plasma level of Hcy > 14.5 µM was considered to be a strong risk factor for cognitive decline in AD patients
Since AD is a neurodegenerative disease
However, until now, methods of sample collection used in clinical research to detect biothiol levels in the brain of AD patients have been limited to cerebrospinal uid extraction
Smach et al. have found that the concentration of Hcy in cerebrospinal uid was increased in AD patients
Real-time, in-vivo monitoring of biothiol changes would be bene cial for early diagnosis, prevention and therapeutic development for personalized AD management.
Recently, multi-signal uorescent probes have been widely applied to observe and detect biothiols in-situ, due to their high selectivity, sensitivity, and operational simplicity
It is of great value to utilized multi-signal uorescent probes to observe and quantify biothiols in AD patients and nerve cells, because this may help to con rm the associations between AD and Hcy levels by direct measurement in real-time.
We previously developed a multi-signal uorescent probe, ethyl (E)-3-(9-chloro-11-oxo-2,3,6,7-tetrahydro-1H,5H, 11H-pyrano[2,3f]pyrido[3,2,1-ij]quinolin-10-yl)-2-cyanoacrylate (Probe 1), which can simultaneous detect Cys, GSH and Hcy via three different emission channels, and has been evaluated in Raw 264.7,
L-02 and BEL-7402 cells
In this study, using Probe 1, we measured the levels of Cys, GSH and Hcy in Aβ 1-42 -treated PC12 cells, the brain and hippocampus of an AD model (APP/PS1) mouse, and the serum of AD patients, which further enabled us to evaluate the effect of VB 6 supplementation on the level of expression of Hcy and related biothiols.
Thus, we were able to verify the effectiveness of Hcy as a biomarker for early AD detection.

Materials And Methods

Participants
The serum of thirty-one consecutive patients (18 male and 13 female, ages range 26-70 years with average 52.57±16.75)
from the Ningbo Lihuili Hospital, was collected for measurement of Cys, GSH, and Hcy levels using an ELISA and Probe 1.
Patients (n = 31) sampled for Cys, GSH, and Hcy levels in serum were recruited from the memory clinic of Ningbo Kangning Hospital after meeting the diagnostic criteria for AD of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders-V (DSM-V).
Inclusion criteria required a diagnosis of mild to moderate dementia, with a disease duration of greater than three months prior the enrollment, a Behavioral Pathology in Alzheimer's Disease Rating Scale score of equal to or greater than 8, and a Mini-Mental State Examination score of 10-26.
Exclusion criteria included history of epileptic disorders and seizures, brain tumors or trauma, dementia caused by infection, depressive mood disorder and malnutrition.
Age-, sex-and education-matched healthy subjects were recruited as a control cohort.
The consort diagram of patient clinical data is presented in Table
All procedures were approved by the local Ethics Committee of Ningbo Kangning Hospital and Ningbo Lihuili Hospital, Zhejiang, China, and were in complete accordance with the ethical standards and regulations of human studies of the Helsinki Declaration.
Informed consent was given by each individual as all experimental procedures were clearly explained to participants during the consent process.
The effects of Probe 1 on cytotoxicity were determined using a CCK-8 assay according to instructions of the manufacturer of the CCK-8 kit (Beyotime, Shanghai, China).
PC12 cells at 60%-70% con uence were treated with different concentrations of Probe 1 (1-10 μM) for 24 h.
Then 20 μL of CCK-8 was added before incubation for 2 h.
Absorbance was measured at 450 nm with the Varioskan Flash (Thermo Fisher Scienti c, Waltham, MA, USA).

Imaging of endogenous and exogenous Cys, GSH and Hcy in PC12 cells
After being cultured in confocal plates until reaching 80 % con uence, PC-12 cells were pretreated with 100 μM Aβ 1-42 (A9810; Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) for 0-48 h.
Nontreated cells were used as a control.
All cells were then treated with 1 mM VB 6 for 2 h.
Next, the cells were incubated with Probe 1 (10 μM) for 30 mins, and imaged after washing with PBS three times.
To detect exogenous Cys, GSH and Hcy, PC-12 cells were pretreated with N-ethylmaleimide (NEM, 0.25 mM) for 30 min, and subsequently incubated with Cys, GSH and Hcy (100 μM, 30 min) and Probe 1 (10 μM, 30 min), before being washed with PBS three times.
Cells were imaged by a uorescence confocal microscope (Zeiss LSM 880, Oberkochen, Germany).
(λ ex = 405 nm, λ em = 421-475 nm for the blue channel; λ ex = 458 nm, λ em = 500-550 nm for the green channel; and λ ex = 543 nm, λ em =552-617 nm for the red channel).
Using Zen Blue software, the mean uorescence values were obtained by using the following formula: mean uorescence values = Integrated Density / Area.
Experimental animals and experimental procedure

Imaging of endogenous and exogenous Cys, GSH and Hcy in the hippocampus of mice
The mouse hippocampal tissue was frozen, embedded and sliced (8-μm-thick).
Probe 1 solution (10 μM) was added and the sections were incubated for 60 min at 4 °C.
For imaging of endogenous Cys, GSH and Hcy, the hippocampal slices were incubated with Probe 1 (10 μM) for 60 min, and then washed with PBS three times.
For monitoring exogenous Cys, Hcy and GSH, the hippocampal slices were pre-incubated with NEM (500 μM) for 30 min, and then washed with PBS three times.
Next, Cys, GSH and Hcy (500 μM) were added and the slices were incubated for 30 min, separately, before each section was washed with PBS three times.
Finally, sections were imaged by a uorescence confocal microscope (Zeiss LSM 880, Oberkochen, Germany).
Using Zen Blue software, the mean uorescence values were obtained using the following formula: mean uorescence values = Integrated Density / Area.

In vivo whole brain uorescence imaging
An injection solution of Probe 1 (2 mg/kg) was freshly prepared in saline with 15% DMSO, and the solution was stabilized for 20 min before injection.
The APP/PS1 and C57BL/6 mice were anesthetized with ketamine (40 mg/kg) before a 1.0 cm cranial imaging window was surgically prepared.
Each mouse was injected intravenously with 100 μL of Probe 1.
At 0, 15, 30, 60 and 120 min, the same regions of brain were imaged using an IVIS®Lumina animal imaging system (Caliper LifeSciences, Perkin Elmer, Hopkinton, MA) with the same parameters.
Data analysis was performed using LivingImage® 4.2.1 software.
Determination of Cys, GSH and Hcy levels in PC12 cells and the hippocampus of mice by Probe 1
Cultured PC12 cells (1×104 cells/μl, 10 μl) or murine hippocampal cells (10 mg) were collected and lysed/homogenized.
After centrifugation at 1, 4000 g for 10 min at 4 °C, the supernatant was collected for the quantitative analysis of Cys, GSH and Hcy by Probe 1 as previously described.

Statistical analysis
All cellular -based assays were performed in triplicate.
Data were analyzed using SPSS software, version 16.0 (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, USA).
The results were expressed as mean ± SD.
Values among different groups were analyzed using one-way ANOVA, with correction for multiple comparisons using the Sidak method.
P < 0.05 was considered statistically signi cant.

Results
Probe 1 is feasible for evaluation of Cys, GSH and Hcy levels in PC12 cells and in vivo
In order to evaluate the chemical stability of Probe 1, UPLC-MS was utilized to analyze the changes in the retention time (RT) and mass spectrum before and after deposition at room temperature for 48 h (Fig.
There were no changes in retention time observed pre and post -deposition, with an RT of 2.13 min, and the difference between the two peak areas was less than 5%.
The mass spectrum of the compound after deposition was also not changed, with a [M + H] + m/z of 399, indicating that Probe 1 has excellent stability in practical application.
After PC12 cells were treated with 1-10 µM of Probe 1 for 48 h the cell survival rate was greater than 90% (Fig.
The accuracy and validity of Probe 1 for use in measuring clinical serum samples was also veri ed.
We rstly used the commercial ELISA method to measure the serum Cys, GSH and Hcy concentrations in the clinical patient samples, and compared the results when Probe 1 was used for measurement.
There was a similar trend in the data obtained using both methods and the data were closely matched (Table
Probe 1 can additionally be used to detect thiols in PC12 cells.
NEM was added to remove the endogenous thiol, and when exogenous Hcy, Cys or GSH was added, Probe 1 could induce the production of corresponding blue, green and red uorescence.
Furthermore, after storage at room temperature for 48 h, the exogenous thiols in PC12 cells could still be detected by Probe 1 with no attenuation in uorescence intensity (Fig.
Moreover, in this study we elucidate that Probe 1 can be used to detect thiol groups in the hippocampus of mice.
Firstly, NEM was used to suppress signal from endogenous biothiols, before Hcy, Cys or GSH were added to stimulate the bright blue, green and red uorescence through activity of Probe 1, which con rmed the excellent response of Probe 1 to Cys, Hcy and GSH in hippocampal tissue (Fig.
Similarly, the intensity of uorescence in hippocampal tissue was not attenuated after being deposited for 48 h at room temperature (Fig.
however, in-vivo, we observed that the intensity of uorescence of produced by Probe 1 activity in the brain peaked at 30 min before being attenuated, while, the uorescent produced by Probe 1 activity did continue for 120 min before fading completely (Fig.
This data ensures that adequate testing time will be available when using Probe 1 to detect thiol groups in brain tissue.
The results and discussion may be presented separately, or in one combined section, and may optionally be divided into headed subsections.

Aβ 1-42 induced changes in Hcy, Cys and GSH expression in PC12 cells
Probe 1 can detect endogenous Hcy, Cys, and GSH in PC12 cell (Fig.
Aβ 1-42 can exacerbate oxidative stress by decreasing endogenous antioxidant levels and resulting in induction of apoptosis in PC 12 cells
When PC12 cells were treated with Aβ 1-42 for 24-48 h, the uorescence intensity from the blue channel (Hcy) was enhanced with increasing treatment time, and correspondingly, uorescence from the green and red channels (Cys and GSH) broadly decreased (Fig.
Next, we quanti ed intracellular levels of the three biothiols using Probe 1 and observed that treatment of PC 12 cells with Aβ 1-42 for 48 h resulted in signi cantly increased levels of Hcy (~ 2.44 ± 0.37 fold, P < 0.01), and decreased Cys and GSH levels (~ 32.70%±0.03
and 61.57%±0.05)
compared to levels identi ed in nontreated control cells (Fig.

Biothiol level changes in the brains of AD mice
The three different uorescent signals resulting from detection of Cys, GSH and Hcy were shown in the different layers of the hippocampal tissue slices from the C57BL/6 mice imaged by the Z-stack mode of a confocal microscope (Fig.
In these C57BL/6 hippocampal sections, there was greener and red uorescence representing endogenous Cys and GSH, while there was less blue uorescence representing Hcy, indicating that Hcy was not abundant in the hippocampus of normal mice (Fig.
This was converse to the data indicating the Cys, GSH and Hcy levels in the hippocampal slices of APP/PS1 mice at different ages.
The green (Cys) and red uorescent (GSH) signals were gradually attenuated with the age in APP/PS1 mice, and this attenuation was more obvious in the APP/PS1 12M+ group compared to in the hippocampus of the C57BL/6 12M+ group.
Meanwhile, the blue uorescence (representing Hcy) was enhanced with increasing age, indicating that the level of Hcy in the hippocampus rises with the progression of AD pathology in this mouse model (Fig.
Meanwhile, we quanti ed Cys, GSH and Hcy concentrations in the hippocampus of APP/PS1 and C57BL/6 mice using Probe 1, and found that Cys and GSH levels were reduced by 39.54%±0.05
and 15.24%±0.02,
but Hcy level were increased by 1.46 ± 0.31-fold, in the APP/PS1 12M+ group when compared to the C57BL/6 12M+ group (Fig.
These results are consistent with the trend of uorescence staining observations we described using Probe 1 for detection.
In order to further monitor the changes in Cys, GSH and Hcy levels in the brain of AD model mice at different ages, we used the in-vivo imaging technique and found differences in the uorescence intensities of the 3 biothiols when comparing the brains of normal C57BL/6 mice and APP/PS1 mice with AD symptoms.
When the APP/PS1 mice were 6 months old, there was little to no difference in biothiol level expression compared to the C57BL/6 12M+ group.
However, the brains of 9 month APP/PS1 mice showed signi cant enhancement of Hcy uorescence, while Cys and GSH signal was attenuated.
In the brains of 12 month old APP/PS1 mice, the uorescent signals indicating Cys and GSH presence were decreased by 62.50%±0.07 and 44.83%±0.05,
while Hcy signal was increased by 1.60 ± 0.19-fold, when compared with those of C57BL/612M + group (Fig.

Cys, GSH, and Hcy levels are abnormal in the serum of AD patients
The levels of Cys, GSH, and Hcy in the serum samples acquired from healthy individuals and AD patients were measured using Probe 1. Table
Meanwhile, in AD patients, average Hcy was over 22 µM, which is an increase of 2.78 ± 0.83 fold, and Cys and GSH were just below 24 µM and 662 µM, which is a decrease 36.2%±0.04 and 43.3% ±0.06, compared to the control cohort, respectively (Table
This supplementation with VB 6 resulted in signi cantly increased levels of Cys and GSH, by 1.73 ± 0.25 and 1.25 ± 0.18 fold, and a signi cantly decreased Hcy level, by 30.44%±0.06 fold, when compared to those Aβ 1-42 treated cells with no VB 6 supplementation (Fig.
Furthermore, when detected by Probe 1, we found that VB 6 treatment led to signi cantly increased amounts of uorescence signal indicating Cys and GSH, and decreased levels of Hcy uorescence, compared to the Aβ 1-42 treated cells with no VB 6 (Fig.
12-month-old APP/PS1 mice were treated with VB 6 .
After 7 days of VB 6 (100 mg/kg) intervention, compared with the APP/PS1 12M+ group with no treatment, the brain levels of Cys and GSH had increased by 1.84 ± 0.27-fold and 1.21 ± 0.14 -fold, and the level of Hcy had decreased by 9.80%±0.02,
respectively, in the APP/PS1 12M + VB6+ group (Fig.
Similarly, the uorescent signals indicating Cys and GSH were signi cantly increased, while Hcy signal was decreased in the APP/PS1 12M + VB6+ group compared to the APP/PS1 12M+ group (Fig.
Brain imaging showed that pre-treatment with VB 6 (100 mg/kg, 7 d) effectively changed the Epiuorescence levels of Cys, GSH, and Hcy in the brain compared of the APP/PS1 12M+ mice.
Cys and GSH levels were increased by 1.80 ± 0.20-fold and 1.25 ± 0.16-fold, respectively, while the level of Hcy was found to be decreased by 27.08%±0.03,
in the APP/PS1 12M + VB6+ group compared to the APP/PS1 12M+ group (Fig.

Discussion
The most abundant intracellular biothiols, Cys, GSH, and Hcy, are widely associated with physiological and pathological processes in complex biological environments
Hcy and serine are converted to cystathionine by transsulfuration in a reaction catalyzed by cystathionine β-synthase, which is further converted to Cys by cystathionine γ-lyase
Cys then acts as a substrate for glutamate cysteine ligase and glutathione synthetase and will eventually be converted to GSH
Therefore, Hcy levels are tightly associated with the levels of Cys and GSH.
Evidence has indicated that aberrant levels of Cys, Hcy, and GSH contribute substantially to AD pathology
During the progression of AD, the accumulation of Aβ may lead to an increase in ROS generation, and a decrease in the levels of endogenous antioxidants, such as GSH
For the three biothiols, Hcy is most strongly correlated with oxidative stress, since auto-oxidation of Hcy can produce ROS, which causes an increase in the level of free radicals locally in the brain, aggravating nerve cell damage and causing neuronal cell death in severe cases
Ellya et al. demonstrated that the combined effects of Hcy and local oxidative stress contribute to the damage of presynaptic terminals in neurodegenerative motor neuron diseases
Moreover, Liang et al. analyzed data from 239 AD patients and 226 controls, and found that AD patients have higher cerebrospinal uid levels of Hcy (0.11-0.19 µmol/L) compared to healthy controls (0.07-0.08 µmol/L)
Therefore, it is generally considered that the level of Hcy is an important diagnostic indicator for AD
In this study, we observed signi cant changes in Cys, GSH, and Hcy levels in Aβ 1-42 -treated PC12 cells, in the brains of APP/PS1 AD model mice and the serum of clinical AD patients.
The Hcy level was signi cantly increased, and Cys and GSH levels were signi cantly reduced in Aβ 1-42 -treated PC12 cells, which would be repeated in APP/PS1 mice and exacerbated by age in these mice.
These results further veri ed the relationship between neuronal cell and brain levels of Hcy, Cys and GSH and AD pathology.
However, as a limitation to the study, these evidences are circumstantial unless changes in biothiols can be observed directly in situ.
Probe 1 can simultaneously detect Cys, GSH, and Hcy via three emission channels with properties of high quantum yield and minimal uorescence background signal
In our study, we found that Probe 1 had good stability and low cytotoxicity and we rstly tested the effectiveness of Probe 1 in clinical serum samples.
The levels of Cys, GSH, and Hcy detected by Probe 1 showed a similar trend when compared to levels detected by the ELISA, and the data were consistent in terms of the concentration given for each test sample.
Perhaps most importantly, we found that Probe 1 could reach the brain in a short time by passing through the blood brain barrier after intravenous injection and could then be imaged clearly.
Furthermore, we used probe one and ELISA to successfully observe changes in levels of three biothiols in PC12 cells and the hippocampal regions and brains of mice after various treatments.
These results indicate that Probe 1 is an effective tool for observation of Cys, GSH, and Hcy in vivo and in vitro.
Using confocal imaging, we found that the 3 biothiols of interest were not present at noticeably different levels in the brains of 6-month-old APP/PS1 mice compared to control mice.
However, signi cant differences were observed in 9-month-old APP/PS1 mice compared to controls, and the uorescence intensity of Hcy in the brain of 12 month-old APP/PS1 mice was signi cantly enhanced, while Cys and GSH levels were reduced compared to controls, which is consistent with the age of onset of behavioral changes observed in APP/PS1 mice during AD disease progression
It has been reported that there are no behavioral differences between APP/PS1 mice and WT mice before 9 months of age, while apparent abnormalities, including changes in memory function, could be observed after 9 months in APP/PS1 mice
Notably, Hcy content in the serum of APP/PS1 mice increased rapidly from 9 to 12 months of age
VB 6 is a coenzyme required for proper function of cystathionine β-synthase.
Studies have indicated that lowering levels of plasma Hcy by VB 6 treatment could markedly slow cognitive decline in humans
Encouragingly, it's been observed that VB 6 (at 100 mg/kg) can signi cantly reverse the alterations in Hcy to Cys and GSH levels in the hippocampus of AD model mice and Aβ 1-42 -treated PC12 cells.
Our observation provided strong support for VB 6 , as an anti-AD candidate drug, which may reduce the risk of AD and improve AD prognosis in humans.

Conclusions
In summary, we rstly con rmed that Hcy is an effective biomarker for AD disease.
Changes in Cys, GSH and Hcy were observed in situ in the brains of APP/PS1 mice and Aβ 1-42 -treated PC12 cells by a novel multi-signal uorescent Probe 1.
With the progression of AD, it was observed that Hcy levels were upregulated while Cys and GDH levels fell in the hippocampus and brain of APP/PS1 mice.
These changes were consistent with abnormal alterations in Hcy levels in the serum of AD patients.
Meanwhile, intervention using VB 6 treatment could effectively reverse the observed abnormal Cys, GSH and Hcy levels in Aβ 1-42 -treated PC12 cells and in the brains of APP/PS1 mice.



1
Abbreviations



Figure 2 Changes
Figure 2



Table 1


All mice were purchased from Hangzhou Ziyuan Experimental Animal Technology Co., Ltd.
(SCXK 2019-0004), and housed in the animal center of Ningbo University Medicine College (Ningbo, China).
All mice used were housed in a cage and maintained under a 12-h light/12-h dark cycle in temperature-and humidity-controlled environments (21 ± 2 °C and approximately 60%, respectively) with free access to food and water.
All experimental procedures were performed in accordance with the health guide for the care and use of laboratory animals of national institutes, and animal protocols were approved by the ethical committee of animal use and protection.



Table 2
The9]cy, Cys and GSH levels in the serum from AD patients and healthy controls (µM, mean ± SD). 6 reverses the changes in Hcy, Cys and GSH levels in Aβ 1-42 -treated PC12 cells and brains of AD model mice VB 6 , is an important coenzyme that can promote cystathionine beta-synthase -mediated catalysis of serine and Hcy into Cys[8,9].
PC12 cells were pretreated with Aβ 1-42 before being supplemented with VB 6