TNF-α-dependent neuronal necroptosis regulated in Alzheimer's disease by coordination of RIPK1-p62 complex with autophagic UVRAG
Background Neuronal death is a major hallmark of Alzheimer's disease (AD).
Necroptosis, as a programmed necrotic process, is activated in AD.
However, what signals and factors initiate necroptosis in AD is basically unknown.
Methods We examined the expression levels of critical molecules in necroptotic signaling pathway by immunohistochemistry (IHC) staining and immunoblotting using brain tissues from AD patients and AD mouse models of APP/PS1 and 5×FAD.
We performed brain stereotaxic injection with recombinant TNFα, anti-TNFR1 neutralizing antibody or AAV-mediated gene expression and knockdown in APP/PS1 brains.
For in vitro studies, we used TNF-α combined with zVAD-fmk and Smac mimetic to establish neuronal necroptosis models and utilized pharmacological or molecular biological approaches to study the signaling crosstalk.
Results We nd that activated neuronal necroptosis is dependent on upstream TNF-α/TNFR1 signaling in both neuronal cell cultures and AD mouse models.
Upon TNF-α stimulation, accumulated p62 recruits RIPK1 and induces its self-oligomerization, and activates downstream RIPK1/RIPK3/MLKL cascade, leading to neuronal necroptosis.
We further reveal that ectopic accumulation of p62 is caused by impaired autophagy ux, which is mediated by downregulation of UVRAG during the TNF-α-promoted necroptosis.
Notably, UVRAG overexpression can inhibit neuronal necroptosis in cultures and in brains of AD mice.
Conclusions We identify a nely controlled regulation of neuronal necroptosis in AD by coordinated TNFα signaling, RIPK1/3 activity and autophagy machinery.

Background
Alzheimer' disease (AD) is a progressive neurodegenerative disorder characterized by clinical symptoms of memory loss, personality changes, and general cognitive decline
The neuropathological alterations of AD brain include Amyloid-β (Aβ) deposit, aggregates of hyperphosphorylated/misfolded tau, neuroin ammation, and neuronal loss
Despite continuing debates about hypotheses for the cause(s) of AD, Aβ-induced neuronal death and brain dystrophy has emerged as the most extensively accepted theory
In the past decades, evidence has shown that extracellular Aβ plaques are directly toxic to adjacent neurons
Among the various forms of cell death, neuronal apoptosis and necrosis are believed to be the two major death pathways for neuronal loss in AD, but recent ndings have also implicated necroptosis, a programmed cell necrosis
However, the mechanism initiating necroptosis in AD is not known.
Another process that may be involved in AD pathology is autophagy, a main cellular catabolic process for protein aggregates and damaged organelles, has crucial roles in the maintenance of cell homeostasis
Autophagy primarily acts as a pro-survival role, in some cases the damaged autophagy may lead to distinct autophagic cell death, rather than apoptosis or necrosis
Recent studies also suggest its function in modulating the switching between apoptosis and necroptosis
Interestingly, a considerable amount of investigation has found that impaired autophagy contributes to the accumulation of misfolded protein aggregates, which is featured by most neurodegenerative diseases (NDs), including AD
However, very little is currently known about the possible interplay between autophagy pathway and neuronal necroptosis in AD pathogenesis.
We have turned to investigation of possible action of a candidate critical proin ammatory cytokine in these processes: tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α).
It is already known to be involved in neuroin ammation and to contribute to AD pathology
TNF-α is elevated in the cerebrospinal uid (CSF) and plasma in aging, mild cognitive impairment (MCI), and AD patients, and MCI patients with a higher level of TNF-α are much more likely to progress to full AD
Data from animal models further reveal that TNF-αinduced in ammation may have a detrimental effect on neuronal death, and chronic release of TNF-α during AD progression is likely through the activation of microglia, astrocytes and neurons stimulated by aggregated Aβ
Currently, strategies targeting TNF-α inhibition have demonstrated some reduction of brain pathology and alleviation of cognitive decline in both rodent models and in AD patients
TNF-α acts through a classical signaling pathway initiated by binding to its receptor TNFR1.
TRADD, TRAF2/5, RIPK1, cIAP1/2 and other subunits are then recruited to form complex I, which in turn leads to ubiquitination of RIPK1 and thus to NF-κB activation
When NF-κB activation is inhibited, e.g., by blocking cIAP1/2, caspase-8 can be activated, which induces RIPK1 cleavage and leads to cell apoptosis.
Elimination or inhibition of caspase-8 prompts RIPK1 activation through deubiquitination and leads to its interaction with FADD, TRADD, and RIPK3, to form complex II.
Complex II can phosphorylate the pseudokinase MLKL and ultimately promotes necrotic cell membrane disruption and cell death, which is also termed necroptosis
However, whether elevated TNF-α in AD can induce neuronal necroptosis has remained conjectural.
We now report that elevated TNF-α signaling can indeed induce the activation of neuronal necroptosis in AD.
TNF-α-triggered neuronal necroptosis is further modulated by impaired autophagic ux, in which a key regulator UVRAG tightly regulates signaling transduction.
These ndings thus implicate crosstalk between neuronal necroptosis and autophagy machinery in AD pathology, and may exemplify a more general paradigm for cell death regulation in other NDs.

Materials And Methods

Human brain tissues
Para n sections of the human cerebral cortex were kindly provided by NIH NeuroBioBank.
These materials include samples from 8 AD patients (Braak VI) and 7 age-matched healthy elderly.

Mice
APP/PS1 (JAX, Stock # 034848) and 5×FAD (JAX, Stock # 034848) transgenic mice were purchased from The Jackson Laboratory and generously provided by Dr. Guobing Chen (Jinan University, China).
In this study, we crossed the APP/PS1 or 5×FAD with C57BL/6 mice (GemPharmatech, China) to obtain daughter mice for further study.
All mice were maintained under standard laboratory conditions with free access to food and water unless otherwise indicated.
All experiments were conducted in accordance with the regulations for the Administration of Affairs Concerning Experimental Animals (China) and approved by the China Pharmaceutical University Animal Ethics Committee.
Mice were genotyped by One Step Mouse Genotyping Kit (Vazyme, Cat# PD104-01), according to manufacturer's instructions.

Immunohistochemistry (IHC), immuno uorescence (IF) and autophagic ux analysis
For DAB staining of para n sections, 5 µm slices were xed in 10% formaldehyde followed a protocol as described
For Immuno uorescence staining of cryostat sections, 30 µm frozen slices were sectioned by a Leica CM1950 microtome and followed a protocol as previously described
All antibodies used in this study were listed (Table
Images were analyzed by Olympus IX73 microscopy.
Images of cellular autophagic ux analysis were captured by the Olympus FV1000 laser scanning confocal microscope.
For quantitative analysis of the uorescence intensity, the integral optical density was measured by using Image-Pro Plus 6.0 software.

Brain stereotaxic injection
Brain stereotaxic injection was performed as described
In brief, for lateral ventricle injection of TNF-α, 2 μL recombinant murine TNF-α (5 μg in 2 μl of PBS) or 2 μL PBS (Ctrl) was injected into the lateral ventricle at -0.4 mm from bregma, mediolateral 1.0 mm, depth 2.5 mm of mouse brains using a digital pump (ZS Dichuang Company, China) at a speed of 0.25 μl/min with a microinjection syringe.
After injection, the syringe was remained in the injection point for additional 5 min before it was slowly removed.
For hippocampal CA1 injection, same instruments and procedure applied, except 4 μL TNFR1 antibody (Thermo Fisher Scienti c, Cat# 16-1202-85) or 2 μL viral particles (10 12 ~10 13 v.g./ml) was injected into the hippocampal CA1 region at -2.2 mm from bregma, mediolateral 1.7 mm, depth 2.4 mm of mouse brains.
All mice were placed on a heating pad until they recovered from the surgery.
One week after injection of TNF-α (or) TNFR1 antibody, while three weeks after virus injection, mice were sacri ced for further experiments.

Cell culture
Human SH-SY5Y cells were cultured in DMEM with 10% FBS.
Rat PC12 cells were cultured in DMEM with 5% FBS (Gibco) plus 10% horse serum (Hyclone).
The primary mouse cortical neuron culture was performed as described
Cells were maintained at 37 °C in an incubator containing 5% CO 2 .
The cells were pretreated with or without zVAD-fmk (MCE, Ca# HY-16658B), Necrostatin-1 (MCE, Ca# HY-15760) or Chloroquine (MCE, Ca# HY-17589) for 1 h followed by adding recombinant human or murine TNF-α (or PBS) (PeproTech, Cat# 300-01A or 315-01A) in combination with (or without) SMAC mimetic (MCE, Ca# HY-12600) for 8 h for protein extraction, RNA/DNA extraction, IHC and cellular autophagic ux analysis.
In some cases, cells were cultured for 24 h for cell viability analysis, Propidium Iodide (PI) staining, and Acridine Orange (AO) staining.

Preparation of adeno-associated virus (AAV), lentivirus and adenovirus
The AAV vector expressing two shRNA sequences and a separated RFP (pAV-2in1shRNA-CMV-RFP) was obtained from Vigene Biosciences, Inc.
The structure of AAV vector can be found in Supplementary information (Fig
The below is shRNA sequences.
TNFR1 shRNA-1: 5'-CCTCGTGCTTTCCAAGATGA-3'; TNFR1 shRNA-2: 5'-CCCGAAGTCTACTCCATCAT-3'; p62 shRNA-1: 5'-TAGTACAACTGCTAGTTATT-3', p62 shRNA-2: 5'-GAGGTTGACATTGATGTGGA-3'.
The AAV vector expressing GFP (pAV-CAG-P2A-GFP) was obtained from Vigene Biosciences, Inc. HA-tag fused UVRAG was cloned into an AAV vector named pAV-CAG-P2A-GFP (Vigene Biosciences) (Fig.
The viral particles (10 12 ~10 13 v.g./ml) were packaged and puri ed by Vigene Biosciences for further use.
For lentivirus production, HEK293T cells were transfected with lentiviral vectors and packing plasmids using a Lentiviral Packaging Kit (Yeasen, Ca# 41102ES20).
The structure of lentiviral vectors (Yeasen) used were listed in Supplementary information (Fig.
The shRNA sequences were listed as below.
RIPK1 shRNA: 5'-CGGAACAGATTCTGGTGTCT-3'; p62 shRNA: 5'-CCTCTGGGCATTGAAGTTGA-3'.
shRNAresistant wild type p62 (p62-wt), zz domain deleted p62 (p62-zz△), and uvrag genes were cloned into indicated vectors, respectively (Fig.
SH-SY5Y cells were transduced with above lentiviral particlecontaining supernatant in the presence of 8 mg/ml polybrene for 24 h, and then exposed to 2 mg/ml puromycin.
The lentivirus encoding eGFP was used as a control.
The adenoviral particles expressing mCherry-GFP-LC3B protein (Ad-mCherry-GFP-LC3) and GFP-p62 fusion protein (Ad-GFP-p62) were purchased from Beyotime (Ca# C3011 and C3015).
The control adenoviral particles expressing β-glactosidase (Ad-LacZ) were purchased from Sciben Biotech (Ca# AD1002).
SH-SY5Y cells or primary neurons were transduced with the individual adenoviral particles for 24 h at 5 of multiplicity of infection (MOI=5).
Ad-LacZ was used as a control.

Cell viability analysis
Cells were seeded in 96-well plates before indicated treatment.
The cells were then loaded with Enhanced Cell Counting Kit-8 (CCK-8) (Beyotime, Ca# C0046).
Subsequently, the cell viability was determined by measuring the absorbance at 460nm.
Propidium iodide (PI) staining and Acridine orange (AO) staining Cells were seeded in 6-well plates before indicated treatment.
Then cells were incubated with 2 μg/ml propidium iodide (PI) (Sigma Aldrich, Ca# P4170) for 10 min or 200 μM Acridine orange (AO) (Sigma Aldrich, Ca# A6014) for 15 min as described
All stained wells were rinsed three times with PBS, followed by direct image capture using Olympus IX73 microscope.

Immunoblotting, immunoprecipitation and insoluble protein extraction
Immunoblotting and immunoprecipitation were performed as described
For soluble and insoluble protein extraction, cells were lysed in cold PBS/1% Triton X-100 buffer (PBS containing 1% Triton X-100 and cocktail protease inhibitor) for 30 min on ice.
After centrifugation at 15,000×g for 30 min at 4 °C, the supernatants were collected as soluble protein fractions.
Pellets were washed with cold PBS/1% Triton X-100 buffer, and then re-suspended in 8 M urea containing 1% SDS, 1% Triton X-100 and cocktail protease inhibitor.
After sonicated, the samples were centrifuged at 15,000 × g for 15 min at 4 °C and the supernatants were collected as insoluble fractions.
All the antibodies used were listed (Table
Quantitative real-time PCR (qPCR) Cells were homogenized in Trizol reagent (Vazyme, Ca# R701-01) for extraction of total RNA based on the manufacturer's protocol.
Puri ed RNA was reverse transcribed to cDNA using the HiScript III 1st Strand cDNA Synthesis Kit (Vazyme, Ca# R312-01).
mRNA levels were determined by qPCR using AceQ qPCR SYBR Green Master Mix kit (Vazyme, Ca# Q131-02).
All primers used are listed in Table

Core promoter analysis and chromatin immunoprecipitation
Core promoter analysis of Uvrag gene was performed using a computational program ConTra v2 (
Chromatin was extracted and immunoprecipitated using a Chromatin-IP (ChIP) kit (CST, #9004) and an anti-RelA antibody (CST, #8242) according to the manufacturer's protocol.
Then separated and puri ed DNA was ampli ed by qPCR.
All primers used are listed in Table

Data and statistical analyses
All data were expressed as mean ± SEM.
Student's t-test for nonpaired replicates was used to identify statistically signi cant differences between treatment means.
Group variability and interaction were compared using either one-way or two-way ANOVA followed by Bonferroni's post-tests to compare replicate means.
Signi cance was accepted at p < 0.05.

Results

TNF-α signaling promotes neuronal necroptosis in AD mice
We hypothesized that elevated TNF-α signaling in AD brain may lead to neuronal necroptosis.
To test this hypothesis, we rst examined the level of MLKL, a marker of cell necroptosis, in the brains of AD patients.
Immunohistochemical (IHC) staining demonstrated MLKL upregulation in samples of cerebral cortex from AD patients at Braak VI stage compared to age-matched healthy controls (Ctrl) (Fig.
We then checked the levels of total MLKL and phosphorylated-MLKL (p-MLKL) in 10-month old APP/PS1 and 5×FAD transgenic AD mouse models.
IHC images of hippocampal CA1 regions showed that compared to wild type (WT) littermate controls, p-MLKL levels were greatly increased in either APP/PS1 or 5×FAD mice, although total MLKL levels were only mildly augmented (Fig.
We noted that 5×FAD showed stronger activation of MLKL compared to APP/PS1 mice, possibly due to their more severe AD pathology
In addition to the IHC data, immunoblotting of whole brain lysate also showed a higher p-MLKL level in 10-month old APP/PS1 mice compared to WT littermates (Fig.
These data indicate that in line with previous ndings [8], necroptosis is indeed activated in AD.
To assess whether TNF-α signaling is involved in neuronal necroptosis in the hippocampus, we carried out lateral ventricle injection of murine TNF-α as described
Notably, 5 μg TNF-α compared to PBS control injection induced p-MLKL levels ~3 fold in the cells of CA1 pyramidal layers (Fig.
In addition, TNF-α injection into APP/PS1 hippocampus only slightly increased the levels of p-MLKL (~1.47 fold), perhaps because the level of p-MLKL activated in APP/PS1 mice was already so high (Fig
To further study the function of TNF-α signaling in necroptosis, we used adeno-associated virus (AAV) vector-mediated small hairpin RNA (shRNA) to knockdown (KD) TNFR1 (Fig.
Assessed by IHC and immunoblotting at least 70% reduction of TNFR1 e ciency were seen (Fig.
Using intrahippocampal injection (Fig.
After 3 weeks, p-MLKL levels were then examined by IHC.
Data showed that TNFR1 shRNA reduced p-MLKL levels by 55.5% compared to sc shRNA (Fig.
By injection of an anti-TNFR1 neutralizing antibody that can block TNF-α signaling
In sum, we infer TNF-α/TNFR1 signaling is indispensable for the neuronal necroptosis activated in AD patients and AD mouse models.

TNF-α can trigger neuronal necroptosis in cell culture
To explore the molecular mechanism of TNF-α-mediated neuronal necroptosis, we performed cell culture experiments using various neuronal cell types including SH-SY5Y, PC-12 and primary cortical neurons.
We examined the effects of TNF-α on cell viability in all above cell types.
The pan-caspase inhibitor zVADfmk (zVAD, Z) and cIAPs inhibitor Smac mimetic (S), two inducers of cell necroptosis
We found that 40 ng/ml TNF-α alone (T) induced a loss of cell viability in all three cell types, with a percentage of 16.4% (SH-SY5Y), 21.5% (PC12), and 22.4% (primary neurons), but zVAD did not fully block cell death (Fig.
We further observed that Smac mimetic remarkably increased TNF-α-induced cell death, which could only be partially inhibited by zVAD, with a percentage of 5.5% in SH-SY5Y or 27% in PC12.
Moreover, zVAD even provoked cell death in primary neurons with a percentage of 4.9% (Fig.
These data imply that TNF-α or TSZ treatment can induce type(s) of cell death besides common apoptosis.
Propidium iodide (PI) staining and cell morphology images showed that TNF-α, especially combined with Smac mimetic and zVAD (TSZ) treatment, indeed triggered the characteristic features of necrosis/necroptosis
Quantitation indicated that TSZ increased cell necrosis with a percentage of 51% in SH-SY5Y, 53.2% in PC12 or 54% in primary neurons; TNF-α treatment also slightly increased necrosis with a percentage of 11.7% in PC12, 14.7% in SH-SY5Y, and 14% in primary neurons (Fig.
To con rm the involvement of necroptosis in TNF-α-induced cell death, we used Acridine Orange (AO) staining, a unique technique used to distinguish necroptosis from apoptosis
After staining, cultured SH-SY5Y cells as well as primary neurons showed attened morphology with intact cytoplasm (red uorescence) and nuclei (green uorescence) (Fig.
TNF-α treatment induced cell contraction and nuclear condensation, while TS triggered features of apoptotic cells, with nuclear fragmentation.
Particularly, zVAD yielded necrotic cell morphology in TS treated cells with PI-positive nuclei, loss of plasma membrane integrity, and translucent cytosol.
zVAD also slightly induced cell necrosis in TNF-α treated cells (Fig.
To verify that TNF-α-induced cell necrosis is indeed necroptosis, we examined the levels of the speci c marker p-MLKL with different combination treatment of T/S/Z.
We found that TNF-α or Smac mimetic alone both mildly activated caspase-8 and caspase-3 in SH-SY5Y cells but not in primary neurons, and the activation was inhibited by zVAD (Fig.
Interestingly, TS powerfully activated caspase-8 and caspase-3, an action entirely blocked by zVAD (Fig.
In addition to the apoptotic caspase activation, TNF-α or TZ treatment indeed upregulated p-MLKL, while TSZ treatment had a sharp effect on p-MLKL (Fig.
Taken together, our data show that TNF-α alone can mildly activate neuronal necroptosis; but combined with Smac mimetic and zVAD (TSZ), it triggers strong activation of neuronal necroptosis.

TNF-α-induced neuronal necroptosis is dependent on RIPK1 action
We aimed to clarify whether TNF-α-induced neuronal necroptosis is dependent on RIPK1, a known crucial control center in regulating TNF-α-induced NF-κB signaling pathway as well as apoptosis and necroptosis
In cultured SH-SY5Y and primary neurons, similar to MLKL activation (Fig.
TNF-α also increased the phosphorylation of RIPK3, a RIPK1 binding partner, on its Ser227 (human) or Thr231/Ser232 (mouse) site.
Smac mimetic, however, markedly repressed RIPK1/3 phosphorylation, while TSZ strongly activated RIPK1 and RIPK3 (Fig.
Of note, we observed that zVAD effectively prevented TS induced RIPK1 cleavage (Fig.
As shown in Fig.
Using an RIPK1 inhibitor Necrostain-1 (Nec-1), we found that Nec-1 effectively suppressed the activation of RIPK3 and MLKL, as well as subsequent cell necroptosis induced by TNF-α or TSZ (Fig.
Furthermore, RIPK1 reduction by lentiviral vector mediated shRNA distinctly blocked phosphorylation of RIPK1/3 and MLKL, and thereby also blocked cell necroptosis (Fig.
Thus, our data suggest that TNF-α-induced neuronal necroptosis is dependent on the activation of an RIPK1/RIPK3/MLKL cascade.
p62 mediates TNF-α-induced necroptosis via its interaction with RIPK1 Previous studies have found that RIPK1 interacts directly with p62/SQSTM1, a molecule responsible for the clearance of aggregated proteins
We inferred that p62 might participate in RIPK1-dependent neuronal necroptosis in AD.
To test this notion, we rst examined the protein complex formation of RIPK1, RIPK3 and p62 in neuronal necroptotic cells.
Immunoprecipitation data showed that p62 indeed complexed with RIPK1, RIPK3 and MLKL when cells were treated with TSZ (Fig.
Endogenous p62 was also upregulated in both SH-SY5Y cells and primary neurons with TNF-α or TSZ treatment (Fig.
To evaluate the function of p62 in necroptosis, we transduced SH-SY5Y cells with recombinant adenoviral particles encoding GFP-tagged p62 (Ad-p62-GFP) or encoding LacZ as a control (Ad-LacZ) (Fig.
Interestingly, overexpression of p62-GFP evidently upregulated the total protein levels of RIPK1, increased the phosphorylation levels of RIPK1 as well as MLKL, and augmented the percentage of neuronal necroptosis (Fig.
Consistently, p62 shRNA transduced into cells with lentiviral particles reversed the effect of p62 overexpression (Fig.
Furthermore, necroptosis was restored by expression of p62-GFP (shRNA-resistant) in p62 shRNA transfected cells (Fig.
The ZZ domain (amino acid 122-167) of p62 is the binding domain with RIPK1
Here, a ZZ domain deleted p62 (p62-ZZΔ, 3×Flag-tagged) expressing plasmid (Fig.
Data showed that the expression of p62-ZZΔ in p62 KD cells failed to recover the activation of RIPK1/RIPK3/MLKL pathway and subsequent necroptosis (Fig.
We conclude that p62 promotes neuronal necroptosis by complexing with RIPK1 and activating MLKL.
To test the possible promotion role of p62 for neuronal necroptosis in AD, we then assessed p62 levels in the brains of AD patients.
IHC staining showed higher p62 levels in samples of cerebral cortex from AD patients compared to healthy controls (Fig.
Similarly, IHC images of hippocampal CA1 regions also showed remarkable upregulation of p62 in APP/PS1 mice compared to WT littermates (Fig.
Next, we used AAV vector-mediated shRNA to knock down p62 (Fig.
After three weeks, IHC of p62 and p-MLKL was performed.
Our data indicated that p62 shRNA diminished p-MLKL levels by 47% compared to sc shRNA (Fig.
Overall, our results demonstrate that p62 elevates neuronal necroptosis by interacting with RIPK1 and promoting phosphorylation of RIPK1/RIPK3/MLKL cascades, both in TNF-α-treated neuronal cultures and in AD mouse brain.
Impaired autophagic ux regulates neuronal necroptosis p62 is a critical molecule participating in several processes of autophagic ux including the initiation/assembly of autophagosome, docking/fusion of autophagosomes with lysosomes, and cargo degradation
We asked whether p62 upregulation during neuronal necroptosis is caused by impaired autophagic ux.
We checked the state of autophagic ux by monitoring the protein levels and cellular localization of LC3, a key marker of autophagy.
In all three cell culture models mentioned above, TNF-α treatment upregulated LC3-II, a standard indicator for autophagosomes, in a dose-dependent manner (Fig.
Strikingly, the levels of LC3-II and p62 were much higher with TSZ compared to TNF-α treatment (Fig.
Moreover, p62 levels in the insoluble fraction was sharply increased in TSZ treated cells (Fig.
To con rm this notion, we used recombinant adenoviral particles encoding GFP and mCherry tagged LC3 (Ad-GFP&mCherry-LC3) to evaluate autophagic ux
As shown in Fig.
This change was notably further ampli ed by treatment with zVAD and Smac mimetic (Fig.
To clarify whether the impaired autophagic ux contributes to necroptosis, we used an autophagic ux inhibitor chloroquine (CQ) that can effectively raise the lysosomal pH and inhibit proteases
Of note, CQ sharply increased the upregulation of p62 and LC3-II triggered by TNF-α or TSZ treatment and enhanced the activation of RIPK1 and MLKL, as well as the consequent neuronal necrosis (Fig.
Our data thus clearly show that impaired neuronal autophagic ux contributes to TNF-α-induced neuronal necroptosis.

UVRAG down-regulation by TSZ leads to neuronal necroptosis
We extended our study to the molecular mechanism of autophagy in TNF-α-mediated neuronal necroptosis.
We examined mRNA expression levels of a series of genes responsible for the recognition and fusion of autophagosome and lysosome
Real-time quantitative PCR (RT-qPCR) data showed that among the tested genes, UVRAG mRNA, was the most signi cantly downregulated by TSZ treatment (Fig.
To test this possibility, we constructed a SH-SY5Y cell line stably expressing UVRAG.
Data showed that UVRAG overexpression reversed TSZ-induced autophagic ux impairment and necroptosis activation by preventing LC3-II and p62 upregulation as well as RIPK1/MLKL phosphorylation (Fig.
Hence, our data infer that down-regulation of UVRAG transcription by TSZ impairs neuronal autophagic ux, leading to p62 accumulation and the onset of necroptosis.
UVRAG transcription is reduced through inactivation of NF-κB cIAP1/2 facilitates TNF-α-induced transcription factor NF-κB activation
Given that Smac mimetic(S), as an inhibitor of cIAP1/2, can induce strong neuronal necroptosis (Fig.
Therefore, we checked the level of RelA (p65), a key subunit of NF-κBs, before and after TSZ treatment.
Compared to TNF-α alone, TSZ did not alter the levels of RelA in cytoplasm, but reduced the levels in nuclei, indicative of an inhibition of NF-κB activation (Fig.
Next we analyzed the core promoter regions of Uvrag gene across species using ConTra v2 software and found a high-scoring NF-κB binding site (Fig.
Chromatin-IP (ChIP) qPCR showed that NF-κB indeed bound to the indicated region of the Uvrag promoter (Fig.
Importantly, TSZ signi cantly reduced the binding of RelA to the Uvrag promoter (Fig.
We thus conclude that Uvrag is a direct target of TNFα/TNFR1/NF-κB signaling and TSZ reduces UVRAG transcription by inhibiting NF-κB action.

Upregulation of UVRAG reduced neuronal necroptosis in AD
Based on our ndings, we considered that UVRAG upregulation may inhibit neuronal necroptosis in AD mice.
To test this hypothesis, we rst utilized AAV-mediated overexpression of UVRAG (Fig.
UVRAG overexpression did markedly suppress TNF-α-induced MLKL phosphorylation (Fig.
We next transduced cells in hippocampal CA1 regions with AAV expressing UVRAG or control GFP in APP/PS1 mice at 10-month age by intrahippocampal injection.
After 3 weeks, we sacri ced the APP/PS1 mice and measured p62 and p-MLKL levels in transfected neurons.
IHC images showed the average level of p62 in UVRAG-overexpressing neurons was 34.5% lower than that in control GFP expressing neurons (Fig.
Notably, UVRAG overexpression also lowered MLKL phosphorylation 36.5% (Fig.
These results support the notion that upregulation of UVRAG inhibits neuronal necroptosis in AD mice, and that UVRAG may thus be a potential target for AD intervention.

Discussion
Brain deterioration caused by neuronal loss is the most consequential feature of AD pathogenesis
The mechanistic study of neuronal loss is an object of even more intense study because neuronal loss starts at the early stage of AD, when Aβ plaques and neuro brillary tangles have not yet appeared
Therefore, targeting neuronal loss might slow or even prevent the progression of AD.
According to the amyloid cascade hypothesis, Aβ accumulation serves as an initial signal in AD, which leads to neuro brillary tangles and facilitates neuronal death and cognitive defects
A huge body of evidence shows that different forms of Aβ, either insoluble aggregates or soluble oligomers, can cause neuronal death by a rapid toxic effect on neurons [6] or by triggering chronic neuroin ammation and toxic cytokine release
As for the mechanism of neuronal cell death, distinct processes including apoptosis, necrosis, autophagy, and parthanatos have been described in AD as well as other NDs
Necroptosis, a programmed cell necrosis, is a more recently discovered pathway to cell death detected in several NDs
In AD, neuronal necroptosis activation has been observed in the brains of AD patients and rodent AD models
In line with these ndings, our data also nd upregulated protein levels of MLKL or p-MLKL, a necroptotic marker, in the brains of AD patients, APP/PS1 and 5xFAD mice (Fig.
Various extracellular stimuli can activate necroptosis, including TNF, interferon, and Toll-like receptor (TLR) signaling as well as viral infection
But the question has then been raised, how is neuronal necroptosis in AD initiated?
Given the accumulated evidence of elevated TNF-α in the CSF and brains of AD patients [18, 47], we hypothesized that upregulated TNF-α in AD brain might lead to the activation of neuronal necroptosis.
Using injection of recombinant TNF-α, an anti-TNFR1 neutralizing antibody, and AAV particles expressing TNFR1 shRNA, we provide evidence that activated neuronal necroptosis in APP/PS1 hippocampus is dependent on TNF-α/TNFR1 signaling (Fig.
In addition, using three different types of neuronal cell culture models, we also successfully observed that TNF-α treatment could induce cell necroptosis in vitro (Fig.
Thus, TNF-α, as a critical proin ammatory cytokine, also activates neuronal necroptosis in AD.
Our data also support the notion that neuronal necroptosis is likely a secondary source of cell death induced by Aβ-mediated neuroin ammation at a later stage in AD, consistent with previous ndings that necroptosis inhibitor Nec-1 can block Aβ-induced cell death in APP/PS1 mice, but with limited e cacy at early stages
Turning to details of the inferred pathway, Fig.
In the overall fate of neurons, RIPK1 is a key regulator of survival signaling, in ammation response, and pro-death stimuli in many human diseases such as autoimmune and NDs
TNF-α/TNFR1 mediated RIPK1 activation is the most comprehensively studied signaling pathway; it decides whether cells live or die by tightly regulating prosurvival NF-κB action, pro-apoptotic caspase activity, and necroptotic MLKL activation
We used our neuronal culture models and con rmed that RIPK1/RIPK3/MLKL cascade was activated upon TNF-α or TZS stimulation (Fig.
Consistently, RIPK1 inhibitor Nec-1 and RIPK1 KD both prevented phosphorylation of RIPK1/RIPK3/MLKL cascade (Fig.
We also saw the increased oligomerization of RIPK1 in TNF-α-induced necroptosis (Fig.
To further explore the mechanism of RIPK1-dependent neuronal necroptosis in AD, we focused on p62/SQSTM1, a RIPK1 binding partner that participates in both the ubiquitin-proteasome system (UPS)
and autophagic lysosomal degradation process in many diseases
In our cell culture models, we veri ed the complex formation of p62, RIPK1, RIPK3 and MLKL (Fig.
Some literature has reported lower p62 expression in the brains of AD patients and rodent models of AD
This discrepancy may result from biological differences among patients or in different animal models.
In our own study, data consistently show higher levels of p62 in TNF-α-treated cells in cultures, hippocampal CA1 cells in APP/PS1 mice, and neuronal cells in the cortexes of AD patients (Fig.
We further nd that p62 KD suppresses the activation of neuronal necroptosis in both cell cultures and in APP/PS1 mice (Fig,
Our results thus imply that p62 inhibition, a therapeutic modality in prostate cancer
p62 is also implicated in the interacting pathway of autophagy.
Impaired autophagic ux has been found to be able to induce cell death by disabling degradation of protein aggregates in NDs
As a critical regulator in autophagic ux as well, p62 was accumulated in both soluble form and in insoluble aggregates after TNF-α treatment (Fig.
Notably, autophagic ux was seen to be inhibited, also mediating RIPK1-dependent necroptosis (Fig.
TNF-α can damage autophagic ux by disrupting lysosome acidi cation and blocking the degradative function of autolysosomes
These hints led us to search for possible molecules involved in regulating autophagic ux.
We examined the mRNA levels of major genes participating in autophagosome recognition and autolysosome fusion.
Among the tested targets, UVRAG mRNA was the most one strikingly reduced in level by TSZ treatment (Fig.
UVRAG is in fact a critical modulator of several steps in autophagic ux, including autophagosome-lysosome fusion
In agreement with these ndings, our data clearly show that UVRAG overexpression can alleviate the impairment of autophagic ux and reduce RIPK1-dependent necroptosis (Fig.
UVRAG downregulation can likely disrupt autophagosome-lysosome fusion, resulting in p62 accumulation, which then further recruits RIPK1 to autophagosome and facilitates its oligomerization and auto-phosphorylation (Fig.
To understand how UVRAG expression was down-regulated during TSZ-induced cell necroptosis, we investigated the status of NF-κB, a key transcriptional factor acting downstream of TNF-α.
Because NF-κB transcriptional activity can be blocked by Smac mimetic-mediated inhibition of cIAP1/2, we predicted that UVRAG is a transcriptional target of NF-κB.
Indeed, we found a putative NF-κB binding site within the core promoter region of Uvrag gene, and ChIP-qPCR con rmed UVRAG as a direct transcriptional target of NF-κB (Fig.
Strikingly, AAV-mediated UVRAG overexpression reduced TNF-α-induced p-MLKL upregulation in both neuronal cultures and in APP/PS1 animal mice (Fig.
These ndings thus provide evidence that upregulation of UVRAG may be another route to suppress neuronal necroptosis in AD.

Conclusions
Overall, in the picture of TNF-α/TNFR1-dependent neuronal necroptosis in AD, there appear to be several key successive events, including UVRAG downregulation and autophagic ux impairment and p62 accumulation, which further leads to RIPK1 activation and subsequent neuronal necroptosis (Fig.
It remains unknown how other molecules and signaling pathways are modulated to precisely set levels of cell necroptosis in AD.
However, in a broader view, our results have demonstrated that in ammatory TNFα signaling, pro-survival NF-κB action, autophagic machinery, and RIPK1 activity are all tightly controlled and unbalanced during neuronal necroptosis in AD.
This may provide a general outline of the mechanism of neuronal necroptosis in other NDs as well.
Figures



Figure 1 TNF
Figure 1



Figure 2 TNF
Figure 2



Figure 3 TNF
Figure 3



Figure 4 p62
Figure 4



Figure 5 Impaired
Figure 5



Figure 6 UVRAG
Figure 6



Figure 7 UVRAG
Figure 7