Using the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative to improve early detection, diagnosis, and treatment of Alzheimer's disease
The Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) has accumulated 15 years of clinical, neuroimaging, cognitive, biofluid biomarker and genetic data, and biofluid samples available to researchers, resulting in more than 3500 publications.
This review covers studies from 2018 to 2020.
We identified 1442 publications using ADNI data by conventional search methods and selected impactful studies for inclusion.
Results: Disease progression studies supported pivotal roles for regional amyloid beta (Aβ) and tau deposition, and identified underlying genetic contributions to Alzheimer's disease (AD).
Vascular disease, immune response, inflammation, resilience, and sex modulated disease course.
Biologically coherent subgroups were identified at all clinical stages.
Practical algorithms and methodological changes improved determination of Aβ status.
Plasma Aβ, phosphorylated tau181, and neurofilament light were promising noninvasive biomarkers.
Prognostic and diagnostic models were externally validated in ADNI but studies are limited by lack of ethnocultural cohort diversity.
Discussion: ADNI has had a profound impact in improving clinical trials for AD.

INTRODUCTION
Currently in its 17th year and fourth phase, Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI)
This review updates previous works
Here, we provide a full listing of all publications and discuss key studies published from 2018 to 2020 with the goal of exploring how ADNI has contributed to our understanding of disease progression in AD and how this knowledge can be translated into successful clinical trials, leading to approved treatments which slow the progression of, and ultimately prevent the development of, AD.
The well-documented struggles of clinical trials to demonstrate significant cognitive benefits of disease-modifying therapies targeting amyloid beta (Aβ)
Which species of Aβ (e.g., fibrils, oligomers) is the appropriate target?
Is tau responsible for symptom progression?
Which species of tau is the appropriate target for treatment?
What other pathologies contribute to symptom progression?
Which population (dementia, mild cognitive impairment [MCI], cognitively unimpaired [CU]) is most likely benefit to from treatment?
Which biomarkers best detect AD pathology and monitor progression?
ADNI is uniquely positioned as a resource to examine these issues given the depth and breadth of its data and the availability of its samples.
Since its inception in 2004, ADNI participants have been followed for up to 15 years, providing crucial longitudinal data to aid in understanding progression for a disease in which pathology is now thought to arise decades before the onset of clinical symptoms.
The most recent 5-year phase of ADNI, ADNI3, 2 is nearing its completion.
In addition to the continuity of established biomarkers, ADNI has collected longitudinal positron emission tomography (PET) using the AV1451 (Flortaucipir) tau radiotracer (tau PET) that has allowed examination of disease progression from different perspectives.
A lipidomics
ADNI is unique in several respects.
First, ADNI participants are followed longitudinally with blood sampling and plasma banking, clinical evaluation, neuropsychological evaluation, genetics, lumbar puncture for cerebrospinal fluid (CSF; Aβ and tau), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) PET, Aβ PET, tau PET, and at-home digital cognitive testing, and participants are followed for autopsy (further details at:
Second, all ADNI data are available on
without embargo.
Third, ADNI biospecimens including samples of CSF, blood, urine, and brain tissue are available to researchers.
The impact of ADNI's data-and sample-sharing policies cannot be overstated.
Unrestricted sharing of research data has been unequivocally demonstrated to drive science progress,
There have been more than 140 million downloads of ADNI data by researchers worldwide, and > 30,000 samples have been shared.
These have resulted in more than 3500 publications in which ADNI is used as a primary data set, as a cohort in the external validation of developed models, as a control cohort, or in genetic studies requiring large sample sizes.
The cumulative impact of this body of work is reflected in a calculated h-index of 123 with ADNI publications garnering an average of almost 30 citations for a total of more than 75,000.
In comparison to National Institutes of Health (NIH)-funded studies in the same field, ADNI publications from the breadth of PubMed have a mean relative citation ratio (RCR)
The RCR metric is indexed against the expected influence of an NIH-funded study (RCR of 1) and has been demonstrated to identify works of differential influence and to correlate with opinions of subject experts.
These numbers therefore suggest a scientific impact of ≈twice that of the average NIH-funded study and are comparable to those of other large, longitudinal studies on aging such as the Health and Retirement Study.
e median RCR score of ADNI publications is also comparable to that of the ≈3500 publications arising from the long-running Framingham Heart Study (FHS),
The highest impact ADNI publication
It should be noted that ADNI has also provided convenient data sets to test primarily image processing methodologies in computer science and engineering studies that are not captured by the PubMed system.
In this way, ADNI has become an integral part of AD research across the globe.
This review initially examines how recent ADNI publications have contributed to our understanding of disease progression.
We consider the extent to which Aβ, tau, and neurodegeneration can predict disease course, and conversely, we also consider the limitations of these canonical AD neuropathologic features before examining the influence of factors beyond established AD pathology.
Subsequent sections describe approaches to determining Aβ status; the exciting and rapidly developing field of blood biomarkers for AD; and finally, improvements to clinical trials.
We have taken an integrated approach to topics, including evidence from a variety of fields that reflects their growing interdependence.
A reader's guide to the review structure summarizing its main points is presented in Table
This review focuses exclusively on ADNI publications and does not attempt a comprehensive review of the field.
A full list of the 1442 ADNI publications from 2018 to 2020 can be found in the supporting information.
All ADNI publications are searchable at

STUDIES OF DISEASE PROGRESSION

Data-driven models of disease progression
Understanding the sequence of biomarker changes in the continuum of AD progression is of increasing importance.
Since 2017, ADNI data ADNI studies have applied this knowledge to improving diagnosis and prognosis, developing blood biomarkers, and making other improvements to clinical trials for AD.
However, results may not be generalizable due to limited cohort diversity.
3. Future Directions: The next 5-year phase of ADNI (ADNI4) will enroll more minorities and less-educated individuals to ensure generalizability of prognostic and diagnostic methods and disease progression studies.
High sensitivity assays of plasma phosphorylated tau (ptau)217 and ptau181 will allow further investigation of AD blood biomarkers.
ADNI will continue to impact improvements to AD clinical trials.
have been used to validate previously published models in different cohorts, and to develop new models based on the expanded set of biomarkers, or which consider continuous instead of dichotomous biomarkers.
These widely support the Jack et al. model for the ordering of biomarkers
A model that jointly considered longitudinal changes terior cingulate cortex and precuneus.
Regional tau deposition was observed initially in the amygdala, inferior temporal lobe, and banks of the superior temporal sulcus, with deposition in the entorhinal cortex accelerating to become prominent 5 years before dementia diagnosis (Figure
A probabilistic Markov model
We have selected key studies to examine their contribution to our understanding of disease progression and how these aid in fulfilling the overarching goal of ADNI, the validation of biomarkers for AD clinical trials.

STUDIES OF DISEASE PROGRESSION
2.1.
Data-driven models of disease progression Models constructed using multimodal data largely recapitulate the theorized ordering of biomarkers but also highlight temporal and spatial heterogeneity in disease course.

Aβ in disease progression
Subthreshold Aβ accumulation is linked to subtle cognitive deficits in memory.
Staging of CU individuals by sequential regional Aβ accumulation predicted memory decline and is associated with CSF biomarkers and the APOE ε4 allele.
Recent ADNI studies have identified some of the genetic architecture underlying Aβ accumulation.

Tau deposition in disease progression
Tau PET studies suggest that regional tau accumulation is dependent on antecedent Aβ deposition and leads to regional atrophy.
Genetic factors beyond those associated with Aβ underlie tau deposition and subsequent neurodegeneration.
Resilience may be biologically based on components of the vascular, lipid-metabolic, and immune system.
Mechanisms may be sex dependent.

AT(N) biological classification of AD

Sex effects in AD
Biological sex influences AD progression and may be attributed to differences in genetics, hormones, environment, or resilience.
Greater susceptibility to AD in women may be due to the greater vulnerability to tau deposition in temporal regions resulting in differences in tau network structure.
Female specific reserve may counteract the increased vulnerability.

IMPROVING CLINICAL TRIALS AND CLINICAL PRACTICE

Clinical trials of prodromal AD
Improvements to clinical trials of prodromal AD participants include broadening selection criteria in accordance with AT(N) staging, better predicting the time frame of progression to AD, and accounting for treatment effects.

Clinical trials of preclinical AD
A stochastic model of a clinical trial of CU participants provided guidance for clinical trial design.
Subject selection based on subthreshold regional cortical Aβ accumulation may improve trial power.
Alternatively, subtle subjective and objective cognitive changes may be used for subject selection.
Tau PET may be an effective surrogate outcome measure with appropriate subject selection using Aβ Centiloid measures.

Assessing an individual's risk of progression
The ability to predict an individual's risk of decline in the clinic is fundamental to implementing personalized medicine.
Models using multimodal data have been operationalized into practical tools to aid the clinician.
The study, which used hidden Markov models to align participants' trajectories and estimate disease progression, identified tested the hypothesis that the pathological tau propagated preferentially along functionally strong and spatially short connections using resting state functional MRI (rs-fMRI) to assess interregional connectivity.
Aβ+ CU individuals had increased baseline and longitudinal tau PET uptake in temporoparietal and frontal regions, corresponding to regions with higher functional connectivity, compared to CU Aβparticipants.
Seed ROIs with higher tau accumulation rates were associated with tau PET changes in regions with higher functional connectivity (Figure
A model based on baseline tau, functional connectivity, and the spatial remoteness of connections predicted longitudinal tau spread at both group and individual levels better than models based on baseline tau and functional connectivity or distance alone (Figure
This demonstration that such stronger and closer functional connections predicted greater change in tau binding is consistent with transneuronal tau propagation.
A second study
The seeding of this model in the entorhinal cortex explained the greatest proportion of tau spread (70% of group and 51% of average individual tau spread) and was consistent with autopsy findings.
The use of a structural connectome assessed by diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) tractography predicted the observed pattern of tau spreading better than a functional network assessed by rs-fMRI (Figure
Regions with greater than predicted tau accumulation had greater Aβ burden, but antecedent Aβ deposition could not fully explain the observed pattern of tau PET, suggesting that although regional Aβ may accelerate the spread of tau tangles, tau spread may be influenced by other factors or be self-perpetuating.
disease progression score based on the differences in trajectories of cortical Aβ burden and hippocampal volume of an individual, compared to population curves derived from data-driven models, tracked longitudinal disease progression and predicted worsening clinical diagnosis.
Disease progression models may therefore be of use in discovering regional and temporal genetic variation in AD.
These data-driven models illustrate the power of considering different modalities in elucidating the intricacies of disease progres-

Aβ in disease progression
The extracellular deposition of Aβ into plaques is part of the definition of AD pathology and represents an early step in all models of disease progression discussed above.
Increased cortical Aβ accumulation below the threshold for Aβ positivity in CU elders was associated with worse memory decline, but not with decline in executive function.
The fastest-changing tertile of subthreshold CSF Aβ42 was associated with greater CSF biomarker abnormality, greater cortical Aβ burden, glucose hypometabolism, decline in the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE), and an increased risk of clinical progression to MCI.
The region of greatest early Aβ PET uptake, the banks of the superior temporal sulcus, was operationalized as a staging method to investigate this association further.
The rate of memory decline in CU elders in stage I (positive for Aβ accumulation in this region but negative for uptake in a composite cortical region)
Studies of summary scores of polygenic risk (polygenic risk scores and/or polygenic hazard scores) indicated that their association with CSF Aβ42 or cortical Aβ was driven primarily by the APOE ε4 allele.

Tau deposition in disease progression
ADNI tau PET data have allowed researchers to move beyond neuropathological studies to investigate neurofibrillary tau pathology in vivo.
A feature of normative aging is the accumulation of tau tangles within the medial temporal lobe (MTL), termed primary age-related tauopathy (PART), which is associated with subtle cognitive effects.
Aβ-participants, regional MTL tau PET SUVR was not associated with longitudinal cortical atrophy,
However, in the same individuals, regional MTL tau PET SUVR was associated with MTL subregional atrophy that recapitulated Braak staging, suggesting that 18F-flortaucipir detects tau pathology from PART in the MTL.
The sequence of events leading to tau-dependent neurodegeneration beyond normative aging in individuals with suprathreshold Aβ deposition was investigated by several ADNI studies.
First, temporal region tau PET accumulation was observed only in CU participants with high (>68 Centiloids [CL])
antecedent Aβ deposition in the Mayo Clinic Study of Aging,
However, these findings were not totally supported by ADNI data.
Second, tau PET binding in the transentorhinal cortex, an early site of neurofibrillary tangle accumulation, was positively associated with longitudinal atrophy within the MTL in CU and impaired Aβ+ but not Aβ-individuals.
Broader MTL tau PET binding in Aβ+ individuals was positively associated with longitudinal atrophy in temporal and orbitofrontal regions
Taken together, these results support an active process of neurodegeneration specific to tau pathology that is dependent on antecedent Aβ deposi-tion and that spreads from the entorhinal cortex to laterotemporal and orbitofrontal regions.
However, the Aβ plaque deposition measured by Aβ PET may not be the species of Aβ that drives tau deposition, neurodegeneration, and cognitive decline.
Some have suggested that Aβ oligomers (not detected by Aβ PET), which are associated with Aβ plaques, may be toxic Aβ species.
Tau accumulation may be influenced by genetic factors independently of APOE ε4-influenced Aβ accumulation.
Beyond APOE, polygenic risk scores and/or polygenic hazard scores were associated with CSF total tau (t-tau) and p-tau181,
The established risk locus, rs74473 in BIN1, was associated with higher global tau PET uptake independently of Aβ status, and with elevated tau in regions corresponding to Braak stages II-VI (Figure
These results are consistent with the hypothesis that the protein encoded by BIN1 risk variants aggravates tau but not Aβ pathology.
A genome-wide interaction analysis of epistatic interactions
The pair with the most significantly altered expression was MAPK9, associated with t-tau, p-tau181, and neurofibrillary tangles, and CAMKK1, involved in tau phosphorylation.
Although it is well known that the APOE ε4 allele is associated with levels of Aβ, it may also independently modulate tau.
In two independent cohorts of participants across the AD spectrum, APOE ε4 carriers had increased tau PET SUVR in the bilateral entorhinal cortex and hippocampus independently of Aβ PET global SUVR, implicating greater tau pathology as a cause of increased regional neurodegeneration observed in these individuals.
Therefore, it is likely that the deleterious consequences of APOE ε4 in AD extend beyond its link with Aβ.
It has been known for many years that the regional pattern of Aβ plaque spread in AD differs from that of closely associated patterns of tau spread and neurodegeneration (Figure
The molecular underpinnings of this differential regional vulnerability to Aβ deposition and subsequent neurodegeneration were investigated by examining the brain transcriptional architecture underlying these patterns.
Regional expression of the genes coding for the APP (APP) and for tau (MAPT) was correlated with regional Aβ deposition and regional neurodegeneration, respectively, but not vice versa.
Gene set enrichment analysis identified differential gene sets underlying regional vulnerability to Aβ deposition and neurodegeneration.
Aβ-vulnerable regions were characterized by low expression of genes implicated in protein folding and degradation, suggesting that these may contribute to Aβ aggregation, and also by the low expression of mitochondrial respiration genes.

AT(N) biological classification of AD
The National Institute on Aging-Alzheimer's Association AT(N)
research framework for the biological definition of AD
There may exist a biologically relevant "gray zone" around the biomarker threshold that reflects the difficulty in defining the exact point at which changes in biomarkers result in a significantly worse cognitive trajectory that may be indicative of other etiologies or mixed pathologies contributing to cognitive decline.
The NIA-AA framework document discussed this at length and pointed out that while binarizing the AT(N) groups into ± is one option, all AT(N) measures are continuous and other options for cut points might be more useful in certain situations.
The trajectory of impairment in the preclinical Alzheimer's cognitive composite (PACC)
Subthreshold changes in Aβ and tau that are not detected in the dichotomous AT(N) classification may represent a state of worsening yet not abnormal biomarkers with implications for disease trajectory.
In CU elders, subthreshold Aβ accumulation, but not baseline Aβ load, was associated with decline in a composite memory score, but not in a composite executive function score,
The ADNI data set has been especially useful in studying how the choice of biomarker within each AT(N) category may affect patient staging.
CSF and PET measures of Aβ pathology provide different information as evidenced by the finding that decreases in CSF Aβ42
precede Aβ PET positivity.
The transition to CSF Aβ abnormality was predicted at a cutoff of 12 CL of Aβ PET, whereas the transition to Aβ
PET positivity occurred at ≈30 CL.
Regardless of tau PET status, individuals with suprathreshold CSF p-tau181 were more likely to be Aβ+, have elevated tau PET binding in Braak stage ROIs, and have accelerated rates of antecedent p-tau181 accrual than those with subthreshold CSF p-tau181.
The CSF+/PET-discordance in tau may therefore represent an intermediate stage in AD pathogenesis that may or may not be recognized by AT(N) staging depending on the biomarker used.
and clinical practice.
e use of additional biomarkers of different aspects of neurodegeneration has been an active area of study and may increase staging precision and the prediction of decline.
CSF neuronal pentraxin, a marker reflecting the loss of synaptic regulation, was decreased in AD compared to CU elders, strongly predicted both memory and global cognition, and in a ratio with tau accurately discriminated between AD and CU individuals independently of Aβ.
(SNAP-25), also predicted cognitive decline.
Levels of CSF neurogranin, SNAP-25, and visinin-like protein 1 were highly correlated and elevated at baseline as a function of Aβ positivity.
NfL, a marker of neuronal damage, can now be accurately measured in plasma in addi-tion to CSF,
Longitudinal changes in plasma NfL were associated with both AD neuropathology and neurodegeneration across diagnostic groups.

BEYOND AT(N): OTHER INFLUENCES ON DISEASE PROGRESSION
The multifactorial nature of AD is well recognized and there has been increasing acknowledgment that the cascade of Aβ deposition leading to tau deposition and neurodegeneration is insufficient to fully explain the diversity of disease trajectories.
What other factors, then, influence disease progression and how do they affect the selection of participants for clinical trials and subsequent interpretation of findings?
Several studies described in Section 2 identified heterogeneous pathways of disease progression
In addition, neuropathological examination frequently identifies co-pathologies such as cerebral amyloid angiopathy, limbic-predominant age-related TDP-43 encephalopathy neuropathological change, and Lewy bodies.
Although we do not comprehensively review these pathologies, several studies highlight their contribution to AD. CSF α-synuclein, the major component of Lewy bodies, predicted cognitive measures and progression to AD dementia,
though the AT(N) research framework is currently most commonly implemented using the biomarkers in Section 2.4, it was constructed to be flexible in the incorporation of new biomarkers and to the addition of new biomarker categories reflecting the multifactorial etiology of AD such as genetic risk, cerebrovascular disease, cognitive reserve, and inflammation.
The use of these additional categories of biomarkers may help to better define cognitive trajectories in elders with "gray zone" A or T biomarkers.
is section will discuss evidence for subtypes of AD that have different disease trajectories, the effect of cerebrovascular disease on both Aβ and tau pathways, the growing recognition of the importance of the immune system in AD, mechanisms of cognitive resilience, and how sex influences disease progression.
It is important to note that these are not discrete categories of factors; there is ample evidence for their interplay.
Recent ADNI genetic studies that have identified novel loci or investigated established AD risk alleles have predominantly identified the factors described above.
While a discussion of these findings is beyond the scope of this review, these studies are summarized in Tables

Heterogeneity
AD is an inherently heterogeneous disorder with wide variance in biomarkers or cognitive tests that confound understanding disease progression and treatment.
ADNI has continued to be instrumental in identifying sources of heterogeneity and characterizing subtypes of AD.
A data-driven approach using a wide range of neuropsychological tests identified six clusters across the spectrum of ADNI participants and identified their characteristic biomarkers.
In addition to a "healthy" subgroup with normal cognition and biomarkers, a second "worried well" subgroup with no diagnosis of cognitive impairment was characterized by higher subjective cognitive decline and may represent preclinical AD.
Two MCI groups were identified, a lesserimpaired, younger, and more highly educated "affective MCI" subgroup comprised mostly of early MCI participants and a more highly impaired "uncompensated MCI" group split between ADNI early and late MCI groups that had an increasing severity of other biomarkers (MRI, FDG PET, CSF).
Two distinguishable subtypes of AD were iden-tified.
"Anosognosia dementia" was characterized by maximum severity of cognitive impairment with low self-awareness of impairment and widespread atrophy and comprised almost entirely ADNI AD participants.
In addition, "insightful dementia" had better cognitive scores and self-awareness, regional rather than whole brain atrophy, and included some late MCI and early MCI participants.
It is unclear whether these clusters represent different stages or different trajectories of progression, but the novel identification of distinct AD subgroups, distinguished in part by levels of self-awareness, has implications for diagnosis and treatment assignments.
Neuropsychologically derived MCI subtypes may represent different trajectories of progression underlaid by differences in biomarkers.
A "neuropsychological early MCI" subtype was characterized by impairment in memory and naming domains, a "neuropsychological F I G U R E 5 Progression of regional atrophy of subgroups of temporal and phenotypic heterogeneity.
Rows show the progression pattern of three major subtypes: a typical, a cortical and a subcortical subtype, as well as an additional very small outlier parietal group (only 4%) that may represent outliers with a posterior cortical atrophy phenotype.
CVS, cross-validations.
Reproduced with permission from Young et al.
These groups had nonoverlapping survival curves (Figure
In contrast, ADNI early and late MCI groups were less well defined in their survival curves (Figure
Consideration of temporal in addition to phenotypic heterogeneity
The Typical subgroup, Cortical, and Subcortical subtypes were characterized by atrophy beginning in the hippocampus and amygdala; insula and cingulate; and pallidum, putamen, and caudate, respectively.
A parietal subtype was also identified in one data set that was characterized by posterior cortical atrophy, younger age, and worse performance on special subtests.
Although mixtures of the subtypes were expressed within individuals, more AD than MCI individuals were strongly assigned to a subtype, raising the possibility that these phenotypes may be more strongly expressed later in disease progression.
A similar approach that jointly considered both cognitive deficits and atrophy patterns identified three latent factors in MCI and AD participants that were stable across time.
e first was associated with MTL atrophy, episodic memory deficits, and tau binding in MTL regions, and appears consistent with the "Typical" pattern described above.
The second latent factor was characterized by lateral temporal atrophy and language deficits and had no associations with tau deposition.
The third latent factor was characterized by posterior cortical atrophy, deficits in visuospatial abilities and executive function deficits, tau binding in lateral temporal and posterior cortical regions, and younger age.
Individuals differed in their expression of each of the latent factors, reflecting the possibility of multiple coexisting pathologies.
netic differences may underlie identified subgroups.
Reproducible genetic differences were found in subgroups of AD individuals defined by impairments in memory, executive function, language, visuospatial, or multiple domains.
Relative memory impairment was associated with higher levels of APOE ε4 than other subgroups, and 33 novel suggestive loci outside APOEapproached genome-wide significance for at least one subgroup, suggesting that these subgroups are biologically coherent (Figure
In a novel approach, subgroups of participants across the AD spectrum were identified from differences in blood proteins and metabolites, primarily levels of β2-microglobulin, cystatin-C, thrombospondin, and seven other plasma proteins (Figure
bgroups were characterized by distinct patterns of cortical and subcortical atrophy, suggesting that biochemical differences may underlie the subtypes identified using atrophy patterns.
Biological subtypes of AD were identified based on differences in CSF proteomes between AD and CU participants across two cohorts.
ree distinct subtypes were identified, characterized by hyperplasticity, activation of the innate immune system, and blood brain barrier dysfunction, respectively, and each subtype was associated with distinct cognitive, cortical thickness, and CSF biomarker profiles.
All subtypes had an excess of genetic risk for AD and did not differ in disease severity or presence of co-pathologies.
Converging evidence from multiple angles-neuropsychological, imaging, blood biomarkers, genetics, and proteomics-points to substantial heterogeneity underlying disease progression.
A "classic" AD subgroup was identified by multiple approaches,
er subgroups feature primarily non-memory cognitive deficits, commensurate atrophy patterns, and associations with distinct genetic loci.
Of note, a subgroup was characterized by younger age of onset, faster progression, posterior cortical atrophy, cognitive deficits in visuospa-tial tasks, and a higher frequency of APOE ε4 carriers by multiple studies
A very recent study described and replicated four similar subgroups with distinct trajectories from tau PET scans.
Further investigation of disease subgroups is required to establish biological coherence and the relationship between subgroups defined by cognitive measures, atrophy, and plasma biomarkers.
These studies will play an important role in both identifying participants for clinical trials and guiding clinical care with the development of personalized medicine approaches.

Cerebrovascular disease
Cerebrovascular disease, consisting of microvascular changes that cause impaired cerebral perfusion such as white matter (WM) lesions, microinfarcts, and hemorrhages is increasingly recognized as a major contributor to AD, vascular dementia, Lewy body disease, and other conditions.
It is observed in 60% to 90% of AD patients and may act to exacerbate clinical dementia risk although the underlying mechanisms are complex.
Cerebrovascular disease may act directly, as an additive contribution to cognitive decline, independently of Aβ and tau pathology, or may interact with Aβ deposition or tau burden.
Recent ADNI studies have made important contributions of cerebrovascular disease to an emerging framework of these mechanisms.
Cerebrovascular events can be directly caused by a lack of blood flow to the brain due cardiovascular disease.
Smoking,
Cognitive decline in ADNI participants with Type 2 diabetes mellitus was mediated by baseline cortical thickness.
These participants also had decreased regional cerebral cortical Aβ compared to participants without Type 2 diabetes mellitus,
These studies are consistent with a mechanism by which Type 2 diabetes mellitus exerts its effect on cognition via "classic" AD pathology and neurodegeneration.
A major manifestation of cerebrovascular disease is WM hyperintensities (WMHs) on T2-weighted MRI.
These have been associated with decline of global cognition rather than the specific cognitive domains typical of AT(N) pathology.
Greater WMH volume was associated with worse baseline and longitudinal performances over a range of cognitive and functional tests across ADNI participants (Figure
Increased WMHs were also associated with higher levels of plasma NfL, a marker of axonal degeneration, in MCI and AD participants.
The relationship was significantly attenuated by age, suggesting that WMHs are linked to neuronal damage in an age-dependent manner.
It is important to note that these associations have been identified in the relative absence of cerebrovascular disease due to ADNI's cerebrovascular exclusion criteria (
How does cerebrovascular disease worsen cognition?
Its effect may be direct, or mediated by "classic" AD pathologies, or both.
Individuals with neurodegeneration in the absence of Aβ deposition (i.e., having suspected non-AD pathology) had high WMH burden, suggesting that cerebrovascular disease may directly drive hippocampal atrophy and cognitive decline.
Increased WMH burden was to a lesser degree associated with lower CSF Aβ42 across diagnostic groups, independently of CSF p-tau181 and CSF t-tau, and APOEstatus,
In Aβ-CU elders, regional increases in WMHs spanning superior regions of the frontal and parietal lobes were associated with faster rates of regional subthreshold Aβ accumulation in cortical regions characterized by early Aβ accumulation.
This study is consistent with models in which cerebrovascular alterations are one of the earliest AD pathological changes.
Across CU, MCI, and AD participants, increased cortical Aβ load and WMH volume were associated with lower cortical thickness.
However, the association between WMH volume and cortical thickness in AD-associated regions held even in the absence of Aβ, suggesting an additive effect of Aβ and cerebrovascular disease on neurodegeneration.
Together, these results support independent and additive mechanisms for the effect of cerebrovascular disease on cognitive decline: one age-related and independent of "classic" AD pathology, and a second, related to AD pathology, that may occur very early in disease progression.
An additional Aβ-independent pathway for the effect of cerebrovascular disease on cognitive decline in AD may involve tau pathology.
creased WMH volume was associated with higher plasma t-tau concentration independently of CSF Aβ42, with an increasing strength of the interaction across diagnostic stages (Figure
The interaction of WMH and plasma t-tau, independently of CSF Aβ42, was associated with increased likelihood of MCI and AD, indicating their combined impact on cognitive decline.
Although the plasma measurement of t-tau reflects neurodegeneration rather than phosphorylated tau, neuropathological studies of ADNI participants in which arteriosclerosis was positively associated with Braak neurofibrillary tau staging support the association of cerebrovascular damage with neurofibrillary tangles.
Future confirmatory studies using plasma measures of phosphorylated tau may clarify these associations.
The effect of cerebrovascular disease on cognition may be modulated by carriage of the APOE ε4 allele, which has far-reaching effects via numerous Aβ-dependent and independent pathways.
Some studies reported APOE ε4-independent associations between vascular disease and AD biomarkers
(2)
The apolipoprotein E (APOE) ε4 allele may increase WMHs via induction of CAA.
(3) APOE ε4 exacerbates effect of vascular risk factors on cognition.
(4) CVD has an age-related effect on general cognition which increases MCI to AD transition.
(5) Aβ-mediated and direct effects of CVD are additive.
Other studies have found both direct and additive interactions.
(6) Aβ is associated with WMHs independently of tau.
erall, these studies provide further evidence for the detrimental effect of vascular risk factors on neurodegeneration and decline.
Cerebrovascular disease may exert its effect directly, via Aβ or tau deposition, or by a combination of pathways, and its effect may be exacerbated by the APOE ε4 allele (Figure

Immune response
Multiple strands of evidence from recent studies using ADNI genetics Overall, these studies are coalescing around the model of a key role of innate immune response in AD in which this response exerts its effect after the establishment of both Aβ and tau pathology.
The importance of this response is underscored by the strong deleterious or protective effects of AD risk alleles such as TREM2 and PLCG2, and supports the addition of a biologically relevant "immune dysfunction" category to AT(N) staging.

3.4
The role of resilience If the effect of resilience is specific to AD rather than normal aging, what is its biological basis?
As discussed in Section 3.3, CSF proteins with vascular, lipid-metabolic, and immune system functions explained substantial variance between observed cognitive scores and those predicted by the level of AD biomarker abnormality.
These may impact resilience through mechanisms such as the maintenance of brain regions important in cognition, resilience to pathological changes, and resistance to pathological changes (Figure
A resilience signature comprising a pattern of higher glucose metabolism in the anterior cingulate cortices and anterior temporal poles was identified in Aβ+ participants aged 80 and older who were cognitively stable for 5 years or more.
This signature, but not glucose metabolism, Aβ PET, or cortical thickness in AD-typical regions, predicted global cognition.
Moreover, higher FDG PET uptake in this signature was associated with lower vascular risk, suggesting a role for vascular health in maintaining resilience residing in regions beyond those associated with AD.
Resilience may also lie in the maintenance of functional and structural connectivity.
In CU participants, greater internetwork functional connectivity primarily between the default mode network and dorsal attention network attenuated the association between Aβ burden and memory decline.
The opposite relationship was observed in MCI participants, suggesting that reordering of internetwork connections may compensate for the effects of Aβ deposition early in disease progression but fail in the face of increasing pathology. 120
MCI non-converters and those without AD pathology had hyperconnectivity between the entorhinal cortex and hippocampus, sites of early Aβ and tau accumulation, whereas MCI converters and those with AD pathology, and AD participants had hypoconnectivity between these regions, supporting a compensatory role for increased regional functional connectivity.
Greater global functional connectivity of the left frontal cortex, a major hub within the frontoparietal control network, was associated with better than expected memory in the face of neurodegeneration and so functions as a measure of reserve capacity.
gher between-and within-network connectivity in this region was unaffected by entorhinal tau or Aβ binding but interacted with entorhinal tau PET uptake to attenuate the negative effects of tau on memory performance.
Similarly, resilience was associated with preservation of small world network organization in the brain's structural connectome.
In Aβ+ CU participants, better-than-expected cognitive performance was associated with increased gray matter (GM) volume and WM connections of hub-like regions.
Both studies implicate preservation of structural and functional brain networks as likely mechanisms for resilience.
A large genetic analysis of multiple cohorts including ADNI identified genetic variants and biological pathways associated with a combined resilience metric consisting of educational attainment and residuals of cognitive measures independent of Aβ status.
The metric was genetically correlated with educational attainment, a range of neuropsychiatric phenotypes, hormonal traits, and smoking-related factors, but not with AD or APOE.
For example, genetic risk for obsessive-compulsive disorder, old age at first birth, and at initiation of smoking were associated with high resilience whereas higher age of smoking cessation and cigarettes per day, and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder were associated with lower resilience.
Top variants associated with the metric were upstream of ATP8B1 on chromosome 18.
ATP8B1 encodes aminophospholipid transferase, an enzyme involved in the bile acid homeostasis in the liver, and additional analysis found that higher levels of two bile acids was associated with lower resilience.
Finally, pathway analyses identified molecular pathways involving branched chain fatty acids and dehydrogenases, suggesting that deficits in their metabolism influence resilience.
Together, these results suggest key contributors to resilience include educational attainment, vascular and metabolic risk, bile acid homeostasis, and mental health.
These results point to the contribution of vascular, metabolic, or immune-related factors acting via multiple mechanisms in maintaining cognition in the face of AD pathology until the point of failure, beyond which there is a rapid decline to cognition commensurate with AD pathology.

Sex effects in AD
Biological sex is a critical variable for consideration in AD.
More than 65% of Americans with AD are women 125 and being female is one of the strongest predictors of AD.
This increased risk may be caused by genetic factors, exposure to ovarian hormones, environmental factors, differences in resilience, or some combination thereof that contributes to AD-related pathological changes, 126 although the most significant factor in greater dementia prevalence in women versus men is likely greater life expectancy.
ADNI has contributed to understanding of the nature of sex-related differences in dementia risk, particularly through the availability of tau PET imaging data and serum samples for metabolomics analyses.

MCI participants stratified as being either high or low likelihood
for MCI due to AD by CSF t-tau/Aβ42 showed clear sex differences in cognitive decline over up to 10 years. 127
MCI females at low risk had the smallest rates of decline in cognition but those at high risk far exceeded all other groups in decline (Figure
This study also reported an additive effect of sex and the carriage of the APOE ε4 allele on cognition such that female carriers declined faster than male carriers, consistent with previous reports of a greater adverse effect of APOE ε4 in women than men.
However, the sex-specific associations of APOE ε4 with AD-related markers may vary across diagnostic groups.
In CU men but not women, APOE ε4 was associated with smaller hippocampal volume and hypometabolism.
There were no sex differences in the associations of this allele at the MCI stage, suggesting that the effects of APOE ε4 manifest themselves at a later stage in women than men.
In AD, APOE ε4 was associated with greater Aβ burden in men only.
A second study reported that sex modulated the relationship between APOE ε4 and brain tau deposition primarily in the entorhinal cortex, amygdala, and parahippocampal gyrus in MCI participants such that female carriers had a greater susceptibil-ity to the accumulation of neurofibrillary tangles than male carriers.
APOE ε4 is commonly used for participant stratification in clinical trials, failure to account for sex differences in its effect across disease progression may complicate interpretation of results.
Vulnerability to tau deposition may underlie susceptibility to AD in women.
The APOE ε4 allele was more highly associated with CSF tau levels in women than in men, suggesting that the sex-specific effect of APOE on AD risk acts via tau.
The availability of tau PET data from ADNI has facilitated studies of the effect of sex on in vivo tau binding.
In CU and MCI women but not men, significantly higher tau PET SUVR across multiple cortical regions was associated with faster cognitive decline.
Compared to CU men, CU women had higher Aβ-dependent tau accumulation in primarily temporal regions 130 and increasing Aβ burden was associated with higher tau binding in the entorhinal cortex but not in extratemporal regions.
These results suggest that Aβdependent entorhinal cortical tau accumulates in a female sex-specific manner early in disease progression.
It would be expected that this degree of pathology would impact early cognitive decline, but in fact a verbal memory advantage for CU women is well documented and may be related to sex-specific reserve.
Despite higher florbetapir SUVR uptake, CU women had higher verbal memory scores than men, and Aβ+ women had higher than expected verbal memory scores for their level of tau pathology.
At autopsy, this sex advantage was observed at the earlier Braak stages I/II and III/IV, but no sex differences in verbal memory were observed at late stages V/VI.
Interestingly, sex-specific differences in tau propagation across the brain were observed using tau-PET to construct tau connectivity networks.
The most striking difference was that widespread tau PET uptake increased from CU to MCI to a much greater extent in women than men.
In MCI women, the tau network was dense with a high number of direct connections between individual brain regions and may have developed from differences in network nodes at the CU stage (Figure
The maintenance of female verbal advantage despite the more "advanced" tau network in CU and MCI women underscores the importance of reserve in maintaining cognition at the early stages.
Eventually, greater numbers of interregional tau network connections may accelerate the spread of tau and explain the faster progression of women from MCI to AD.
These results suggest that there is not only a female-specific vulnerability to tau in temporal regions such as the entorhinal cortex, but a female-specific reserve able to overcome early tau load to maintain verbal memory.
Tau deposition and changes in network structure may eventually overcome mechanisms of reserve and lead to a rapid decline in memory, resulting in women "catching up" with men in tau distribution and memory impairment in AD.
Hormonal differences may underlie the greater vulnerability to tau pathology in women.
Lower testosterone levels were associated with higher CSF p-tau181 levels, especially in APOE ε4 carriers, regardless of sex.
The lower testosterone levels typically found in women may therefore predispose them to pathological tau, and this vulnerability may be worse in female APOE ε4 carriers.
What are the mechanisms underlying the effect of sex, alone or in combination with the APOE ε4 allele, in disease progression?
Framing Overall, these studies suggest that differential Aβ-dependent tau deposition, and mechanisms of reserve may contribute to sex differences in disease progression.
Failure to account for the effect of these sex differences through disease progression could complicate interpretation of trial data.
An additional topic for future research is the interaction between sex differences and aging and the ADNI database provides information that could be used to address this.

TESTS FOR AD
Effective testing for AD in an array of settings-clinical, research,

Improvements to measurement of CSF Aβ and Aβ PET
Although CSF Aβ42 and Aβ PET are highly correlated, 136 they cannot be considered equivalent.
CSF Aβ42 measures a soluble form of Aβ, which may reach abnormality in individuals at a different point in disease progression than the cortical fibrillar forms of Aβ detected by Aβ PET.
Moreover, Aβ PET uses different radiotracers ( 11 C-PiB,
Underscoring these differences, examination of simultaneous longitudinal trajectories of Aβ PET and CSF Aβ42 suggested that the CSF measure becomes abnormal prior to abnormality on Aβ PET, but that abnormality on Aβ PET better predicts cognitive decline.
e false equivalence of Aβ status determined by a variety of methods can hamper the development of prediction models, and therefore the development of a set of universal and generalizable thresholds for Aβ positivity in both methods of measurement is crucial.
The CL method enables the direct comparison of Aβ radiotracers by representing tracer SUVR on a 0 to 100 scale.
Two inflection points in Aβ deposition were observed in a study deriving optimal CL thresholds in CU participants.
The first at 12 CL predicted CSF Aβ42 positivity and may represent the early transition to subtle Aβ pathology, and the second near the threshold established by visual raters at ≈30 CL predicted CSF tau/Aβ42 and is consistent with the transition to widespread Aβ pathology.
Multi-tracer staging models of Aβ binding may also circum-vent the use of cohort-specific global SUVR cutoffs and detect subthreshold Aβ abnormality.
e measurement of CSF Aβ42 is affected by pre-analytical and analytical variables, an issue partially overcome by the ADNI Biomarker Core's use of the Roche ElecSys platform.
CSF immunoassays of Aβ42, p-tau181/Aβ42, and t-tau/Aβ42 using this platform predicted decline in MMSE and progression to AD.
These were transferable across independent cohorts despite different PET tracers, patient populations, pre-analytical protocols, and other variables; had a high concordance with Aβ PET classification; and predicted 2-year clinical decline in MCI individuals.
CSF biomarkers measured using the ElecSys platform and dichotomized with these cut points may therefore obviate the need for costlier and less accessible Aβ PET.

Low-cost and/or non-invasive approaches for the determination of Aβ status
In the United States, an estimated 14.9 million patients aged 55 and over with MCI due to AD may be eligible for an anti-Aβ therapy, should one be approved, a number representing a huge screening challenge.
Low-cost and/or non-invasive tests for Aβ status may circumvent drawbacks of CSF and PET assessments.
Several externally validated algorithms using readily available clinical information were designed to function as a primary care prescreen funneling high-risk patients toward CSF or PET confirmation of Aβ status.
4]
similar algorithm was estimated to reduce screening PET scans for clinical trial enrichment by ≈23%, a savings of > US$25 million based on the enrollment of a cohort of 1000 Aβ+ MCI individuals.
A classifier based on features selected from T1 MRI and DTI was estimated to eliminate 60% of unnecessary confirmatory PET or CSF tests in the enrollment of CU participants, reducing overall trial costs by 47%.
Plasma assays for Aβ are described in the following section.

Blood tests for AD
Perhaps the most exciting and impactful recent ADNI studies have concerned the development of blood tests for AD.
Detection of AD pathology in blood is far more challenging due to the much higher concentration of non-AD proteins, but improvements in ultrasensitive assay As the AT(N) biological construct for AD requires not only Aβ, but tau abnormality, a blood biomarker that correlates with both pathological proteins and thus predicts AD is somewhat of a Holy Grail of AD research.
Several ADNI studies used an ultrasensitive single molecule array (Simoa-Quanterix) assay to measure plasma p-tau181 and to investigate its associations with Aβ and tau pathology,
This biomarker alone was a moderate predictor of Aβ status (AUC of 0.67) in MCI but not CU in one study;
an accurate predictor in combination with age and sex in MCI (AUC of 79.9) but not CU (AUC 70.4) in a second study (Figure
Aβ and tau pathology measured by PET most strongly in MCI and AD, but also in CU participants.
Baseline levels of plasma p-tau181 were strongly associated with widespread Aβ deposition in MCI and AD participants (Figure
Moreover, weaker associations were detected in CU participants with subthreshold Aβ deposition in sites of early Aβ accumulation (precuneus and temporal and superior frontal regions; Figure
Longitudinal and, to a lesser degree, baseline plasma p-tau181, was also associated with an AD-typical pattern of widespread cortical tau aggregation 6 years later (Figure
Like CSF p-tau181, the plasma biomarker reached abnormality ≈6 years after measures of Aβ. 151 Plasma p-tau181 increased with worsening diagnostic status, and predicted MCI to AD progression, cognitive decline, and hippocampal atrophy.
These results validate plasma p-tau181 as a biologically relevant biomarker that accurately reflects both Aβ and tau pathology.
It may therefore both fulfill a need for a rapid and cost-effective "first pass" test of AD in primary care that could identify patients requiring further, more expensive diagnostic tests, and enable the identification of individuals at high risk of AD for clinical trials.
In addition to p-tau181, there is considerable excitement concerning other species of phosphorylated tau such as p-tau217.
As assays for p-tau181, p-tau217, and possibly others become more widely available, head-tohead comparison studies will become possible.
Neurodegeneration is the final requirement in the biological staging of AD.
NfL reflects axonal injury and can be measured in blood by immunoassays.
Plasma NfL levels increased linearly across diagnostic groups
Longitudinal NfL changes were associated with longitudinal changes in a wide range of AD measures (CSF, FDG PET, GM and WM volumes, ADAS-Cog) increasing differentially across diagnostic groups in a manner consistent with disease progression.
In CU participants, longitudinal NfL was more strongly associated with "early" pathological features such as low hippocampal volume and lower CSF Aβ42, whereas an association with ADAS-Cog was predominant in AD participants.
Distinct NfL trajectories were observed in participants stratified by AT(N) status, CSF Aβ42 status, CSF p-tau181 status, or the status of a temporal cortical atrophy composite (Figure
asma NfL was associated with AD-typical regions of Aβ PET uptake in CU but not in MCI participants, and of tau PET uptake in MCI but not CU participants.
9 Finally, a peripheral signature of AD risk containing plasma markers of cardiovascular health, immune and inflammatory systems, hormone levels, and lipid metabolism outperformed brain features when combined with CSF biomarkers to predict diagnostic progression.
These approaches offer complementary information to plasma AT(N) biomarkers and have the potential to fine-tune the prediction of future decline.
They may be particularly relevant if additional categories reflecting, for example, vascular or immune system dysfunction were added to AT(N) staging.

DEVELOPMENT OF TOOLS TO IMPROVE CLINICAL TRIALS AND CLINICAL PRACTICE
The structure of ADNI as a simulated clinical trial with clearly defined inclusion and exclusion criteria and a wealth of longitudinal data and samples has made it an ideal testing ground for novel approaches to improve clinical trials and to fulfill its primary objective.
As an ancillary benefit, ADNI data have also been used in studies aimed at improving patient diagnosis and management in clinical practice.
In many cases, these improvements are informed by knowledge gained from the disease progression studies described in previous sections.

Clinical trials of prodromal AD

Clinical trials of preclinical AD

Assessing an individual's risk of progression

Methodological improvements to automated diagnosis and prognosis
Automated diagnostic approaches that use machine learning algorithms, in particular deep learning strategies, 186 to extract and combine information from multiple modalities have the potential to aid
Two recent works have sought to overcome some of these barriers.
Longitudinal atrophy rates measured using MRI are powerful predictors of future decline.
A multi-atlas automated segmentation method applied to baseline and follow-up MR images was used to develop a morphometry database that removes some of the variability in image preprocessing.
This database is available to the research community to allow direct comparison of MRI-based machine learning frameworks.
Another issue with publicly available data sets is their continual incorporation of new participants whose images may be processed using updated methods.
A framework that accounts for new participants, and additionally uses a modular set of preprocessing pipelines and feature extraction methods was developed to allow the reproducible evaluation of machine learning algorithms for AD prediction. 188
MRI and FDG PET data were automatically converted into a standard format using this framework, which enabled comparison of the influence of methodological differences and the two imaging modalities across multiple cohorts.
Classifiers developed using this framework were generalizable to external cohorts and the framework is publicly available at:
A lack of transparency of automated methods that produce a prediction without providing information on underlying diagnostic decisions to the clinician can also hinder its clinical use.
A deep-learning strategy that predicted AD status from non-imaging data such as demographics and MMSE score, or MRI data, or a combination of both, generated interpretable visualizations of the probability of AD in a cerebral morphology map 189 (Figure
Models were developed in ADNI and validated across three independent cohorts, consistently outperforming diagnoses by clinical neurologists (Figure
The generalizability of the framework and its presentation for neurologists as an intuitive graphic interface address key issues with automated clinical diagnosis.
Several MRI-based automated diagnostic approaches have been validated in ADNI.
Morphological metrics such as gyrification index and cortical thickness selected from surface-based morphometry distinguished MCI from CU participants with ≈80% accuracy, improving classification over volumetric measures alone.
The addition of DTI features from diffusion MRI representing the structural connectome selected using a novel feature ranking method improved the same classification challenge over T1-weighted MRI (AUC of ≈0.67).
The selection of top diffusion MRI features varied considerably between cohorts, and models based on the overlap between cohorts were more generalizable, emphasizing the need for external validation of diagnosis models.
Last, spatial patterns of functional connectivity selected using multivariate pattern analysis from rs-fMRI data were used to construct an extreme learning machine classifier for the automated discrimination of AD and MCI versus CU across two cohorts.
mbining multiple modalities is a popular approach for predicting MCI to AD dementia progression because of the complementary information that each modality provides.
However, it suffers from Flagship Study of Ageing, accurately predicted MCI progression to AD, and was improved with the addition of APOEstatus, and demographic and cognitive variables.
Recent internally validated diagnostic and prognostic models developed using ADNI data are briefly described in Table

ADDRESSING ETHNOCULTURAL DIFFERENCES IN AD
Although AD disproportionately affects ethnoculturally diverse populations (e.g., Latina/o, Black/African American), these populations have been underrepresented in AD research.
A meta-analysis of nine data sets from major clinical cohort studies including ADNI 194 reported that their participants were 79.3% White, 11.5% Black, 5.6% Latina/o, 2.7% Asian, and 0.8% Native American.
This poses a major challenge as results may not be generalizable to wider populations.
This issue particularly applies to ADNI as its cohort (e.g., primarily non-Latina/o White, highly educated, few comorbidities) is highly selected as the study is designed to resemble an AD clinical trial with strict inclusion and exclusion criteria.
Therefore, ADNI results alone must be interpreted with the caveat that they may have limited external validity for more diverse populations.
Of the limited available research on ethnocultural differences in AD, ADNI participants have been included for non-Latino/a White comparison groups.
For instance, a study that compared a Caribbean Latina/o cohort to a cohort of non-Latina/o, including ADNI participants, found that although the APOE ε2 allele was protective and the APOE ε4 allele increased AD risk in both cohorts these effects were substantially smaller in the Caribbean Latina/o compared to the non-Latina/o White cohort.
Local European ancestry (vs.
African ancestry) at APOE was associated with increased AD risk, after adjusting for the ε2, ε3, and ε4 alleles, supporting the contribution of additional genetic variation at this locus.
Similarly, haplotypes linked to the APOE ε4 allele differed between Asian, African, and European populations and conferred differing susceptibility to AD, 196 and combinations of race (Korean vs. European) and APOE status affected regional and whole brain atrophy.
With regard to international research, the Japanese ADNI study has enabled comparison of regional variation in Asian and North American populations and to examine the feasibility of international trials.
spite the possible impact of cultural differences on functional end measurements 200 and differences in APOE ε4 allele frequency, MCI participants in both J-ADNI and North American ADNI had similar levels of Aβ positivity, and decline in cognitive or functional measures.
The finding that ADNI biomarkers are generalizable to this Asian population is an important step toward the international harmonization of clinical trials in AD.

CONCLUSIONS
Since its inception, the overall goal of ADNI has been to validate ADNI data were widely used to validate various image processing and analysis methods.
A major limitation of ADNI is its strict inclusion and exclusion criteria that have resulted in a highly educated largely European cohort with few comorbidities.
ADNI participants are not representative of the wider general population and therefore the studies using ADNI data described in this review may not necessarily ensure generalizability.
A smattering of studies using ADNI as a control cohort highlighted ethnocultural differences that must be investigated further.
One goal of a renewal application to the NIA, called ADNI4, to be submitted in October 2021, will be to increase generalizability by reducing the exclusion criteria (e.g., allowing more cerebrovascular disease), increasing the ethnocultural diversity of newly enrolled participants, and recruiting individuals with lower levels of education.
Finally, ADNI samples including genetics, CSF, and plasma can be requested here:



RESEARCH IN CONTEXT 1 .. 2 .
Systematic Review: The authors identified 1442 journal publications using Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) data from 2018 to July 2020 using standard search methods (PubMed, Google Scholar, Web of Science)Interpretation: ADNI studies have contributed to a greater understanding of the factors influencing Alzheimer's disease (AD) progression, including the role of amyloid and tau (from tau positron emission tomography [PET]), and the contributions of resilience, cerebrovascular disease, sex, and immune response.


Aβ PET and tau PET in Aβ+ ADNI individuals estimated the temporal and spatial ordering of Aβ and tau lesions.
The earliest sites of Aβ deposition were identified as the posterior cingulate cortex and precuneus in which Aβ PET uptake increased first, becoming abnormal between 10 and 5 years before symptom onset.
These regions of Aβ PET uptake were followed by frontal lobe and several parietal lobe regions of interest (ROIs; Figure S1 in supporting information).
Examination of CU participants who had not yet passed the threshold for Aβ positivity identified the banks of the superior temporal sulcus as an even earlier site of Aβ accumulation, occurring prior to accumulation in the pos-


estimated the expected time to reach different diagnostic states using 27 cognitive tests, and fluid (CSF and plasma) and imaging (FDG, PET, and MRI) biomarkers in TA B L E 1 Reader's guide 1. INTRODUCTION


12 disease stages in which CU individuals were largely positioned in stages 1 to 4, AD individuals in stages 10 to 12, and individuals with MCI spread between.
Individuals frequently skipped stages in their progression to AD.
Two prominent and distinct paths with little interchange were identified in MCI and AD: path A, going through stages 8 →10 → 12 and characterized by greater neurodegeneration with lower levels of AD pathology, or path B, going through stages 9→11→12 and characterized by relatively greater Aβ burden for the degree of cognitive impairment (Figure S2 in supporting information).
Compared to individuals on path A, individuals on path B were younger, had a higher frequency of the apolipoprotein E (APOE) ε4 allele, and had a faster transition to AD.
A novel approach to uncovering underlying molecular mechanisms of neuropathology used unsupervised machine learning to infer longitudinal gene expression trajectories from cross-sectional gene expression data sets. 24
The molecular disease score generated from the Religious Orders Study-Rush Memory and Aging Project (ROS-MAP) autopsy cohort and from ADNI blood samples was therefore independent of phenotypic variables yet still predicted pathological evolution and was associated with diagnosis, clinical progression, executive function, and memory performance.
Molecular pathways important for pathological progression largely overlapped between blood and brain, and included common pathways associated with neurodegeneration such as axon guidance and apoptosis.
Additionally, this analysis highlighted the key contributions of immune system response and vascular structure and functioning.
The use of gene expression data in this manner may aid in understanding molecular mechanisms underlying neurodegenerative heterogeneity.
The accumulation of neurofibrillary tangles in the sequential spatiotemporal pattern described by the Braak stages has led to the development of hypotheses positing the prion-like misfolding, aggregation, and propagation of pathological tau species cell to cell through anatomical connections. 25,26
ADNI longitudinal tau PET data were F I G U R E 1 Prediction of longitudinal tau-PET change.
A, Hypothetical network spreading model of tau pathology.
Each node within the network represents a brain region, where color indicates local tau pathology, distance between regions indicates connection length (i.e., Euclidean distance), and edge thickness indicates functional connectivity strength.
Example formulae for models 1 to 3 illustrate how tau-weighted distance (Model 1), tau-weighted functional connectivity (Model 2).
or tau-& distance-weighted functional connectivity (Model 3) that were used to model instrumental in two studies investigating these hypotheses.
The first 27



F I G U R E 2
(A) Baseline distribution of staging clasification per cohort.
Stages refer to a model developed in CU individuals based on the sequential addition of four clusters of regional Aβ: Stage 0: no tracer uptake; Stage 1: cingulate regions; Stage 2: precuneus, paracentral gyrus, lateral orbital cortex, and insula; Stage 3: basal temporal, frontal, and additional associative cortices; Stage 4: other temporal and occipital regions.
Classification based on Aβ staging model vs (B) global Aβ PET classification.
(C) syndromic diagnosis, (D) genetic risj, (E) z-scored CSF Aβ42 levels, and (F) log-transformed z-scored phosphorylated tau (p-tau) values.



F I G U R E 3
Regions vulnerable to neurodegeneration were characterized by the high expression of genes involved in neural plasticity, and by the tau kinases CDK5 and MAPK1/ERK2, along with components of the Ras-ERK signaling pathway.
This study provides intriguing insight into the differential molecular properties underlying vulnerability of the affected neural systems in Aβ accumulation compared to neurodegeneration.
Association of tau positron emission tomography uptake with cortical thickness and atrophy.
Top, Mean standardized uptake value ratio of 18F-AV-1451 uptake in amyloid beta (Aβ)-(left) and Aβ+ (middle) individuals.
Right panel shows areas of significantly greater tracer uptake in amyloid-positive group (P < .01
family-wise error rate).
Bottom, Areas of significantly greater thickness (left) and lower rate of thickness change (right) in Aβ-individuals.
Maps are shown at an uncorrected threshold of P < .1 for visualizing trends in the data.
Effects were not statistically significant after correction for multiple comparisons.
Reproduced with permission from Das et al.


is based on biomarkers for Aβ deposition (A), pathologic tau (T), and neurodegeneration (N) that are defined as abnormal above predetermined thresholds.
The ADNI data set has been a rich source of material for those investigating the value of the AT(N) approach.
Despite data-driven models of disease progression
A study of ADNI CU and MCI participants that followed trajectories of AT(N) biomarkers found that the biomarker for amyloidosis most commonly became pathological first, and subsequently diverged into a faster-progressing A→T→N evolution and the much slower-progressing A→N→T evolution (FigureS7in supporting information).
In some elders, tau deposition preceded amyloidosis by an average of more than 40 months in a T→A→N sequence of biomarker abnormality, suggesting that tau and Aβ may independently arise from separate pathophysiological processes.
Individuals with an N→A→T sequence had the fastest rate of pathological progression, suggesting that different etiologies, such as vascular brain injury or TDP43, underlie initial neurodegeneration in this instance (FigureS7).A recent mediation study suggested that the degree to which the effect of baseline Aβ on cognition is explained by tau or neurodegeneration differs depending on disease stage and region.
In CU elders, Aβ deposition affected change in memory via predominantly MTL atrophy in the absence of changes in tau, suggesting that Aβ may interact with tau already present in the MTL due to PART or other pathological processes early in disease progression.
This effect continued into early and late MCI, but in early MCI, the effect of Aβ on memory was also mediated by tau and lateral temporal lobe atrophy.
In late MCI wider taudependent atrophy affected both memory and executive function.


A systematic study of AT(N) classification highlighted staging discrepancies resulting from the use of different biomarker classes at different disease stages. 66
Compared to staging using CSF core AD biomarkers, substitution of Aβ PET resulted in increasing misclassification from CU to MCI to AD (Figure 4A-D).
Different markers of neurodegeneration (hippocampal volume, cortical AD signature, FDG PET SUVR, and CSF t-tau were poorly correlated at all disease stages, resulting in substantial misclassification (Figure 4A-D) but performed best in individuals with AD, presumably due to more advanced neurodegeneration in this group.
Tau PET was not included in this study but another study 65 suggested that this measure would likewise result in misclassification as CSF p-tau181 abnormality appeared to precede tau PET positivity.
As AT(N) groups are associated with different trajectories of decline, 60 misclassification may result in incorrectly ascribed progression risks with implications in clinical trials



F I G U R E 4
Discrepancies in AT(N) classification using different biomarker combinations.
Percent of AT(N) misclassifications for the different biomarker combinations in (A) the whole sample, (B) cognitively unimpaired, (C) mild cognitive impairment, and (D) dementia subjects.
The percent of participants classified in different categories are shown for each biomarker combination compared to classification with CSF Aβ42, p-tau181, and t-tau.
Percent of misclassifications are shown in green when one biomarker was changed, and in orange when two biomarkers were changed.
Aβ, amyloid beta; ADsig, Alzheimer's disease cortical signature; aHV, adjusted hippocampal volume; FBP PET, [18F] florbetapir positron emission tomography; FDG PET, [18F] fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography; p-tau181, phosphorylated tau; t-tau, total tau.
Reproduced with permission from Illán-Gala et al. 202


ADNI data have been used to study the effects of both cognitive and brain resilience.
An elder with high cognitive resilience has better cognitive abilities than would be expected for their levels of AD pathology, whereas an individual with high brain resilience has higher than expected brain structure/function for their levels of AD pathology.114
Cognitive resilience has been measured in several ways, primarily using years of education as a lifestyle proxy.
However, even though education was associated with increased cognition in MCI and AD participants, it did not moderate the effects of CSF Aβ42, CSF tau, or atrophy on cognitive function, suggesting that it may not function as a proxy for cognitive resilience.115
Similarly, duration of education was not associated with Aβ deposition or brain metabolism in any clinical group and was associated with larger total brain volume only in MCI participants.116
Different measures of cognitive resilience have better established its impact on AD disease progression.
When cognitive resilience was represented by a residual term that captured the difference between observed cognitive performance and that predicted by demographics and brain integrity measures, it predicted decline in executive function only in participants positive for CSF t-tau/Aβ42.117
This supports an AD pathology-dependent effect of cognitive resilience that is not operative in normal aging.Greater brain resilience, calculated from the difference between the expected and actual amount of cerebral damage (whole brain, temporoparietal, or hippocampal volume, or global WMH volume) of an individual based on their cognition (ADAS-Cog), was associated with lower risk of progression, and slower decline in both memory and executive function in MCI and CU participants, but with more rapid decline in AD participants (FigureS16in supporting information).118
This paradoxical finding may represent a masking effect of brain resilience in the face of the accrual of pathology during CU and MCI, followed by a subsequent rapid decline in AD after a point at which pathology "outpaces" resilience.
Participants with high and low brain resilience may reach the endpoint in the same timeframe, explaining the accelerated rate of decline in AD patients with high brain resilience.



F I G U R E 7
Paths to cognitive resilience or successful cognitive aging.
Aβ, amyloid-β.
Reproduced with permission from Arenaza-Urquijo et al.119



F I G U R E 8
Sex differences in tau-based brain networks in four subject groups.
Each node represents a brain region.
The position of each node within the network is determined based on the strength of its PET SUVR correlations with other nodes.
Regions that have higher PET correlations with each other than with the rest of the brain congregate to each other as communities depicted with different colors.
CN, cognitively unimpaired; hemi., hemisphere; MCI, mild cognitive impairment; PET, positron emission tomography; SUVR, standardized uptake value ratio.
Reproduced with permission from Shohouki et al.132    AD as a metabolic disease, a recent study investigated how these factors affect associations between AT(N) biomarkers (CSF Aβ42, CSF p-tau181, FDG PET) and metabolites.135
From 139 blood metabolites tested, the study identified and replicated 8 homogeneous (the same between sexes), 15 heterogeneous (differed by sex), and 3 sex-specific interactions with AT(N) biomarkers (FigureS18in supporting information).
Metabolites adversely affected in females were predominantly involved in energy metabolism (acylcarnitines, valine, glycine, proline) or energy homeostasis (asparagine, glycine, proline, histidine), suggesting that impaired mitochondrial energy production may play a role in the greater susceptibility of women to AD pathology.
Further stratification of participants by APOE ε4 status identified associations of three phosphatidylcholines with pathological CSF Aβ42, acylcarnitine C10 with CSF p-tau181, and proline with FDG PET in females only, suggesting a molecular basis for the adverse effects of APOE ε4 in females.


or trial-is fundamental to progress in understanding disease progression and treatment.
ADNI cohorts have been instrumental in the development, replication, and external validation of improved or new approaches.
Many studies have focused on the measurement of brain Aβ, as the initial pathology in the biological definition of AD.
This can be detected in vivo as CSF Aβ42, or by Aβ PET.
CSF Aβ42 has excellent accuracy, but lumbar puncture is invasive, and MRI or PET scans are expensive and may have limited availability in remote communities.
Recent publications have focused on improving traditional measures and developing low-cost and/or noninvasive alternative measures of Aβ, or reported improved tests for tau or for combinations of pathology.
Development of ultrasensitive blood tests for AD has been a particular highlight.



F I G U R E 9
Regional associations of plasma p-tau181 with Aβ and tau PET.
A, Regional associations between baseline plasma p-tau181 levels and baseline Aβ PET SUVR.
B, Regional associations between baseline plasma p-tau181 levels and tau PET 6 years later.
Color panels on the right display Pearson correlation coefficients ® of the effects on global measures.
AD, Alzheimer's disease; CN, cognitively unimpaired; CI, cognitively impaired; MCI, mild cognitive impairment; FBP, florbetapir (Aβ) PET; FTP, flortaucipir (tau) PET.
Reproduced with permission from Moscoso et al. 97 technology now allow us to find and measure the proverbial needle in a haystack.
ADNI's large, well-characterized cohort with available longitudinal plasma samples has played an outsize role in accelerating discovery and validation of plasma assays for AD.
Vive la revolution!
A substantial body of work now supports the ability of ultrasensitive plasma Aβ immunoassays and mass spectroscopy assays to accurately and detect brain Aβ (reviewed in Ashford et al. 147 ).
Blood samples from ADNI CU and MCI participants were used to validate a model developed in the Swedish BioFinder study that combined age, APOE groups, a cognitive test (10 word list delayed recall), and plasma Aβ42/40 to predict individual brain Aβ (AUC of 0.83). 148
Although plasma Aβ42/40 improved prediction only slightly, the model was calculated to reduce the number of unnecessary Aβ PET scans by ≈90% in a clinical trial requiring assessment of brain Aβ for enrollment.
Plasma Aβ42/40 alone accurately predicted brain Aβ (AUC of 0.80 to 0.87) in a systematic assessment of blood biomarkers and clinical information, and the subsequent addition of APOE genotype or MRI features further improved prediction.
A blood-based signature of CSF Aβ42 developed in ADNI CU and MCI participants consisted of plasma Aβ42 and three additional plasma proteins, age, and APOE genotype (AUC of 0.80). 149
An ongoing study funded by the Biomarkers Consortium of the Foundation for the NIH will compare a number of different immunoassays and mass spectroscopy methods for measurement of plasma Aβ40 and Aβ42. 150



A
substantial proportion of clinical trials are targeted at nondemented but symptomatic MCI participants.
The design of the ADNI study has enabled the simulation and quantification of various approaches for more targeted participant selection and outcome measure refinement and for overcoming other trial challenges.Prodromal AD trials commonly incorporate a biomarker of Aβ as an inclusion criterion, in keeping with its position as the earliest AD biomarker, but the choice of CSF or PET biomarker may be crucial.
Low CSF Aβ42 as an eligibility criterion enrolled 15% more MCI participants than Aβ PET, consistent with disease progression studies positioning this CSF biomarker abnormality earlier than the cut point for cortical Aβ burden.
However, few clinical trials of MCI have broadened selection criteria to include additional AT(N) biomarkers, which could target an expanded pool of participants likely to benefit from intervention.
An alternative selection criteria of high CSF p-tau181/Aβ42 or p-tau181 was estimated to enroll an additional 15% of MCI participants over CSF Aβ42 alone.161
Furthermore, machine learning-based selection of MCI participants using a combination of Aβ PET, CSF biomarkers, FDG PET, and MRI volumes in an externally validated model reduced sample sizes to detect a treatment effect by 50% to 75% over selection with Aβ PET alone, depending on trial power, duration, and cognitive outcome measure.162
These studies therefore suggest that AT(N) biomarkers can select a broader pool of participants further along the AD continuum with a high likelihood of decline than Aβ alone.Determining the timeframe of progression to AD is important for clinical trial design.
Faster neurodegeneration might be expected to lead to earlier diagnostic progression, but a recent study suggests otherwise.163
Using 10 years of follow-up ADNI data, both baseline global and regional volumes, and annual change rates in the same regions significantly predicted time to AD progression but atrophy rate depended on baseline volume.
For example, all MCI participants with low baseline hippocampal volumes converted to AD within 3 years, but in those with high baseline volumes, the rate of hippocampal atrophy determined time to progression (FigureS21in supporting information).Consideration of baseline volume may therefore improve detection of a treatment effect in clinical trials that use reduction in atrophy rate as an outcome measure.Other issues may affect the ability of a clinical trial to detect a treatment effect.
The ADAS test is a common outcome measure used in clinical trials of MCI and AD, but it is susceptible to practice effects which manifest as a stable or improved score instead of a declining score over time.
A meta-analysis of 18 clinical trials and observational studies reported that more than half of MCI participants and more than a third of AD participants had practice effects in ADAS, resulting in an increase in the estimated sample size per arm to detect a treatment effect of up to 35%.164  Failure to account for practice effects in clinical trial design may therefore result in underpowering.
Another common issue is whether to include or exclude observations from the up to 10% of MCI placebo patients who initiate AD medications such as donepezil or memantine after the start of the trial.
Modeling the use of medications in ADNI as a simulated trial revealed that MCI participants who began concurrent medication were at a more advanced stage and declined faster despite treatment than those who did not.
Excluding these participants would result in a placebo arm that declined more slowly and was not representative of the trial population, decreasing the power to detect treatment effects.



F I G U R E 1 0
Survival curves for biomarker-based models of decline.
Observed progression is analyzed by Kaplan-Meier whereas predicted progression is analyzed with Cox models.
Findings are based on data from four cohorts.
ATN, amyloid, tauopathy, and neurodegeneration; CSF, cerebrospinal fluid.
Reproduced with permission from van Maurik et al. 183 clinicians in making an accurate and timely diagnosis of AD.
However, barriers remain to their incorporation into clinical practice including a lack of objective comparison of methods and a lack of reporting of classifier generalizability in external cohorts.
Although many studies have used the ADNI data set to test or validate their machine learning approaches (reviewed in Veitch et al.



a
lack of applicability to clinical settings in which the assembly of different fluid and imaging biomarkers is challenging.
Therefore, constructing multimodal classifiers based on a minimum number of inputs that are generalizable across populations may help make automated classification a viable alternative to neurologist-based diagnosis.
The Characterizing Alzheimer's disease Risk Events (CARE) index is an individual score based on sMRI, rs-fMRI, and cognitive tests that staged participants across disease progression without the need for CSF biomarkers.
A classifier based on this index was developed in ADNI and validated in a clinical single-center study, predicting MCI to AD progression in 3 years with high accuracy. 192
Finally, an MRI-based deep learning time-to-event model that was developed and validated in ADNI and Australian Imaging, Biomarker & Lifestyle


Carriage of the APOE ε4 allele affected Aβ SUVR cut points for positivity in non-Hispanics more than Hispanics. 198
Cardiovascular risk factors differentially affected cognition in Latina/o versus non-Latina/o White adults, such that hypertension and obesity were not associated with poor memory in either cohort but were associated with poorer executive function only in the Latina/o group. 199
Further studies are required to uncover the biological and sociocultural mechanisms underlying these effects and to determine how ethnocultural factors may impact clinical trials.


biomarkers for AD clinical trials.
This goal has been met by validating MRI, FDG PET, Aβ PET, tau PET, and CSF measures of Aβ and tau.
ADNI data have been widely used by academic groups and pharmaceutical companies to design and statistically power clinical AD trials.
As this review shows, the publicly available ADNI data set has been used as a sample of convenience to investigate the use of biomarkers to predict and monitor cognitive decline across the AD continuum from CU to MCI to dementia.
Data-driven models of disease progression constructed from imaging, cognitive, and gene expression data largely recapitulated the ordering of biomarkers proposed by Jack et al.,
Subthreshold, declining Aβ may be an early marker of future decline linked to subtle memory dysfunction.
Tau PET data helped elucidate patterns of tau accumulation tied to antecedent Aβ deposition.
Genetic analyses identified distinct gene sets underlying amyloidosis, and tau deposition and neurodegeneration.
Stratification of ADNI participants using the AT(N) biological construct of AD identified multiple possible trajectories of biomarker abnormalities, but issues with the non-equivalence of biomarkers within each category remain to be resolved.
Subgroups of all diagnostic classes were identified based on cognition, MRI, and blood proteins and metabolites and differed in associations with cognitive domains, AD biomarkers, and underlying genetics and biochemistry, supporting their biological coherence.
Additional factors modulating disease trajectory included cerebrovascular disease acting to exacerbate AD by multiple mechanisms, microglial associated innate immune response and inflammation, cognitive and brain reserve, and sex differences.
Additional common co-pathologies may modulate disease progression but further neuropathological studies are required to understand their influence.
Taking into account these often interacting factors in the selection of participants may improve clinical trials.
The determination of Aβ status will certainly be improved by methodological changes to PET and CSF and plasma assays as well as the development of practical algorithms based on clinical information.
Other improvements to clinical trials hinge on the more nuanced understanding of disease progression and included fine-tuning of selection tools, determining the time frame of progression, and modifications to outcome measures.An explosion of interest in plasma biomarkers led to ADNI studies of plasma Aβ, p-tau181, NfL, and others, suggesting that future studies will use the ADNI biofluid repository to investigate and compare additional biomarkers such as p-tau217 and various analytical methods.


Microglia, the primary innate immune cells of the central nervous system, facilitate Aβ and tau clearance, and contribute to neuroinflammation that damages neurons.103Therefore, the immune response and inflammation can both slow and accelerate AD pathol-


In CU participants, plasma NfL was associated with hippocampal and frontal lobe atrophy in APOE ε4 carriers only,


Aβ+ MCI remaining stable throughout the study timeframe.181Participants
with MTL atrophy, AVLT impairment, and an abnormal CSF t-tau/Aβ42 ratio had the highest hazard ratio of 15.1 for progression, and progressed to AD within a median of 1.3 years compared to > 11.5 years for those in the normal range for these risk factors, sug-