Epigenetic Factors in Late-Onset Alzheimer’s Disease: MTHFR and CTH Gene Polymorphisms, Metabolic Transsulfuration and Methylation Pathways, and B Vitamins
DNA methylation and other epigenetic factors are important in the pathogenesis of late-onset Alzheimer's disease (LOAD).
Methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) gene mutations occur in most elderly patients with memory loss.
MTHFR is critical for production of S-adenosyl-L-methionine (SAM), the principal methyl donor.
A common mutation (1364T/T) of the cystathionine-γ-lyase (CTH) gene affects the enzyme that converts cystathionine to cysteine in the transsulfuration pathway causing plasma elevation of total homocysteine (tHcy) or hyperhomocysteinemia-a strong and independent risk factor for cognitive loss and AD.
Other causes of hyperhomocysteinemia include aging, nutritional factors, and deficiencies of B vitamins.
We emphasize the importance of supplementing vitamin B 12 (methylcobalamin), vitamin B 9 (folic acid), vitamin B 6 (pyridoxine), and SAM to patients in early stages of LOAD.

Introduction
Most genetic research on late-onset Alzheimer's disease (LOAD) has focused on genome-wide association studies (GWAS) that have provided low effect size results in general, with the exception of apolipoprotein E (ApoE)
Studies of monozygotic twins with Alzheimer's disease (AD) showed discordance in onset and progression indicating a role for nongenetic factors in disease pathogenesis
For these reasons, genetic research turned to epigenetic modifications using epigenome-wide association studies (EWAS) in the last few years
Bonasio et al.
Therefore, epigenetic refers to potentially heritable and nonheritable modifications in gene expression induced by environmental factors without changes in DNA base sequences
These epigenetic processes include DNA methylation, histone modification and expression of long noncoding RNAs and noncoding microRNAs (miRNAs) that primarily repress target messenger RNAs (mRNAs)
This review focuses on DNA methylation dynamics and other epigenetic changes, including the role of methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) gene polymorphisms and its metabolic pathways particularly in aging and LOAD pathology
We also review polymorphisms of the cystathionine-gamma(γ)-lyase (CTH) gene
The role of relevant nutritional factors including the B-vitamins folate, vitamin B 12 , and vitamin B 6 status is summarized.
Elevation of Hcy is important in oxidative stress contributing to the decrease of S-adenosyl-L-methionine (SAM) levels, which induce demethylation of DNA resulting in overexpression of genes involved in AD pathology such as presenilin (PSEN1) and beta-secretase (BACE1), the β-site amyloid precursor protein (APP)-cleaving enzyme that increases hypomethylation and Aβ 1-42 deposition
Moreover, epigenetic markers have also been demonstrated to be critical regulatory factors of brain function
Experimental antiaging epigenetic interventions attempt to reverse age-related changes in DNA methylation

DNA Methylation Studies

5-Cytosine Methylation and DNA Methyltransferases
Methylation at the 5-position of the cytosine base (5mC) is considered a critical phase of epigenetic regulation in pathways related with neuronal development.
Methylation and demethylation of cytosine-phosphate-guanine (CpG) islands is associated with alterations in local chromatin producing a long-term regulation of transcription tagging genome into active and inactive territories introducing a "masking" function
Decreased levels of 5mC
Cytosine base methylation occurs mainly at CpG dinucleotides
Gene regulation is achieved by 5mC silencing gene expression via high-density CpG areas, known as CpG islands, which remain largely unmethylated
In humans, genomic DNA methylation of cytosine results from the addition of a methyl group from SAM to the cytosine, catalyzed by DNA methyltransferases (DNMT1, DNMT3A, and DNMT3B)
In addition to 5mC, hydroxymethylation at the 5-position of the cytosine base (5hmC) derived from the oxidation of methylated cytosines by ten-eleven translocation (TET) enzymes is another epigenetic regulatory mechanism, which is particularly abundant in the brain.
The TET family of enzymes catalyzes Fe (II)and alpha-ketoglutarate (α-KG)-dependent oxidation reactions,
TET enzymes also participate in the conversion of 5-formylcytosine (5fC) to 5-carboxylcytosine (5caC); this cycle ends when 5caC is excised by a thymine-DNA glycosylase (TDG)
In humans, DNA methyltransferases are involved in tumor transformation and progression resulting in genome-wide hypomethylation of tumor cells and silencing of tumor-suppressor genes
DNMT1 mutations occur in hereditary sensory and autonomic neuropathy type 1 (HSAN1)
In mice, DNMT1 mutations induce global hypomethylation along with cortical and hippocampal neuronal dysfunction causing neurodegeneration with severe deficits in learning, memory and behavior
Hypomethylated excitatory neurons have postnatal maturation defects including abnormal dendritic arborization and impaired neuronal excitability
Grossi et al.
Low PSEN1 methylation was linked to low folate levels and low promoter methylation of BACE1 and DNMT genes.
High levels of folate-vitamin B 12 and low Hcy promoted methylation of genes required for DNA methylation reactions (DNMT1, DNMT3A, DNMT3B, and MTHFR)

DNA Methylation in Alzheimer's Disease
Early studies of DNA methylation in LOAD from peripheral blood lymphocytes
Wang and coworkers
Ellison and collaborators
Chouliaras et al.
Levels of 5mC were inversely proportional to the deposition of neurofibrillary tangles in the same hippocampal cells.
Hernández et al.
One of the major problems of initial methylation studies was the small sample size.
This was solved by De Jager and collaborators
Almost a half-million CpGs were interrogated including CpGs in the ABCA7 and BIN1 regions.
The authors also identified genes whose RNA expression was altered in AD including ANK1, CDH23, DIP2A, RHBDF2, RPL13, SERPINF1 and SERPINF2.
ANKYRIN 1 (ANK1) and RHOMBOID5 (RHBDF2) genes are involved in the protein tyrosine kinase 2-beta (PTK2B) gene network, a LOAD gene that is a key element of the calcium-induced signaling cascade involved in modulating the activation of microglia and macrophages, as well as in the transport of TNFα converting enzyme (ADAM17) from the cell surface.
Absence of RHBDF2 in mice impacts the normal release of TNFα
DIP2A functions as a cell surface protein and connects directly to the known SORTILIN RELATED RECEPTOR 1 (SORL1) susceptibility gene that is involved in the APP susceptibility network and amyloid processing
Both SERPIN PEPTIDASE INHIBITORS (SERPINF1 and SERPINF2) interact with elements of amyloid processing.
SERPINF1 mRNA expression is reduced in LOAD and when knocked-out in vitro leads to reduced neurite outgrowth
A Religious Orders companion study by Lunnon and coworkers
The severity of Alzheimer's disease is defined in neuropathology by the presence of tau-based neurofibrillary tangles ranging from early stages (I and II) to extensive neocortical involvement in Braak & Braak stages V and VI in advanced disease.
Dysregulation of DNA methylation occurred earlier in brain areas affected at onset by AD and appeared to have stronger effects (28.7%) than the combination of ApoE and other risk genes (13.9%) identified by GWAS
Additional studies by Yu et al.
RNA expression of transcripts of SORL1 and ABCA7 was associated with tau tangle density, and the expression of BIN1 was associated with Aβ load
Moreover, Lunnon et al.
These findings confirm that AD involves significant disruption of DNA methylation.
Epigenetic age-associated alterations of DNA methylation have also been reported in animal models of AD, in particular global DNA hypomethylation in the J20 model and DNA hypermethylation in the triple transgenic 3xTg-AD model

miRNAs Epigenetic Effects
Long noncoding RNAs and noncoding microRNAs (miRNAs) that primarily repress target messenger RNAs (mRNAs) play a pivotal role in oncology, cardiovascular diseases and dementia
In AD, the miRNA-125b is overexpressed enhancing neuronal apoptosis and tau phosphorylation by activation of cyclin-dependent kinase 5 (CDK5) and p35/25.
FORKHEAD BOX Q1 (FOXQ1) is the direct target gene of miR-125b
Patrick and coworkers

Transsulfuration Metabolic Pathways and Remethylation Defects
The metabolism of sulfur-containing amino acids in the transsulfuration pathway involves the transfer of the sulfur atom of methionine to serine to produce cysteine (Figure
Methionine first reacts with ATP to form S-adenosyl-L-methionine (SAM), then S-adenosyl-homocysteine (SAH) and finally, homocysteine.
Plasma elevation of total homocysteine (tHcy) or hyperhomocysteinemia may result from congenital deficiency of cystathionine β-synthase (CBS) leading to homocystinuria, or more frequently from polymorphisms of the cystathionine γ lyase (CTH) gene (OMIM *607657; EC 4.4.1.1.)
in chromosome 1 (1p31.1)
CTH is the enzyme that converts cystathionine to cysteine, the last step in the transsulfuration pathway.
Wang et al
Caucasian subjects homozygous for the CTH 1364T/T SNP showed elevation of tHcy that reached effects sizes similar to those caused by the 677C > T MTHFR gene polymorphism
Closely related to the transsulfuration pathway are the remethylation defects resulting from the failure to convert homocysteine to the amino acid methionine (Figure
This pathway requires the integrity of the gene encoding methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) required for the interaction of folate and cobalamin (vitamin B 12 ).
Folate provides the methyl group required for the remethylation pathway (Figure
The human MTHFR gene (OMIM *607093; EC 1.5.1.20)
is localized in chromosome 1 (1p36.3)
and it encodes for 5,10-methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR)
This enzyme catalyzes the conversion of 5,10-methylenetetrahydrofolate to 5-methyltetrahydrofolate, a co-substrate with vitamin B 12 for the remethylation of homocysteine to methionine
Mutations of this gene occur in 10-15% of the population and the resulting MTHFR deficiency affects the production of methionine and SAM.
Patients with AD have low levels of SAM in the CSF
MTHFR gene polymorphisms cause enzyme thermolability and involve C-to-T substitution at nucleotide 667 and A-to-C at nucleotide 1298; these MTHFR mutations have been associated with homocystinuria, neural tube defects, preeclampsia, cleft lip and cleft palate, cerebrovascular disease, and psychiatric disorders including susceptibility to depression and schizophrenia
Population-based international studies showed no increased risk of dementia in subjects with MTHFR polymorphisms
In Japan, Nishiyama et al.
In Australia, a causal link between high tHcy and incident dementia was demonstrated
In contrast, de Lau and collaborators
In a small patient population in Tunisia
As mentioned earlier, Román

MTHFR and Epigenetic Drift
In 2005, a multinational study of identical twins by Fraga and collaborators
The authors concluded that this "epigenetic drift" was associated with aging
Epigenetic drift of identical twins with aging also occurs among a large number of animal species
In identical twins with AD, the prognosis and onset of AD can differ by more than ten years
Breitner et al.
Epigenetic drift can be caused by lifestyle, diet, infections, folate status, homocysteine status or toxic exposure
Wang et al.
The methylation level of MTHFR and APOE in individuals 30 years of age apart decreased by 10.6%, whereas in patients with AD the methylation level increased by 6.8%.
The epigenetic drift increases with age particularly in genes that play pivotal roles in removing β-amyloid such as APOE and among methylation genes such as MTHFR and DNMT1
Int. J. Mol.
Sci.
2019, 20, x FOR PEER REVIEW 5 of 15

MTHFR and Epigenetic Drift
In 2005, a multinational study of identical twins by Fraga and collaborators
The authors concluded that this "epigenetic drift" was associated with aging
Epigenetic drift of identical twins with aging also occurs among a large number of animal species
In identical twins with AD, the prognosis and onset of AD can differ by more than ten years
Breitner et al.
Epigenetic drift can be caused by lifestyle, diet, infections, folate status, homocysteine status or toxic exposure
Wang et al.
The methylation level of MTHFR and APOE in individuals 30 years of age apart decreased by 10.6%, whereas in patients with AD the methylation level increased by 6.8%.
The epigenetic drift increases with age particularly in genes that play pivotal roles in removing β-amyloid such as APOE and among methylation genes such as MTHFR and DNMT1

Homocysteine (Hcy): A Risk Factor for Cognitive Loss and Dementia
Hcy is a sulfur-containing amino acid produced in the transsulfuration pathway (Figure
Homocystinuria due to congenital deficiency of the CBS gene causes hyperhomocysteinemia. Polymorphisms of the CTH and MTHFR genes are common genetic causes of hyperhomocysteinemia
The remethylation pathway (Figure

Homocysteine (Hcy): A Risk Factor for Cognitive Loss and Dementia
Hcy is a sulfur-containing amino acid produced in the transsulfuration pathway (Figure
Homocystinuria due to congenital deficiency of the CBS gene causes hyperhomocysteinemia. Polymorphisms of the CTH and MTHFR genes are common genetic causes of hyperhomocysteinemia
The remethylation pathway (Figure
Pyridoxine (vitamin B 6 ) is required by CBS for the conversion of homocysteine to cysteine (Figure

Hyperhomocysteinemia is an Independent Vascular Risk Factor
Elevation of plasma or serum tHcy (hyperhomocysteinemia) is an independent vascular risk factor linked to coronary disease, peripheral vascular disease, stroke and small-vessel cerebrovascular disease
More importantly, elevated tHcy is considered a risk factor for dementia and cognitive decline in the elderly, particularly in association with low levels of folate and cobalamin
A number of studies in cognitively normal elderly subjects, demonstrated that baseline tHcy is a strong and independent predictor of cognitive decline after observation periods ranging from 3 years (USA, n = 321 men
In the Finland cohort
Increased tHcy levels were associated with faster rates of total brain volume loss and with progression of white matter hyperintensities among participants with hypertension (systolic blood pressure > 140 mm Hg)
Regarding the risk of AD associated to elevated tHcy, in the Framingham Study, Seshadri and colleagues
Similar findings were corroborated in two large Finnish
In 2008, Smith
According to a recent international consensus statement
From the Public Health viewpoint, homocysteine-lowering treatment with B vitamins that markedly slows down the rate of brain atrophy and cognitive decline in the elderly offers the possibility that, in addition to folic acid fortification, mandatory methylcobalamin supplementation should also be considered for the prevention of LOAD

Genetic and Nongenetic Causes of Hyperhomocysteinemia
Elevation of tHcy is caused by numerous factors including advancing age, diet, supplementation of B-vitamins, obstructive sleep apnea, smoking, Helicobacter pylori infection, and renal failure, among others
As indicated earlier, both CBS gene polymorphisms and the C667T and the A1298C SNPs in the MTHFR gene decrease the activity of the MTHFR enzyme leading to hyperhomocysteinemia. Minagawa et al.
ApoE4 was not affected; in patients with hyperhomocysteinemia the CSF levels of ApoE3 dimers were significantly lower than in controls.
Minagawa and colleagues
Smith and Refsum
These include impaired endothelial function with reduced inducible nitric oxide synthase; augmented oxidative stress and decreased activity of key antioxidant enzymes; raised generation of the superoxide anion; alterations of lipid metabolism with increased cholesterol synthesis and reduced synthesis of apolipoprotein 1; and, carotid stenosis and induction of thrombosis
Hyperhomocysteinemia induces a decrease in the SAM-dependent synthesis of catecholamines including dopamine, norepinephrine, and epinephrine, as well as non-catecholamine neurotransmitters such as melatonin and serotonin (5-HT) that contribute to development of depression
Moreover, elevated tHcy produces two neurotoxic products, homocysteic acid (HCA) and cysteine sulfinic acid (CSA), which are agonists of the N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) glutamate receptor, with neurotoxic effects on dopaminergic neurons derived from excessive Ca ++ influx and reactive oxygen generation
The beneficial effects of B-group vitamins on elevated tHcy will be reviewed next.

Folate Metabolism
Vitamin B 9 or folic acid (from the Latin folium, leaf) is abundantly found in green leafy vegetables.
Folate is vital for cell development and growth given its role in numerous biochemical one-carbon (methyl-group, -CH 3 ) reactions, many of them critical for cognition.
The Nun Study
Also, the severity of the atrophy in the neocortex and of the Alzheimer disease lesions were strongly correlated with low serum folate levels; none of 18 other nutrients, lipoproteins, or nutritional markers measured in the study correlated with the atrophy
Further studies confirmed that normal cognitive scores were highly associated with elevated blood folate despite the neuropathological evidence of LOAD brain lesions
The primary methyl-group donor for DNA methylation reactions is 5-methyl-tetrahydrofolate (CH 3 -THF) required for the transformation of homocysteine into methionine mediated by methionine synthase with cobalamin (vitamin B 12 ) as a cosubstrate (Figure
Also, CH 3 -THF is critical in the de novo purine synthesis to convert dUMP (deoxyuridylate) into dTMP (thymidylate) for DNA and RNA synthesis, DNA repair or replication.
Several forms of cancer are associated with epigenetic differential methylation causing disturbances in nucleotide synthesis; for instance, hypermethylation may inhibit tumor suppressors.
Folate, therefore, is a B-vitamin that plays an important role as a precursor in the epigenetic regulation of gene expression, DNA stability, DNA integrity and mutagenesis.
Abnormal folate status has been associated with neural tube defects, cardiovascular and cerebrovascular diseases, cleft lip and palate, neurodegenerative diseases, schizophrenia and depression

Telomeres and Folate Levels
Telomeres protect chromosomes from abnormal combination and degradation.
The shortening of telomeres' cap serve as a signature of cell division history, acting as biomarker of aging.
In peripheral leukocytes, short telomere length is associated with increased risk of cognitive decline and LOAD
Low folate levels are associated with short telomeres due to DNA damage in the telomeric region.
Telomere length is epigenetically regulated by DNA methylation and directly influenced by folate status, a process independent of DNA damage due to uracil incorporation.
Shorter telomeres occur with age, infection, stress, and chronic diseases including LOAD
Paul and collaborators
In this population, homozygous carriers of the MTHFR-C677T gene mutation showed decreased levels of plasma folate
Decreased serum folate induces anomalous integration of uracil in place of thymidine in DNA
Troesch, Weber and Mohajeri
The resulting elevation of Hcy levels and the reduced capacity to synthetize, methylate and repair DNA, along with the impaired modulation of neurotransmission, appears to favor the development of AD particularly when combined with increased oxidative stress, particularly in ApoE ε4 carriers

Vitamin B 12 Deficiency and β-amyloid Deposition
Smith, Warren and Refsum
Only bacteria can biosynthesize vitamin B 12 ; in humans B 12 from the diet is a cofactor for the enzymes methionine synthase and L-methyl-malonyl-CoA mutase.
B 12 deficiency results in build-up of homocysteine and lack of interaction with folate that is trapped as CH 3 -THF leading to depletion of tetrahydrofolates used in thymidylate and purine synthesis blocking DNA for the production of red cells in the bone marrow.
B 12 deficiency impedes cellular proliferation and protein synthesis and thereby causes development of megaloblastic anemia

Clinical Manifestations of Vitamin B 12 Deficiency
In 1920, pernicious anemia-a fatal form of a megaloblastic anemia-was successfully treated by adding liver to the diet.
In 1955, Dorothy Hodgkin used crystallography to first identify the molecular structure of cyanocobalamin or vitamin B 12 from the deep-red cyanide-containing pigment isolated from liver tissue.
Pernicious anemia was the first disease to be identified as caused by vitamin B 12 deficiency
Stabler
In addition to megaloblastic anemia, acidemia from elevation of serum methylmalonic acid (MMA), and methylmalonic aciduria, the neurological manifestations of pernicious anemia include memory loss and cognitive decline, visual disturbances from optic nerve neuropathy, burning and painful sensations in hands and feet from peripheral neuropathy, and spinal cord involvement with subacute combined degeneration resulting in loss of proprioception from dorsal column involvement and pyramidal tract symptoms such as paralysis and incontinence.

Measuring Total Serum B 12 Levels
Dietary sources of B 12 include liver, meat, fish, shellfish and dairy products; vegans are prone to B 12 deficiency
Vitamin B 12 deficiency occurs from inborn metabolic errors, alterations of B 12 -binding proteins including haptocorrin (HC) found in saliva, intrinsic factor (IF) produced by parietal cells in the stomach (pernicious anemia is associated with anti-parietal-cell and anti-IF auto-antibodies), and transcobalamin (TC), which binds B 12 to facilitate uptake by the cells
According to Stabler
Therefore, "normal" total serum B 12 levels can mask deficiency if serum contains relatively large amounts of cobalamin analogues
Levels below 200 pg/mL usually indicate biochemical B 12 insufficiency.
Serum B 12 < 350 pg/mL along with tHcy > 14 µmol/L indicate metabolic B 12 deficiency
For this reason, holotranscobalamin, MMA and tHcy levels should be included in the evaluation of a patient suspected of having B 12 deficiency

Causes of Vitamin B 12 Deficiency
Other than pernicious anemia resulting from presence of anti-parietal-cell and anti-IF autoantibodies, other causes of B 12 deficiency include atrophic body gastritis, Helicobacter pylori infection, malabsorption of vitamin B 12 , gastrectomy, gastric bypass or other bariatric surgery, inflammatory bowel disease, tropical sprue, use of metformin, anticonvulsants, proton-pump inhibitors and other drugs to block stomach acid, and vegetarian diets low in meat and dairy products.
Hemodialysis patients, nitrous oxide inhalation, and cholinesterase inhibitors in LOAD patients
Epidemiological studies have shown that prevalence of vitamin B 12 deficiency increases with age
Andrès and colleagues
According to Spence
Inadequate supply of B 12 and folic acid is not only a strong and independent vascular risk factor particularly for subcortical ischemic small-vessel disease
Animal experimental data confirms the importance of B-vitamin deprivation in the expression of AD

Effects of B-Group Vitamins on Cognition: Negative Clinical Trials
An international consensus
Usually, these were short-duration trials without baseline cognitive assessment and results were based on post-hoc brief cognitive assessments; only a few of these studies assessed the incidence of dementia or mild cognitive impairment.
In contrast, solid positive results were obtained in the Oxford Project to Investigate Memory and Ageing (OPTIMA) trial
The results of this trial indicate that supplementation of B 12 , pyridoxine, and folic acid in subjects with MCI and hyperhomocysteinemia decreases tHcy resulting in improved episodic memory and global cognition
Current recommendation is to provide oral supplementation of methylcobalamin 1000 µg/d, folic acid 800 µg/d and pyridoxine 100 mg/d.

SAM in Depression and Cognitive Loss
As described above (Figure
SAM has been used as an adjuvant for the treatment of depression
Linnebank et al.
According to Dayon et al.
Despite the enhancing effects of SAM on antidepressants, no conclusive clinical trials of SAM have been reported

Conclusions
It is established that the damaging effects of deficiencies of folate and cobalamin and the resulting elevation of tHcy contribute to the development of LOAD
The numerous detrimental effects of elevated tHcy include, among others, endothelial and cerebrovascular damage of large-vessels as well as small-vessel disease
Adequate supply of B-vitamins in the elderly, particularly in subjects with MTHFR and CTH gene mutations, appears to be critical to prevent the development of cognitive decline and to halt the progression of LOAD.



Figure 1 .
Figure 1.
Homocysteine metabolism: B12 = cobalamin (vitamin B12).
B6 = pyridoxine (vitamin B6).
MTH = methylenetetrahydrofolate. MTHFR = methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase.
SAM = Sadenosyl-methionine.
SAH = S-adenosylhomocysteine.
5-Me THF = 5-methyl tetrahydrofolate.
(From [53]).



Figure 1 .
Figure 1.
Homocysteine metabolism: B12 = cobalamin (vitamin B12).
B6 = pyridoxine (vitamin B6).
MTH = methylenetetrahydrofolate. MTHFR = methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase.
SAM = S-adenosyl-methionine.
SAH = S-adenosylhomocysteine.
5-Me THF = 5-methyl tetrahydrofolate.(From



Table 1 .
[54]ful effects of homocysteine on vascular function and cognition (modified from Smith & Refsum[54]).