Intake of Meat, Fish, Fruits, and Vegetables and Long-Term Risk of Dementia and Alzheimer’s Disease
et à la diffusion de documents scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non, émanant des établissements d'enseignement et de recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires publics ou privés.

INTRODUCTION
The links between eating habits and the risk of dementia or Alzheimer's disease
Special attention has been devoted to the consumption of fruits and vegetables because of their high content in antioxidant nutrients, such as vitamin C, vitamin E, flavonoids, and carotenoids
Few studies have examined the effect of meat consumption that is generally considered to have a negative effect on health due to its high saturated fat content
However, results of these studies have often been discordant.
Several authors have reported an association between frequent consumption of fruits and vegetables and decreased risk of dementia
Similarly, several studies have found an inverse association between fish consumption and risk of dementia
Some heterogeneous results also exist regarding meat consumption
A potential explanation for these discrepancies is the possible existence of a protopathic bias (i.e., reverse causation).
Indeed these studies evaluated the occurrence of dementia over a period ranging from 2
Yet, reverse causation, which happens when underlying disease causes changes in behaviours such as dietary habits, is very likely to occur when studying the risk factors for dementia or AD.
Indeed, as AD pathophysiological process begins 10 to 20 years before the first clinical signs
This hypothesis was confirmed by a recent study that showed a reduction in the consumption frequency of fish, fruits and vegetables in the years preceding the diagnosis of dementia
The aim of this work was to study the relationship between dietary habits (i.e., consumption of meat, fish, raw/cooked fruits and vegetables) and long-term risk of dementia and AD, by taking into account the possibility of a protopathic bias.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Study Population
The Three-City Study (3C)
Participants were followed every 2 to 4 years for 12 years.
At inclusion and at each follow-up visit, data were collected using a face-to-face questionnaire administered by trained nurses or psychologists.
To limit the possibility of a protopathic bias in the present analysis, only the dementia cases that occurred after the first 4 years post-inclusion (lag window) were included
Accordingly, 505 cases of dementia, 1045 participants lost to follow-up and 549 individuals who died during the first 4 years of follow-up (i.e., before the second follow-up visit) were excluded, as well as 1261 people who did not attend at least one of the planned visits after the first 4 years of follow-up.
In total, 5,934 participants who were alive and without dementia at the second follow-up visit were included in the analysis (study flow chart in Fig.
All participants signed an informed consent form.
The study protocol was approved by the Consultative Committee for the Protection of Biomedical Research Participants of the University Hospital of Kremlin-Bicêtre, Paris, and Sud-Mediterranée III.

Nutritional assessment
At inclusion, dietary habits were assessed using a brief food frequency questionnaire (FFQ) administered by trained investigators.
The FFQ concerned five broad food categories: meat including poultry, fish including seafood, raw fruits, raw vegetables, cooked fruits and vegetables.
The frequency of consumption of each food was categorised in six classes (never, ≤ 1 time/week, ≈ 1 time/week, 2 to 3 times/week, 4 to 6 times/week, and daily).
Some of these categories were aggregated for the analysis: three categories for raw meat and vegetables (≤ 1 time/week, 2 to 3 times/week, ≥ 4 times/week); four categories for fish (< 1 time/week, ≈ 1 time/week, 2 to 3 times/week, ≥ 4 times/week); and three for raw fruits and cooked fruits and vegetables (≤ 1 time/week, 2 to 6 times/week, ≥ 1 time/days).
The food consumption frequencies of the whole 3C cohort have been described elsewhere
In subjects from the Bordeaux center, mean total energy intake per day was estimated from a 24-hour dietary recall performed during a face-to-face interview administered 2 years after baseline by trained dieticians.
For subjects of the 2 other 3C centers (Dijon and Montpellier), total energy intake was imputed (using multiple imputation method) as previously described

Other variables
Sociodemographic characteristics recorded at baseline included study centre, age, sex, marital status (married; divorced/single; widowed), educational level (primary; junior secondary; senior secondary; higher education), and income.
Lifestyle parameters included alcohol consumption (non-drinker or ex-drinker; moderate if ≤ 36 g/d [3 glasses]; heavy > 36 g/d)
Biological and clinical data included: i) presence of the ε 4 allele of the Apolipoprotein gene (APOE-ε4: yes/no); ii) body mass index (BMI) expressed in kg/m 2 ; iii) hypertension, defined by systolic blood pressure ≥ 140 mmHg, or diastolic blood pressure ≥ 90 mmHg, or taking antihypertensive drugs; iv) diabetes, defined by fasting glycaemia ≥ 7•0 mmol/l, or antidiabetic treatment; v) hypercholesterolemia, defined by plasma cholesterol ≥ 6•2 mmol/l or taking anti-cholesterol treatment; and vi) depression, defined by a Center for Epidemiologic Studies Depression (CESD) scale score ≥ 17 in men and ≥ 23 in women

Diagnosis of dementia
Diagnosis of dementia was based on a three-step protocol
To assess the cognitive status at inclusion, a battery of neuropsychological tests was administered by trained psychologists.
At the follow-up visits, participants whose neuropsychological performance could suggest the development of dementia were evaluated by a neurologist.
All potential prevalent or incident cases of dementia were ascertained by an independent committee of expert neurologists to reach a consensus on the diagnosis and aetiology of dementia, following the criteria of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, fourth edition
Only dementia cases diagnosed after the first 4 years of follow-up (lag window) were included in statistical analyses.

Statistical analyses
Relationships between food consumption frequencies and the participants' characteristics were analysed using the Chi2 test (qualitative variables) and the Student's t test (quantitative variables).
The incidence rates of dementia and AD were calculated with their 95 % confidence intervals (CI) for each food consumption frequency level.
Relationships between food consumption frequency and risk of dementia or AD were modelled using Cox proportional hazards models with delayed entry.
The patient's age was used as reference time, and age at the 4-year follow-up visit for the left truncation
For the analysis of AD risk, the other dementia types (mixed, vascular, parkinsonian, Lewy body dementia, and others) were censored at the time of diagnosis.
Two models were constructed:
(1) model a: adjusted for inclusion centre, sex, marital status, income, level of education, APOE-ε4, smoking, alcohol consumption, physical activity frequency, the other four food categories and energy intake, and (2) model b: model a + health factors (BMI, diabetes, hypertension, hypercholesterolemia and depression) that may confound or mediate the relationship between food intakes and dementia risk.
Additional analyses stratified for sex and APOE-ε4 status were performed on the basis of the previous findings about a significant interaction with APOE-ε4 status
To avoid the loss of statistical power and selection bias related to missing data (1.32 % for the whole database and less than 10 % for each explanatory variable except for energy intake which were only collected in the center of Bordeaux), ten imputed datasets were created using multiple imputations method.
Missing values for covariates considered in the analysis were replaced by values generated using the Fully Conditional Specification (FCS) method and the PROC MI procedure of SAS version 9.2.
Each imputed dataset was analysed as if it was complete, and the hazard ratios (HRs) and their CI were compiled using the PROC MIANALYZE procedure
Analyses were performed with a bilateral alpha level of 0.05 using the SAS software, version 9.2 (SAS Institute, Cary, North Carolina).

RESULTS
The mean age of the 5,934 participants included in the present analysis was 76•9 years ± Comparison of the participants' characteristics according to their food consumption frequencies (Tables
Similar results were obtained for low fish consumers (< 1 time/week), but for BMI that was higher in this group.
Low fish consumption was also associated with current smoker status, and less frequent physical activity and hypercholesterolemia. Low consumption of raw or cooked fruits and vegetables (≤ 1 time/week) was associated with non-married status, lower education, income, physical activity frequency and alcohol consumption, as well as high depressive symptomatology.
Raw vegetables were more frequently eaten by men, whereas cooked fruits and vegetables were more frequently eaten by women.
Analysis of the relationship between the consumption frequencies of the different food categories (E-tables 1 and 2) showed that overall, participants with low consumption of a food category tended to report lower consumption of another food category more frequently.
The incidence of dementia and AD increased when the frequency of meat consumption decreased (Table
In analyses stratified according to sex and APOE-ε4 status (E-tables 3 and 4), low consumption of raw vegetables was associated with an increased risk of dementia in men (HR

DISCUSSION
In this longitudinal study of a large cohort with long follow-up and active ascertainment of dementia, we found that people with low meat consumption (≤ 1 per week) had a significantly increased risk of developing dementia or AD after a mean follow-up of 9•8 years.
This increased risk was more pronounced in men and in APOE-ε4 carriers.
In men, low consumption of raw vegetables also was associated with increased risk of dementia or AD.
We did not find any significant association between the consumption frequency of fish, cooked fruits and vegetables or raw fruits and the risk of developing dementia or AD.
The strengths of the 3C cohort include its prospective design, long follow-up time, and large sample size that ensured a sufficient statistical power.
Moreover, our analysis considered a very large number of potential confounding factors (socio-demographic, lifestyle-related, clinical and biological variables).
Our analysis is also the first to have taken into account the possibility of a protopathic bias using a lag window of 4 years
AD pathophysiological process usually begins 10 to 20 years before the clinical signs
Therefore, when assessing nutritional habits in the years preceding dementia, it is difficult to exclude the possibility that these habits are affected, or not, by the ongoing pathological process.
As it is difficult to determine whether the observed eating behaviour is the cause or the consequence of the pathology, it is essential when analysing the relationship between eating habits and risk of dementia to take into account the possibility of a protopathic bias, as routinely done when studying drugs and dementia
Our study has several potential limitations.
First, the 3C cohort volunteers were recruited from the electoral rolls that include 80 to 90% of the French population.
However, participation in the cohort was on a voluntary basis, and the people finally included in the study were generally in better health, more educated, and with higher income than the general population.
As these characteristics can strongly influence the eating behaviour
However, this should not have affected our analysis from an etiological point of view
Because our study has a long follow-up and focuses on an elder population, the issue of competitive risk can be raised.
Indeed, if a subject dies during follow up, it will no longer be possible for him to develop dementia.
If a nutritional exposure is associated, with the risk of death, the number of dementias will be mechanically lower.
In this situation, methods such as the Fine and Gray model
These models should therefore be avoided in etiological studies, as they are sensitive to the variation in competitive risk rates.
Conversely, the method that we used, which consist to censor competitive events in Cox model, is largely unaffected by between-group differences in hazards for competing events
Another issue that can be raised is that of a survival bias related to deaths and loss to follow-up during the lag-time period.
This bias, when it exists, leads to the exclusion of the frailest subjects.
Subjects included in analyzes are survivors less susceptible to develop diseases.
In our study 862 cases of dementia were identified after the lag-time period, which corresponds to an incidence of 24/1000 person/year.
These figures are consistent with previously published incidence
Moreover, supplemental analyzes have shown that subjects excluded from the analysis due to death or loss to follow-up during the lag-time period, did not differ (after adjustment) from the subjects included in the analysis for the 5 food consumption variables we studied (data not shown).
Therefore, it is unlikely that a differential survival bias affected our results.
A frequent limitation of food surveys is the difficulty to identify the role of a specific food category because one food item is never consumed alone.
As the consumption of some food types is often correlated with each other, and foods are composed of many nutrients, it is challenging to understand the specific effects of each food category.
We have take into account, for each food category, the consumption of the other foods categories in multivariate analyses.
It is possible, however, that residual confusion linked to particular dietary patterns, may still be present in our results.
The FFQ that we use did not collect quantitative data (portions grams), but only frequencies of consumption, thus total energy intake (EI) was not directly estimated from this questionnaire.
To take into account this important parameter
We then used multiple imputation method to adjust our analyses for this parameter as previously described
Consistently with previous publications
Adjustment for this parameter did not change strength of associations in our analyses.
It therefore seems unlikely that EI could therefore explain our results.
Our study is not the first analysis on the relationship between dietary behaviour and dementia in the 3C cohort.
A previous study on the first 4 years of follow-up, without lag window
Moreover, daily consumption of cooked fruits and vegetables was associated with reduced risk of dementia.
The study did not find any association with meat consumption possibly because of lack of statistical power.
The differences observed between these studies on the same cohort could be explained by the presence of a protopathic bias in the previous short-term analysis.
For instance, preparation of fish-based dishes could require greater autonomy to buy and cook fresh products, and thus fish consumption frequency might be reduced in subjects in the prodromal phase of AD, as recently shown
In agreement, two long-term studies (the Rotterdam cohort: 9•6 years of follow-up and 5395 subjects at baseline; and the Framingham Heart study: 9•1 years of follow-up and 899 subjects at baseline) did not find any association with fish consumption
Conversely, several short-and medium-term studies (2-7 years of follow-up) reported an association between frequent fish consumption and reduced risk of dementia
A study that analysed pooled data from five large cohorts, including the 3C cohort, identified significant trends of increasing fish intake associated with decreasing rates of cognitive decline, with a small size effect.
However, as it did not exclude subjects who developed dementia at the beginning of the follow-up (as we did here), the possibility of protopathic bias cannot be ruled out
The findings on the role of fruits and vegetables also are divergent.
A meta-analysis on data from six large cohorts
However, moreover, it considered the total consumption, and not fruits and vegetables separately.
Few articles analysed fruit and vegetables separately, and mostly did not find any protective effect against the risk of dementia/AD
Other studies on cognitive decline suggested a protective association only for specific types of fruits and vegetables
Thus, the associations could depend on the nutritional habits of the participants in terms of the type of vegetables eaten.
As for fish, a previous publication
Therefore, a protopathic bias could also partly explain the divergence between our findings and previous literature data.
Contrary to what expected, our analysis showed an increased risk of dementia in low meat consumers and not in heavy meat consumers.
Few studies have focused on meat consumption.
The medium-term (7 years of follow-up) analyses on the PAQUID cohort did not find any link between red meat consumption and risk of dementia after adjusting for age and sex
In the Taiwan Longitudinal Study of Aging, a diet rich in meat was associated with increased risk of cognitive decline in people younger but not in those older than 75 years of age
The E3N study (n = 4809 women), which distinguished between red and white meat, did not detect any association between consumption of red meat (beef, pork, lamb) or processed meat and the odds of cognitive decline, but reported that consumption of white meat (poultry) was associated with a reduction of the long-term risk (13-years follow-up)
A possible pathophysiological hypothesis to explain the increased risk in non-meat consumers is the high frequency of vitamin B12 deficiency in people following with low intakes in animal products (including meat).
Indeed this deficiency is associated with an increased risk of neuropsychological impairment
Moreover, our study shows that in general, people with low meat consumption also eat fewer fruits and vegetables or fish.
Thus, low meat consumption might reflect a general decrease in dietary intakes, or dietary changes associated with multiple deficiencies that could lead to an increased risk of dementia.
However, it seems unlikely that this association is explained by a low energy intake since previous studies
The higher association in men could be explained by a difference in cause of low meat consumption between the two sexes, with more frequent alterations of the dietary behaviour in men.
In conclusion, our study on the long-term risk of dementia suggests that low consumption of raw vegetables in men, and very low meat consumption could be associated with an increased risk of developing dementia or AD.
Conversely, when taking into account the potential reverse causation, it did not find any association between consumption frequency of fish, cooked fruits and vegetables or raw fruits and the risk of developing dementia or AD.

Table 1: Participants' characteristics according to the meat or fish consumption frequency

Frequency of meat consumption
Frequency of fish consumption

Cooked fruit and vegetable consumption frequency



4• 9
years at baseline.
Among them, 25•0 % were enrolled in Bordeaux, 51•6 % in Dijon and 23•4 % in Montpellier.
Women represented 63•4 % of all participants.
The average follow-up duration after the 4-year lag window was 6•1 years (9•8 years after the FFQ), and this corresponded to a follow-up of 35 705 persons-years.
During this time, 662 participants developed dementia (AD in 466 participants, 70 %), and 860 died.


29•0/1000 persons-years for low meat consumers and 17•3/1000 for higher meat consumers for dementia, and 22•1/1000 persons-years versus 12•3/1000 persons-years for AD).
Compared with high meat consumption (≥ 4 times/week), low meat consumption (≤ 1 times/week) was significantly associated with an increased risk of dementia and AD after adjustment (model b: HR = 1•58, 95 % CI = [1•17-2•14] for dementia; HR = 1•67[1•18-2•37] for AD).


not in women.
Low meat consumption was associated with higher risk of dementia and AD in men (model b: HR = 2•44 [1•38-4•32], and HR = 3.74 [2•07-6•76], respectively) and in APOE-ε4 carriers (model b: HR = 2•02 [1•12-3•65], and HR = 2•50 [1•30-4•82], respectively).



Figure 1 :Tableau E- 3 :
Figure 1: Study flow chart.



Table 2 : Participants' characteristics according to the consumption frequency of raw fruits, raw vegetables or cooked fruits and vegetables Raw fruit consumption frequency Raw vegetable consumption frequency Cooked fruit and vegetable consumption frequency



Table 3 : Association between food consumption frequency and risk of dementia or AD


Reference category• HR: Hazard Ratio• 95% CI: 95% confidence interval• Model b: adjusted for center• sex• education level• income• marital status• apoe-ε4• tobacco• alcohol and physical activity, the four other food, caloric intake • body mass index• diabetes• hypertension• hypercholesterolemia and depression•