Astrocytic palmitoylethanolamide pre-exposure exerts neuroprotective effects in astrocyte-neuron co-cultures from a triple transgenic mouse model of Alzheimer's disease
Alzheimer's disease (AD); β-amyloid peptide (Aβ); Days in vitro (DIV); Glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP); Microtubule-associated protein 2 (MAP2); Non-transgenic (

Introduction
Alzheimer's disease (AD), the most common form of dementia, is a neurodegenerative disease affecting several million people worldwide.
AD is clinically characterized by a progressive loss of intellectual abilities such as learning and memory associated with a functional deterioration and, depending on the pathology severity, with behavioral disorders and neuropsychiatric signs
The two pathognomonic lesions in the brain of AD patients are senile plaques due to extracellular neuritic β-amyloid peptide (Aβ) aggregations and neurofibrillary tangles in the cytoplasm of pyramidal neurons due to tau hyperphosphorylation
Neuroinflammation in AD was originally considered as a mere bystander activated by emerging senile plaques and neurofibrillar tangles.
More recent findings, however, clearly supported the view that neuroinflammation contributes as much or more to the pathogenesis of AD.
Accordingly, increased glial cell activation is reliably observed in both rodent models of AD and in AD patients
Astrocytes are glial cells possessing homeostatic, metabolic and defensive properties and playing an important role in the development of inflammatory responses in the brain
These cells are more numerous than microglia in the CNS and their activation seems to be more prolonged than that of other glial cells.
This supports the hypothesis that the role of astrocytes in sustaining neuroinflammation in AD is more relevant than that of microglia
Astrocyte pathological responses comprise reactive astrogliosis, a complex and multistage process mainly characterized by astrocyte morphology changes and generally aimed at neuroprotection and rescue of damaged neurons
In spite of these beneficial effects of reactive astrocytes on surrounding neurons, it is well recognized that extreme and extended astrocyte activation contributes to neuroinflammation development and progress, altering the neuron/astrocyte interaction and leading to harmful neuronal effects
In fact, activated astrocytes induce the release of cytokines, interleukins, nitric oxide, along with other cytotoxic factors, thus exacerbating neurodegeneration process observed in AD
As a consequence, a therapeutic approach directing against not only neurodegeneration, but also astrocyte dysfunctions in AD may be effective in reducing the disease progression
In this context, palmitoylethanolamide (PEA), an endogenous lipid mediator
The compound has been proved to be effective in counteracting neuroinflammation and Journal Pre-proof J o u r n a l P r e -p r o o f neurodegeneration, as demonstrated by numerous in vitro and in vivo animal models of AD
We previously reported that PEA acts as a protective agent against Aβ 1-42 fragment (Aβ 42 )-induced toxicity in primary cultures of cortical neurons or astrocytes from wild-type (non-Tg) and the triple-transgenic murine model of AD (3xTg-AD) mice
Furthermore, PEA demonstrated protective properties against the neurotoxic effects induced by astrocytic Aβ 42 exposure in a mouse astrocyte-neuron co-culture preparation
Collectively, these data propose that PEA exerts favorable effects against Aβ-induced neurodegeneration either by exerting a direct neuroprotective action or by limiting the neurotoxic consequences of astrocyte activation.
From a translational point of view, it became therefore significant to assess the effects of PEA on astrocyteneuron co-cultures from an animal model of AD.
Thus, in the present study we used astrocyteneuron co-cultures from 3xTg-AD mice to further investigate on the possible role of astrocytes in PEA-induced neuroprotection.
To this aim, we evaluated the number of viable cells, apoptotic nuclei, microtubule-associated protein-2 (MAP2) positive cells and the morphological parameters in primary cortical neurons co-cultured with primary cortical astrocytes pre-exposed, or not, to Aβ 42 (0.5 μM; 24 h) or PEA (0.1 µM; 24 h).

Materials and Methods

2.1.Animals and Ethics statement
In the present study, colonies of 3xTg-AD mice and wild type littermates (non-Tg) were used.
These animals were initially established at the animal facilities of the Puglia and Basilicata Experimental Zooprophylactic Institute (Foggia, Italy)
The 3xTg-AD mice harboring APP swe , PS1 M146V , and tau P301L transgenes were genetically engineered by LaFerla and colleagues at the Department of Neurobiology and Behavior, University of California, Irvine
Genotypes were confirmed by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) after tail biopsies
The housing conditions were controlled (temperature 22 °C, light from 07:00 -19:00, humidity 50% -60%), and fresh food and water were freely available.
The experimental protocols performed in this study were in accordance with the European Communities Council Directive of September 2010 (2010/63/EU) and were approved by the Italian Journal Pre-proof J o u r n a l P r e -p r o o f Ministry of Health.
Efforts were made to minimize the number of animals used and to reduce their discomfort.

Primary cultures of cerebral cortex neurons
Primary cerebral cortex neuron cultures were obtained from non-Tg and 3xTg-AD mouse embryos (embryonic day 18) according to the method described for rat cortical neuronal cultures
Concisely, after meninges removal, embryo cortices were dissociated in 0.025% (w/v) trypsin (37°C).
Thereafter, fragments of tissue were dissociated by repetitive mild pipetting through wide-and narrow-bore fire-polished Pasteur pipettes in Neurobasal medium (Gibco, Grand Island, NY, USA) supplemented with glutamine (0.1 mM; Sigma Chemical Co., St. Louis, MO, USA), gentamicin (10 μg/ml; Sigma Chemical Co., St. Louis, MO, USA) and 2% B27® Supplement (50X), serum free (Gibco®).
After the cell counting, the neurons were plated on glass coverslips in a poly-L-lysine (5μg/ml)-coated multiwells (24 wells; Nunc A/S, Roskilde, Denmark) at a density of 200,000 cells per well.
Cultures were grown at a 37°C in a humidified atmosphere, 5% CO 2 /95% air.
After 8 days of in vitro incubation (days in vitro: DIV), the cultures were used for the experiments.
The incubation of primary cultures of cerebral cortex neurons with an antibody against glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP), revealed no contamination of neurons with astrocytes (data not shown).

Primary cultures of cerebral cortex astrocytes
Primary cultures of cerebral cortex astrocytes were prepared from neonatal non-Tg and 3xTg-AD mice (1 or 2 days old) and cultured as previously described
After the removal of cerebral cortices, the tissue was dissociated by slight trypsinization (37°C) and then mechanically triturated to attain single cells.
After their suspension in the culture medium [DMEM, 5% inactivated fetal bovine serum (Gibco), 100 IU/ml penicillin and 100 μg/ml streptomycin (all from Sigma-Aldrich, Milan, Italy)], the cells were seeded in 75-cm 2 flasks at a density of 3 × 10 6 cells/flask and then incubated (37°C) in a humidified atmosphere, 5% CO 2 /95% air.
The culture medium was replaced 24 h later and twice weekly until astrocytes formed a monolayer strictly attached to the bottom of the flask (12 or 14 days after dissection).
At cell confluence, flasks were subjected to a vigorous shake in order to separate astrocytes (remaining adherent to the bottom of the flasks) from microglia and oligodendrocytes (floating on the supernatant).
Finally, the astrocytes were counted and plated on poly-L-lysine (5 μg/ml)-coated Petri dish (35 mm diameter) at a density of 1,500,000 cells per dish (Nunc A/S, Roskilde, Journal Pre-proof J o u r n a l P r e -p r o o f 6 Denmark).
The monoclonal anti-glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) was used to evaluate the cell culture purity; only cultures with more than 95% GFAP-positive cells were used for the experiments.

2.4.Astrocyte-neuron co-cultures and treatment procedure
Astrocyte-neuron co-cultures were prepared following the method described by
All treatments were only applied to astrocytes cultured in dish containing DMEM.
In particular, Aβ 1-42 or PEA (0.1 μM, Tocris Bioscience, Bristol, UK) were applied for 24 h.
The treatment concentrations were chosen according to previous results
Aβ 1-42 (Tocris Bioscience, Bristol, UK) was freshly prepared by dissolving the peptide, at the concentration of 0.5 µM, in distilled water; by means of atomic force microscopy (AFM), a previous study
monomers) and very few larger particles (i.e.
oligomers).
After the treatment period, the medium was aspirated to remove Aβ 42 or PEA and then the astrocytes were washed with fresh DMEM and then placed in supplemented Neurobasal medium for 4 h.
Thereafter, the astrocyte-neuron co-cultures were created by gently transferring primary cortical neurons grown on coverslips on the top of the astrocyte layer cultured in 35 mm dish (neurons facing up; Fig.
Astrocytes were plated at a density of 1,500,000 cells/dish, while neurons were plated on glass coverslips at a density of 200,000 cells/well.
Under these experimental conditions, neurons were never in direct interaction with Aβ 42 and/or PEA.
24 h after the initiation of co-cultures, neuronal viability, MAP immunoreactivity, nuclear staining and different morphometric parameters have been assessed.

Journal Pre-proof

2.5.Neutral red assay
Neuronal viability was assessed with neutral red assay as previously described
Shortly, 24 h after the creation of astrocyte-neuron co-cultures, the dishes were incubated for 2 h at 37°C with a Neutral red working solution [50 μg ml in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) 1X without calcium and magnesium, Sigma-Aldrich, MO, USA].
A washing period with PBS was used to eliminate the extracellular remaining dye.
Thereafter, the cortical neuron-holding glass coverslips were removed from the dishes containing the astrocytes and placed in 24-multiwell plates with neurons facing up.
A destain solution (ethanol: deionized water: glacial acetic acid, 50:49:1 v/v) was used to remove the dye from each well.
A microplate absorbance reader (Sunrise, Tecan) was used to read the absorbance (wave length = 540 nm); the absorbance values obtained from treated cells were compared to those measured in control non-exposed cultures, and expressed as % changes

2.6.MAP2 immunoreactivity
The neuronal morphology was analyzed by using MAP2 immunocytochemistry.
In fact, MAP2 is a neuronal marker that can be considered an index of the cytoskeleton integrity.
24 h after the Journal Pre-proof J o u r n a l P r e -p r o o f creation of astrocyte-neuron co-cultures, the glass coverslip containing the cortical neurons was removed from the dish with cortical astrocytes and positioned in 24-multiwell plate.
Cells were rinsed (three 5 min-periods) in 0.1 M PBS and then fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde in Sorensen's buffer 0.1M, pH 7.4 for 20 min.
Thereafter, the cells were incubated overnight at 4°C in 0.3% Triton X-100/PBS solution containing the primary antibody-MAP2 (1:1000 dilution Chemicon, Temecula, CA).
Then the neurons were rinsed 3 times with PBS and incubated (60 min; room temperature) with the secondary antibody, rhodamine-conjugated anti-rabbit antibody (1:100 dilution Chemicon, Temecula, CA).
At the end of this incubation period, the cells were washed in PBS and mounted in glycerol and PBS (3:1 v/v) containing 0.1% 1,4-phenylenediamine and examined using a Nikon Microphot FXA microscope.
Five distinct and non-overlapping fields in each coverslip were randomly selected for cell counts; images were obtained by using a 20x objective.
The morphometric parameters evaluated in the cortical cultured neurons were: cell body area, length of the longest dendrite, number of dendritic branches per neuron, number of neurites per neuron and MAP2 dendrite aggregations.
Morphometric measurements were accomplished by using a Nikon Microphot FXA microscope (x40 magnification objective) on 5 different microscopic fields in each coverslip.
In particular, the MAP-2 aggregation number was calculated and referred to 100 µm of dendritic length.
Morphometric neuronal analysis was performed utilizing the Image-Pro Plus 4.1 software

2.7.Nuclear Staining with Hoechst 33258.
The investigation of apoptotic neuronal death was performed with nuclear staining by using Hoechst 33258.
24 h after the creation of astrocyte-neuron co-cultures, the coverslips with cortical neurons were removed and rinsed twice with PBS (0.1 M), and then cells were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde, and incubated (20 min; room temperature) with Hoechst 33258 (1 g/ml in 0.1M PBS).
The coverslips were rinsed with PBS and then mounted on slides with a solution containing 50% glycerol in 0.044 M citrate, 0.111 M phosphate buffer, pH 5.5.
Cells were visualized by using a fluorescence microscope (Nikon Microphot FXA).
The % of cells displaying condensed chromatin (fragmented nuclei) was calculated by counting >3000 cells under each experimental condition (5 randomly selected fields per well, 9-18 wells per condition per experiment, and 5 independent experiments;

2.8.Statistical analysis
Journal Pre-proof

J o u r n a l P r e -p r o o f
Results are presented as means ± standard error of mean.
The statistical analysis was carried out by using Student's t test.
P < 0.05 was the accepted level of significance.

Results

3.1.Cortical astrocyte-neuron co-cultures from 3xTg-AD mice: effects of astrocytic Aβ 42 preexposure on neuronal health
These experiments were carried out to compare the impact of astrocytic Aβ 42 pre-exposure on neuronal health in astrocyte-neuron co-cultures from 3xTg-AD mice with that previously observed in astrocyte-neuron co-cultures from non-Tg mice
In fact, in spite of the demonstration that in primary cultures of cerebral cortex neurons or in primary cultures of cerebral cortex astrocytes from 3xTg-AD mice, Aβ 42 failed to affect cell viability and cell morphology
To verify this possibility, 3xTg-AD cortical astrocyte cultures were pre-treated with Aβ 42 (0.5µM; 24 h) and, after changing the culture medium (to remove Aβ 42 ), 3xTg-AD cortical neurons were co-cultured for another 24 h-period.
After this period neuronal viability, MAP2 immunoreactivity and neuronal morphometric parameters were assessed.

Effects of astrocytic Aβ 42 pre-exposure on neuronal viability
In the presence of astrocytes pre-exposed to Aβ 42 (0.5 μM; 24 h), the viability of cortical neurons from 3xTg-AD mice was similar to that observed in control (i.e., Aβ 42 vehicle treated) astrocyteneuron co-cultures (Fig.
To exclude the possibility that this negative results might be due to the fact that, under these experimental conditions, the peptide may have not an active conformation to induce cytotoxicity, we repeated the experiments in astrocyte-neuron co-cultures from non-Tg mice.
As previously demonstrated

Effect of astrocytic Aβ 42 pre-exposure on apoptotic neuronal death
To evaluate apoptotic neuronal death we detected the chromatin structure alteration by using the specific DNA stain, Hoechst 33258.
As shown in Fig.
Aβ 42 vehicle treated) astrocyte-neuron co-cultures.

Effect of astrocytic Aβ 42 pre-exposure on neuronal MAP2 immunoreactivity
To evaluate the effect of astrocytic Aβ 42 pre-exposure (0.5 μM; 24 h) on neuronal MAP2 immunoreactivity, the number of vital MAP2-immunostained cultured cortical neurons in astrocyteneuron co-cultures from 3xTg-AD mice was measured.
The astrocytic Aβ 42 pre-exposure did not significantly modify the number of MAP2 positive co-cultured neurons as compared to control (i.e.
Aβ 42 vehicle treated) co-cultures (Fig.

Effect of astrocytic Aβ 42 pre-exposure on neuronal morphometric parameters

Journal Pre-proof
To characterize the healthy neuronal growth, a morphometric analysis was carried out on cortical neurons in astrocyte-neuron co-cultures from 3xTg-AD mice, by using MAP2 immunofluorescence.
No significant differences in the number of neuritic aggregations/100 µm, number of dendritic branches per neuron, cell body area, length of the longest dendrite and number of neurites per neuron were observed between cortical neurons of 3xTg-AD mice co-cultured with astrocytes preexposed or not (i.e.
control) to Aβ 42 (0.5 μM; 24 h; Fig.

3.2.Astrocytic influence on apoptotic neuronal death and morphological parameters in cortical astrocyte-neuron co-cultures: comparison between 3xTg-AD and non-Tg mice
The above results suggested a different impact of astrocytic Aβ 42 pre-exposure on neuronal viability, MAP2 immunoreactivity and morphometric parameters in cortical astrocyte-neuron cocultures from non-Tg
In view of this observation, further experiments were carried out to compare the effects of astrocytic influence on neuronal health in cortical astrocyte-neuron co-cultures from non-Tg and 3xTg-AD mice.

Astrocytic influence on apoptotic neuronal death
As shown in Fig.

Astrocytic influence on neuronal MAP2 immunoreactivity
The number of vital MAP2 positive cultured neurons obtained from astrocyte-neuron co-cultures was determined.
In the 3xTg-AD mouse co-cultures, the number of MAP2 positive neurons was significantly reduced when compared to non-Tg mouse co-cultures (Fig.
Journal Pre-proof J o u r n a l P r e -p r o o f

Journal

Astrocytic influence on neuronal morphometric parameters
The morphometric analysis was applied to MAP2 immunostained cultured neurons in order to visualize and quantify the neurite maturation of neurons in co-cultures from non-Tg and 3xTg-AD mice.
As shown in Fig.
On the contrary, we observed significantly lower number of dendritic branches per neuron, neuronal body area, length of the longest dendrite and number of neurites per neuron in 3xTg-AD mouse cocultures than in non-Tg mouse co-cultures (Fig.

3.3.Astrocytic influence on apoptotic neuronal death and morphological parameters in cortical astrocyte-neuron co-cultures from 3xTg-AD mice: effects of PEA treatment
Our previous
To verify this possibility, in a final set of experiments the effects of PEA on the impact of astrocytes on neuronal conditions in cortical astrocyte-neuron co-cultures from 3xTg-AD mice, have been evaluated.
To this aim, 3xTg-AD mouse cortical neurons were co-cultured with 3xTg-AD mouse astrocytes preexposed to PEA (0.1 µM; 24 h); apoptotic neuronal death and morphological parameters were then evaluated.

Effect of PEA pre-exposure on astrocytic influence on apoptotic neuronal death
The number of apoptotic nuclei in 3xTg-AD mouse cortical neurons co-cultured with 3xTg-AD mouse astrocytes pre-exposed to PEA (0.1 µM; 24 h) was significantly lower than that observed in control co-cultures (i.e.
3xTg-AD mouse cortical neurons co-cultured with 3xTg-AD mouse astrocytes not treated with PEA; Fig.

Effect of PEA pre-exposure on astrocytic influence on neuronal MAP2 immunoreactivity
As shown in Fig.
3xTg-AD mouse cortical neurons co-cultured with 3xTg-AD mouse astrocytes not treated with PEA).

Effect of PEA pre-exposure on astrocytic influence on neuronal morphometric parameters
As shown in Fig.
3xTg-AD mouse cortical neurons co-cultured with 3xTg-AD mouse astrocytes not treated with PEA).
The astrocytic PEA pre-exposure also induced an increase of the number of dendritic branches per neuron (Fig.
No significant differences in cell body area and number of neurites per neuron were observed in 3xTg-AD mouse cortical neurons co-cultured with 3xTg-AD mouse astrocytes pre-exposed or not to PEA (0.1 µM; 24 h; Fig.

Discussion
It is now generally accepted that activated microglia and astrocytes are integral players in the pathogenesis of AD
Reactive astrogliosis is mainly characterized by astrocytic dysfunctions, increased expression of both GFAP and S100B, also associated with an increased production of proinflammatory mediators
This phenomenon has been detected in proximity of plaques and Aβ deposits; by this way astrocytes contribute to neurodegeneration in AD, thus becoming a possible relevant target for the development of innovative therapies
Using the same experimental preparation as in the present study, we previously demonstrated that wild-type (i.e.
non-Tg) mice astrocytes are involved in Aβ 42 -induced neurotoxicity and PEA, by dampening Aβ 42 -induced astrocyte activation, enhanced neuronal survival
In particular, in the presence of astrocytes pre-exposed to Aβ 42 , a significant decrease in neuronal cell viability, a significant increase in apoptotic neuronal death and in neurite aggregation number were observed, thus suggesting that astrocytes are able to perpetuate/sustain the neurotoxic effects of the peptide
Interestingly, these results have not been replicated in 3xTg-AD mouse co-cultures (present study), where astrocytic Aβ 42 -pre-exposure did not induce any significant effect on neuronal viability, apoptotic neuronal death and neuron morphology.
These results are in line with our previous findings demonstrating that in primary cultures of cerebral cortex neurons or in primary cultures of cerebral cortex astrocytes from non-Tg, but not 3xTg-AD mice, the treatment with Aβ 42 significantly affected glutamate levels, cell viability and cell morphology
Furthermore,
Thus, a negative effect of Aβ 42 in the co-cultured cells from 3xTg-AD mice may be expected based on our previous results.
However, it cannot be ruled out the possibility that Aβ 42 exposure may have resulted in increased levels of neurotoxic agents from astrocytes, thus leading to neuronal injury in astrocyte-neuron co-cultures, and that PEA pre-treatment could counteract this effect.
In this context, using this model we provide further information to support the hypothesis that cultured
Journal Pre-proof astrocytes or neuron from 3xTg-AD mice seem to be less sensitive to the exogenous Aβ 42 -induced insult, when compared to non-Tg mouse derived cells.
The discrepancies between the results observed in cultured cells from 3xTg-AD and non-Tg mice have been associated with the demonstrated expression of endogenous intra-and extra-neuronal Aβ peptides in the transgenic mouse derived cell cultures
Thus, it has been hypothesized that exogenous Aβ 42 was ineffective in 3xTg-AD mice-derived cortical cultures as this cells at 8 DIV were already exposed to endogenous Aβ fragments
The exposure to endogenous Aβ fragments could also explain the evidence that, in the present study, astrocytic Aβ 42 pre-exposure did not influence neuronal viability and morphology in astrocyte-neuron co-cultures from 3xTg-AD mice.
On the other hand, our previous data demonstrating that under the same experimental conditions as used in the present study, Aβ42 directly induced toxicity in non-Tg mouse co-cultures
Thus, it seems likely that the negative results we obtained cannot be due to the strong aggregation propensity of Aβ 42 .
Based on the present findings, we hypothesized that endogenous deleterious factors spontaneously released by cultured astrocytes from 3xTg-AD mice might contribute to neuronal damages in the present experimental model.
Indeed, activated astrocytes in AD become a part of the inflammatory process when, in addition to microglia, they start to secrete pro-inflammatory cytokines and other mediators, thus contributing to neurodegeneration
To verify this possibility, in the present study we also compared the effects of astrocytic influence on neuronal viability and morphology in cortical astrocyte-neuron co-cultures from non-Tg and 3xTg-AD mice.
The results demonstrated that, in the absence of any exogenous treatment, astrocytes from 3xTg-AD mice have a negative impact on the number and morphology of co-cultured neurons.
In fact, when compared to non-Tg mouse co-cultures, a reduced number of neurons, an increased number of apoptotic neuronal death and alterations of neuronal morphology have been observed in 3xTg-AD mouse co-cultures.
Interestingly, a previous study demonstrated that 3xTg-AD mouse primary astrocyte cultures present signs of reactive astrogliosis
In particular, in the absence of any exogenous treatment, 3xTg-AD primary astrocyte cultures displayed a basal reactive and pro-inflammatory phenotype
Furthermore, in cultured hippocampal astrocytes from 3xTg-AD mice, transforming growth factors beta (TGF-β)
TGF-β2 and TGF-β3, but not TGF-β1, were up-regulated, pointing to astroglial TGF-β2 and TGF-β3 as potential early contributors to AD pathogenesis
In view of these results
and on the fact that in the astrocyte-neuron co-culture model we used, the two different cell
Journal Pre-proof J o u r n a l P r e -p r o o f populations were not in direct contact with each other, it seems likely that endogenous mediators released from astrocytes reached the neighboring neurons, thus potentiating neuronal damage.
Taken together, the present data suggest that in this transgenic animal model of AD, astrocytes contribute to neuronal degeneration, as indicated by the reduction of viable neurons and the increased neurite aggregation, which is considered a sign of neuronal damage often observed under neurodegenerative conditions.
Interestingly, in our previous study on non-Tg mouse co-cultures we observed that astrocytic pre-exposure to Aβ 42 increased neuronal aggregations, but failed to affect other morphological parameters
Differently, in the present study, significantly lower length of the longest dendrite and number of dendritic branches per neuron were also observed in astrocyte-neuron co-cultures from 3xTg-AD mice.
These results suggest that the contribution of astrocytes to neurodegeneration in this animal model of AD could be particularly relevant, thus strengthening the role of these cells as possible relevant target for the development of innovative therapies against AD progression.
In this context, it becomes relevant to investigate, in further studies, the effects of 3xTg-AD mouse astrocytes on non-Tg mouse cultured neurons.
PEA is a non-endocannabinoid lipid mediator and is included in the class of N-acylethanolamine phospolipids
Accordingly, various preclinical and some clinical studies suggested PEA as an effective therapeutic agent in pathologies characterized by neurodegeneration and neuroinflammation
Concerning AD, PEA exerted neuroprotective/anti-inflammatory effects in numerous in vitro and in vivo experimental models of the pathology
Among other studies, we previously demonstrated, by using astrocyte-neuron co-cultures from non-Tg mice, that PEA fully prevented the neuronal cell death, the reduced number of MAP2 positive cells, the neurite Journal Pre-proof J o u r n a l P r e -p r o o f fragmentation, and the increase of apoptotic nuclei induced by astrocytic Aβ 42 pre-exposure
Furthermore, data from astrocyte-neuron co-cultures indicated that PEA treatment resulted in a massive reduction in astrocyte number and such an effect was associated with a significant decrease in the number of apoptotic nuclei in MAP2-positive neurons induced by Aβ challenge
Interestingly, the PEA-induced antigliosis and neuroprotective effects were inescapably due to PPARα activation, since they were almost completely abolished by the selective PPARα antagonist
To further evaluate the protective role of the compound against neurodegeneration in AD, in the present study the effects of PEA on astrocyticinduced neuronal damages have been investigated in astrocytes-neuronal co-cultures from 3xTg-AD mice.
Overall, the results indicate that astrocytic PEA pre-exposure counteracts the reduced number of MAP2 positive cells, the increase of apoptotic nuclei and the neuron morphological changes induced by astrocytes when co-cultured with cortical neurons from 3xTg-AD mice.
Based on these findings, it can be hypothesized that PEA exerts at least part of its neuroprotective effects by counteracting the production and/or release of deleterious mediators by astrocytes.
This hypothesis is supported by the demonstration that PEA reduced Aβ-induced neuroinflammation by significantly reducing either the enhanced expression of pro-inflammatory molecules [cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) and inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS)], or the increased release of prostaglandin PGE2, nitric oxide, interleukin-1β, and tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-α)
Additionally, PEA induced a significant decrease in the number of apoptotic nuclei in MAP2-positive neurons induced by Aβ challenge in mixed neuroglial co-cultures, reduced the expression and release of some pro-inflammatory cytokines and mediators in organotypic hippocampal slices
Finally, a previous study
As stated above, in our previous study on primary cortical neurons we observed that untreated (i.e.
control) cortical neurons obtained from 3xTg-AD mice presented morphological modifications similar to those observed in Aβ 42 -exposed cultured cortical neurons obtained from non-Tg mice
This finding has been explained as due to the release of endogenous Aβ fragments by 3xTg-AD mouse cultured neurons
This raises also the possibility that, in the present study, the neuronal damages observed in 3xTg-AD mouse cocultures, when compared with the non-Tg ones, could be simply due to the release of endogenous deleterious factors by neurons and not by the influence of astrocyte-released modulators.
However, the evidence that astrocytic pre-exposure to PEA counteracts the reduced number of MAP2 positive
Journal Pre-proof J o u r n a l P r e -p r o o f cells, the increase of apoptotic nuclei and the neuron morphological changes observed when untreated astrocytes were co-cultured with cortical neurons from 3xTg-AD mice, strongly support the role of these cells in contributing to neurodegeneration.
Based on the present results, it became relevant to evaluate, in future studies, the consequences of co-culturing 3xTg-AD astrocyte with non-Tg neurons, as well as non-Tg astrocytes with 3xTg-AD neurons to definitively confirm that astrocyte contribute to neuronal degeneration in the 3xTg-AD model.
In conclusion, the results obtained in the present study indicate that in mouse astrocyte-neuron cocultures from 3xTg-AD mice, astrocytes contribute to neuronal damage and that PEA, by possibly counteracting reactive astrogliosis, improved neuronal survival.
Together with previous data on experimental AD models
However, it seems likely that also direct neuroprotective actions or a reduction of microglial activation can concur to the beneficial effects of PEA in AD
Considering the extreme safety and tolerability of PEA in humans



Figure 1 .
Figure 1.
Schematic representation of PEA and Aβ 42 treatment protocol in cortical astrocyte-neuron co-cultures.
Control co-cultures were subjected to the same protocol but treated with the respective Aβ 42 and/or PEA vehicle.



Figure 2 .
Figure 2. Effects of astrocytic Aβ 42 pre-exposure (0.5 μM, 24 h) on cell viability in primary cortical neurons from astrocyte-neuron co-cultures from 3xTg-AD mice.
3xTg-AD mouse cortical astrocyte cultures were pretreated with Aβ 42 and, after changing the culture medium (to remove Aβ 42 ), 3xTg-AD mouse neurons were co-cultured for another 24 h-period.
Thereafter, cell viability was assessed by Neutral red assay and expressed as percentage of control values.
Each histogram represents the mean ± S.E.M (n=10-20 wells; 4-5 animals per condition).



Figure 3 .
Figure 3. Effects of astrocytic Aβ 42 pre-exposure (0.5 μM, 24 h) on percentage of apoptotic nuclei (Panel A) and number of MAP2-positive cells (Panel B) in primary cortical neurons from astrocyteneuron co-cultures from 3xTg-AD mice.
3xTg-AD mouse cortical astrocyte cultures were pretreated with Aβ 42 and, after changing the culture medium (to remove Aβ 42 ), 3xTg-AD mouse neurons were co-cultured for another 24 h-period.
The specific DNA stain Hoechst 33258 was used for the determination of apoptotic nuclei.
The number of MAP2 positive cells was determined under fluorescent microscope by staining neurons with anti-MAP2 antibody.
Each histogram represents the mean ± S.E.M (n=10-20 wells; 4-5 animals per condition).
Panel C: representative fluorescent photomicrographs (magnification x40; Scale bar = 50 µm) of MAP2 immunoreactivity (red) and Hoechst 33258 staining (blue).



Figure 4 .
Figure 4. Effects of Aβ 42 pre-exposure on neuronal morphometric parameters in primary cortical neurons in astrocyte-neuron co-cultures from 3xTg-AD mice.
3xTg-AD mouse cortical astrocyte cultures were pretreated with Aβ 42 and, after changing the culture medium (to remove Aβ 42 ), 3xTg-AD mouse neurons were co-cultured for another 24 h-period.
Thereafter, neurons were stained with



Figure 5 .
Figure 5. Astrocytic influence on apoptotic cell death (Panel A) and MAP2 immunoreactivity (Panel B) in primary cortical neurons from astrocyte-neuron co-cultures from 3xTg-AD mice and non-Tg (i.e.
wild-type) mice.
3xTg-AD or non-Tg mouse neurons were co-cultured for 24 h with astrocytes from the respective genotype.
Thereafter, the specific DNA stain Hoechst 33258 was used for the determination of apoptotic nuclei.
At least five random microscopic fields were counted per sample, and the number of apoptotic nuclei was expressed as % of total nuclei.
The number of MAP2 positive cells was determined under fluorescent microscope by staining neurons with anti-MAP2 antibody.
Each histogram represents the mean + S.E.M (n=10-20 wells; 4-5 animals per condition).
**p<0.01
significantly different from the respective non-Tg group (Student t test).
Panel C: representative fluorescent photomicrographs of MAP2 (red) immunoreactivity and Hoechst 33258 (blue) staining (magnification x40; scale bar = 50 µm).



Figure 6 .
Figure 6.
Astrocytic influence on morphological parameters in primary cortical neurons from astrocyte-neuron co-cultures from 3xTg-AD mice and non-Tg (i.e.
wild-type) mice.
3xTg-AD or non-Tg mouse neurons were co-cultured for 24 h with astrocytes from the respective genotype.
Thereafter, neurons were stained with anti-MAP2 antibody and observed under fluorescent microscope; the number of aggregation/100 µm (Panel A), the cell body area (Panel B), the length of the longest dendrite (Panel C), the number of dendritic branches per neuron (Panel D) and the number of neurites per neuron (Panel E) were measured.
Each histogram represents the mean ± S.E.M (n=10/15 wells; 3-4 animals per condition).
*p<0.05,
**p<0.01,
***p<0.001
significantly different from the respective non-Tg group (Student t test).



Figure 7 .
Figure 7. Effects of PEA (0.1 µM; 24 h) pre-exposure on astrocytic influence on apoptotic cell death (Panel A) and MAP2 immunoreactivity (Panel B) in primary cortical neurons obtained from astrocyte-neuron co-cultures from 3xTg-AD mice.
3xTg-AD mouse cortical astrocyte cultures were pretreated with PEA and, after changing the culture medium (to remove PEA), 3xTg-AD mouse neurons were co-cultured for another 24 h-period.
Thereafter, the specific DNA stain Hoechst 33258 was used for the determination of apoptotic nuclei.
At least five random microscopic fields were counted per sample, and the number of apoptotic nuclei was expressed as % of total nuclei.
The number of MAP2 positive cells was determined under fluorescent microscope by staining neurons with anti-MAP2 antibody.
Each histogram represents the mean ± S.E.M (n=10-20 wells; 3-



Figure 8 .
Figure 8. Effects of PEA (0.1 µM; 24 h) pre-exposure on astrocytic influence on morphological parameters in primary cortical neurons obtained from astrocyte-neuron co-cultures from 3xTg-AD mice.
3xTg-AD mouse cortical astrocyte cultures were pretreated with PEA and, after changing the culture medium (to remove PEA), 3xTg-AD mouse neurons were co-cultured for another 24 hperiod.
Thereafter, neurons were stained with anti MAP2 antibody and observed under fluorescent microscope.
The number of aggregation/100 µm (Panel A), the number of dendritic branches per neuron (Panel B), the length of the longest dendrite (Panel C), the cell body area (Panel D) and the number of neurites per neuron (Panel E) were measured.
Control groups represent co-cultures obtained from astrocytes pretreated with the PEA vehicle.
Each histogram represents the mean ±