A large-scale genome-wide cross-trait analysis reveals shared genetic architecture between Alzheimer’s disease and gastrointestinal tract disorders
Consistent with the concept of the gut-brain phenomenon, observational studies suggest a relationship between Alzheimer's disease (AD) and gastrointestinal tract (GIT) disorders; however, their underlying mechanisms remain unclear.
Here, we analyse several genomewide association studies (GWAS) summary statistics (N = 34,652-456,327), to assess the relationship of AD with GIT disorders.
Findings reveal a positive significant genetic overlap and correlation between AD and gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD), peptic ulcer disease (PUD), gastritis-duodenitis, irritable bowel syndrome and diverticulosis, but not inflammatory bowel disease.
Cross-trait meta-analysis identifies several loci (P meta-analysis < 5 × 10 -8 ) shared by AD and GIT disorders (GERD and PUD) including PDE4B, BRINP3, ATG16L1, SEMA3F, HLA-DRA, SCARA3, MTSS2, PHB, and TOMM40.
Colocalization and gene-based analyses reinforce these loci.
Pathway-based analyses demonstrate significant enrichment of lipid metabolism, autoimmunity, lipase inhibitors, PD-1 signalling, and statin mechanisms, among others, for AD and GIT traits.
Our findings provide genetic insights into the gut-brain relationship, implicating shared but non-causal genetic susceptibility of GIT disorders with AD's risk.
Genes and biological pathways identified are potential targets for further investigation in AD, GIT disorders, and their comorbidity.

A
lzheimer's disease (AD) is the most prevalent form of dementia, characterised by neurodegeneration and a progressive decline in cognitive ability
The disorder ranks as a subject of increasing global public health importance with consequences for wide-ranging social and economic adverse impacts on sufferers, their families, and the society at large
By the year 2030, over 82 million people-and about 152 million by 2050-are projected to suffer from AD
While AD has no known curative treatments, and its pathogenesis is yet to be clearly understood, a comprehensive assessment of its shared genetics with other diseases (comorbidities) can provide a deeper understanding of its underlying biological mechanisms and enhance potential therapy development efforts.
Several studies have reported a pattern of co-occurrence of dementia (and AD in particular) with certain gastrointestinal tract (GIT) disorders, microbiota, dysbiosis or medications commonly used in the treatment of peptic ulcer disease (PUD)
For example, an observational study reported more than twice the odds of dementia in individuals with gastritis (adjusted odds ratio [AOR]: 2.42, P < 0.001, 95% confidence interval [CI]: 1.68-3.49)
.
Another observational study found a significant association between regular use of proton-pump inhibitors (PPI, medications for gastritis duodenitis, gastroesophageal reflux disease [GERD] or PUD) and increased risk of incident dementia (hazard ratio [HR]: 1.44 [95% CI, 1.36-1.52];
P < 0.001)
Similarly, lansoprazole (a PPI) was reported to promote amyloid-beta (Aβ) production
More recently, a longitudinal study reported more than a sixfold increased risk of AD in individuals with inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) [HR: 6.19, 95%CI: 3.31-11.57],
predicting over five-fold increased incidence across all forms of dementia
The available evidence, thus, suggests comorbidity or some forms of association between AD and GIT disorders, although it is not clear whether GIT traits are risks for AD or vice versa.
Regardless, these findings agree with the concept of the 'gut-brain' axis or the 'gastric mucosa-brain' relationship, which has been implicated between GIT-related traits and central nervous system (CNS) disorders including depression and Parkinson's disease
A relationship between AD and GIT disorders or their comorbidity can worsen the quality of life of sufferers while contributing to increased healthcare costs.
Despite the increasing number of studies reporting an association between AD and GIT traits, the biological mechanism(s) underlying this potential association remains unclear.
Moreover, contrasting evidence exists
Large-scale genome-wide association studies (GWAS), identifying an increasing number of single nucleotide polymorphism (SNPs), genes, and susceptibility loci, have been conducted separately for AD and a range of GIT traits
Findings from these GWAS provide compelling evidence for the roles of genetics in the aetiologies of AD and GIT disorders including GERD, PUD, PGM (a combination of disease-diagnosis of PUD and/or GERD and/or corresponding medications and treatments-a potential proxy for PUD or GERD), gastritis-duodenitis, irritable bowel syndrome (IBS), diverticular disease, and IBD
However, to the best of our knowledge, no study has leveraged the possible pleiotropy between AD and GIT disorders as a basis for discovering their shared SNPs, genes and/or susceptibility loci.
In this study, we analyse well-powered GWAS summary data to comprehensively assess the genetic relationship and potential causal association between AD and GIT disorders.
We demonstrate a positive significant genetic overlap and correlation between AD and GERD, PUD, PGM, IBS, gastritis-duodenitis, and diverticular disease.
Also, in a cross-trait GWAS meta-analysis, we identify many loci shared by AD and GIT disorders.
Causality assessment reveals no evidence for a significant causal association between AD and GIT disorders.
However, we identify shared genes reaching genome-wide significance for AD and GIT disorders in gene-based association analyses.
Lastly, pathwaybased analyses show significant enrichment of lipid metabolism, autoimmunity, lipase inhibitors, PD-1 signalling and statin mechanisms, among others, for AD and GIT traits.

Results
Figure
Briefly, we performed three broad levels of analyses-SNP-level, gene-level, and pathway-based analyses.
First, we used the linkage disequilibrium score regression (LDSC)
Second, to identify SNPs and susceptibility loci shared by AD and GIT disorders, we carried out GWAS meta-analyses.
We also applied the pairwise GWAS (colocalisation) method
Third, using the Mendelian randomisation (MR)
Lastly, we performed gene and pathway-based analyses to identify shared genes reaching genome-wide significance and biological pathways for AD and GIT disorders.
The largest publicly available AD summary statistics and GIT summary data from research consortia or public repositories were utilised for analysis (Table
Genetic correlation between AD and GIT disorders.
We assessed and quantified the SNP-level genetic correlation between AD and GIT disorders using the LDSC
The apolipoprotein E (APOE) region has a large effect on the risk of AD; hence, we excluded APOE and the 500 kilobase (kb) flanking region (hg19, 19:44,909,039-45,912,650) from the AD GWAS.
We also excluded SNPs in the 26 to 36 megabase region of chromosome six from the data given the complex LD structure in the human major histocompatibility complex (MHC).
Notably, in analyses both with and without the APOE region, LDSC reveals a significant genetic correlation between AD and GIT traits (Table
Genetic covariance intercept estimates were not significantly different from zero (Supplementary Data 2), indicating no sample overlap between our AD and GIT GWAS.
We found a positive and significant genetic correlation (r g ) of AD (excluding APOE region) with GERD (r g = 0.25, P = 8.19 × 10 -18 ), PUD (r g = 0.28, P = 3.70 × 10 -7 ), PGM (r g = 0.22, P = 2.38 × 10 -14 ), gastritis-duodenitis (r g = 0.24, P = 2.40 × 10 -8 ), IBS (r g = 0.19, P = 1.10 × 10 -4 ), and diverticular disease (r g = 0.15, P = 2.97 × 10 -5 ).
However, we found no evidence of a significant genetic correlation between AD and IBD (r g = 0.07, P = 9.94 × 10 -2 ) [Table
Our estimates of effective sample size (Supplementary Data 1) suggest the IBD GWAS was underpowered compared to other GIT data sets.
We reproduced a pattern of a positive and significant genetic correlation between AD
SNP effect concordance analysis (SECA) results.
Using the SECA method
We provide a more comprehensive description of SECA in the methods section.
Briefly, SECA performs a bi-directional analysis, assessing concordance in the direction of the effect of AD-associated SNPs (data set 1) on each of the GIT disorders (data set 2) and vice versa.
First, we conducted two rounds of P-value informed LD clumping (first clumping: -clump-r 2 0.1, -clump-kb 1000; second clumping: -clump-r 2 0.1, -clump-kb 10000) using PLINK 1.90
SECA subsequently assesses (using Fisher's test) the presence of excess SNPs in which the direction of effects is concordant across 144 subsets of data set 1 (AD GWAS) and data set 2 (each of the GIT traits GWAS).
We found a positive and significant concordance of SNP risk effect across the AD (data set 1) and each of the GIT GWAS (data       The 'clinically diagnosed AD' combined data from three case-control cohorts (N = 79,145).
'AD-by proxy' data were based on the UKB phenotype definition of individuals whose biological parents were affected by AD.
The parent's current age, and where relevant, age at death were reported along with this GWAS data.
The genetic correlation between the 'clinically diagnosed AD' and the 'AD-by proxy' is high at 0.81
AD Alzheimer's disease, GERD and GORD gastroesophageal reflux disease, PUD peptic ulcer disease, PGM GWAS combining disease-diagnosis of PUD and/or GERD and/or medications for their treatments, IBS irritable bowel disease, IBD inflammatory bowel disease, ICD International Classification of Diseases, UKB United Kingdom Biobank.
a UKB data code for case definition was from death register, primary care, hospital admissions data, self-report only, and other sources as described in the original publication Wu et al.
The replication set data were used for reproducibility testing in LDSC and SECA analyses, and partly in LCV analysis.
set 2) including IBD (Table
For example, of the total 144 SNP subsets tested with AD as data set 1 (Table
The empirical P values (P permuted ) for the significant associations, adjusting for the 144 SNP subsets tested (using permutations of 1000 replicates), range from 0.001 to 0.018 (Table
These results are significantly more than expected by chance, supporting evidence of genetic overlap between AD and the GIT traits.
By changing the direction of the analysis (in a bidirectional assessment), we tested each of the GIT traits as data set 1 against AD as data set 2 (Table
The results indicate evidence of a strong genetic overlap between AD and GERD, PUD, PGM, gastritis-duodenitis, IBS and diverticulosis.
The results also suggest (except for IBD) that SNPs that are strongly associated with AD influence the named GIT traits and vice versa.
Overall, findings in SECA are largely consistent with those of LDSC, except in the case of IBD-highlighting how SECA differs from (capacity for a bidirectional assessment) as well as complements LDSC.
Notably, and like LDSC, SECA found a significant association between AD and GIT traits with or without the APOE region (Table
Further, replication analyses in SECA produced largely consistent findings as with LDSC (Supplementary Data 5 and 6).
SNPs and loci shared by AD and GIT disorders.
Leveraging the significant genetic overlap and correlation as well as the substantial GWAS sample sizes, we performed cross-disorder meta-analyses of AD with GERD and PUD.
The GWAS for PGM has many cases and overall large sample size (Table
AD Alzheimer's disease, GIT gastrointestinal tract, GERD gastroesophageal reflux disease, PUD peptic ulcer disease, IBS irritable bowel syndrome, PGM GWAS combining disease-diagnosis of PUD and/ or GERD and/or medications for their treatments, IBD inflammatory bowel disease, r g genetic correlation, se standard error, P P value, MHC major histocompatibility complex.
a The number of SNP subsets with nominally significant concordant effects is significantly MORE than expected by chance, indicating significant concordance of genetic risk between the pairs of traits.
P = 4.41 × 10 -101 ) [Supplementary Data 7], hence, we also utilised it in a meta-analysis with AD.
We aimed at identifying SNPs and loci which were not genome-wide significant in the individual AD or GIT disorder GWAS (i.e., 5 × 10 -8 < P GWAS-data < 0.05) but reached the status (P meta-analysis < 5 × 10 -8 ) following a metaanalysis.
We additionally identified SNPs and loci which were already established (P GWAS-data < 5 × 10 -8 ) in AD (Sentinel AD SNPs/loci), but which, following GWAS meta-analyses, were similarly associated with a GIT disorder, and vice versa.
Briefly, our GWAS meta-analyses identified shared SNPs and susceptibility loci, some of which are putatively novel for AD or GIT disorders.
First, a meta-analysis of AD and GERD identified a total of 119 SNPs reaching genome-wide significant association (P meta-analysis < 5 × 10 -8 , Supplementary Data 8), from which we characterised seven independent (r 2 < 0.1) genomic loci-1p31.3,
1q31. 1, 3p21.31, 6p21.32,
17q21.32,
17q21.33,
19q13.32
(Table
Many SNPs reaching genome-wide significance in these loci were not genome-wide significant in the individual AD and GIT GWAS we analysed but reached the status in the cross-trait meta-analyses (Table
Given this premise (that is, P GWAS-data > 5 × 10 -8 < P meta-analysis ), the observation that some of the identified loci are known for AD or GIT traits (from other studies) provides support for our cross-trait analysis findings.
Specifically, two of the identified loci: (1p31.3
[near PDE4B], and 3p21.31
[near SEMA3F]) were not previously genome-wide significant for AD (to our knowledge), indicating they are putatively novel for the disorder.
Similarly, three of the seven loci: (17q21.32
[ZNF652], 17q21.33 [PHB], and 19q13.32
[TOMM40, APOC2, KLC3, ERCC2]) are putatively novel for GERD given we have no evidence they were previously genome-wide significant for the disorder.
A locus at 1q31.1 (near BRINP3) was putatively novel for both AD and GERD at the time of our analysis but has now been reported in a recent GERD multi-trait analysis
The remaining locus, 6p21.32 (near genes HLA-DQA2 and HLA-DRA) is known for both AD
An additional 175 independent SNPs at 121 loci reached a genome-wide suggestive association (P meta-analysis < 1 × 10 -5 , Supplementary Data 9), replicating some of the genome-wide significant loci, including: 1p31.3 (PDE4B, lead SNP: rs2840677) and 1q31.1 (BRINP3, rs10753964) for AD and GERD.
Also, some of the well-established (sentinel) loci for AD in our GWAS showed evidence of association with GERD (Supplementary Data 10) at 8p21.2 (near gene PTK2B, and CHRNA2, rs28834970).
Other AD sentinel loci shared with GERD include: 19q13.32
(near NECTIN2, lead SNP: rs12980613), and 19q13.32
(near KLC3, rs77988534) [Supplementary Data 10].
Known (sentinel) GERD loci were similarly associated with AD as summarised in Supplementary Data 10.
Second, following a meta-analysis of AD and PUD GWAS, a total of 22 SNPs, at six genomic loci, reached a genome-wide significance (P meta-analysis < 5 × 10 -8 , Supplementary Data 11).
The identified loci here include 2q37.1, 6p21.32,
8p21.1, 17p13.
2,  19q13.32 and 19q13.41
(Table 4).
Of the loci found in the AD and GERD meta-analysis, four were replicated in the AD and PUD meta-analysis.
Two of these four loci, the 19q13.32
(near BCL3, rs28363848), and the 6p21.32 (HLA-DRA, rs9270599), were replicated at a genome-wide level of significance.
The remaining two loci-HYAL2, 3p21.31,
P (FE) = 5.24 × 10 -3 , rs709210; and PDE4B, 1p31.3,
P (FE) = 2.94 × 10 -4 , rs6695557 (Supplementary Data 12)-were replicated at 7.14 × 10 -3 level.
In addition to the 6p21.32 (HLA-DRA, rs9270599), two of the identified loci: at 8p21.1 (near SCARA3), and 2q37.1 (near ATG16L1) have been reported for AD (SCARA3
Supplementary Data 13 presents 24 independent SNPs, at 21 genomic loci, reaching genome-wide suggestive association (P meta-analysis < 1 × 10 -5 ) for AD and PUD.
Third, given its large sample size and strong genetic correlation with GERD and PUD, we performed a meta-analysis of PGM with AD thereby identifying 42 SNPs (Supplementary Data 14) at seven independent loci (Table
This analysis replicated, at a genome-wide level (P meta-analysis < 5 × 10 -8 ), five of the seven genome-wide loci found in the AD and GERD meta-analysis including 1p31.3, 3p21.31,
6p21.32,
17q21.
33 and 19q13.32.
Additional loci found in the AD and PGM meta-analysis such as 16q22.1 and 1q32.2 were at least genome-wide suggestive (P meta-analysis < 1 × 10 -5 ) in the AD and GERD analysis, supporting their involvement in the disorders.
An additional 23 SNPs, at three loci, were genomewide suggestive (P meta-analysis < 1 × 10 -5 ) in the AD and PGM meta-analysis (Supplementary Data 15).
Of these, the rs33998678 SNP (16q22.1,
IL34) is in strong LD (r 2 = 0.91) with a genomewide significant locus found in the AD vs PGM analysis (rs34644948, at 16q22.1, MTSS2, Table
Similarly, the rs663576 SNP (at 17q21.32,
PHOSPHO1) is moderately correlated (r 2 = 0.41) with a genome-wide significant SNP (rs2584662 at 17q21.33,
PHB, Table
This locus (17q21.33)
was found in AD and GERD meta-analysis (SNP rs2584662 near PHB), supporting its involvement in AD and the GIT traits.
Supplementary Data 10 summarises the sentinel AD loci associated with PGM and vice versa.
Association of identified loci with other traits.
Seven loci reached a genome-wide significance in the meta-analysis of AD and GERD GWAS; most of these loci were replicated in the AD vs PUD and/or AD vs PGM meta-analysis.
We queried each of the associated loci for pleiotropic associations with other traits using the GWAS catalogue (
platforms.
For three of the loci-1p31.3
(near PDE4B), 3p21.31
(near SEMA3F), and 1q31.1 (near BRINP3)-we have no evidence of their previous association with AD, at a genome-wide level (P < 5 × 10 -8 ).
However, and potentially supportive of our findings, the loci have been reported for AD-related phenotypes such as cognitive traits.
For example, PDE4B has pleiotropic associations with intelligence
The locus is also known for other disorders including major depression, stress disorders, schizophrenia, and multiple sclerosis
The loci harbouring SEMA3F and BRINP3 have similarly been reported for intelligence (SEMA3F
Sex hormone-binding globulin levels
Interestingly, BMI, cognitive traits such as intelligence, cognitive performance and even sleeprelated traits have been associated with GERD
Taken together, and in further support of their relationship, this observation, suggests that GERD may share genetic links with certain ADrelated phenotypes including cognitive and sleep-related traits.
Further, our analysis consistently identified and replicated the 19q13.32
locus (mapped genes: TOMM40, APOC2, KLC3, ERCC2, BCL3, and CD33) as shared by AD and GIT disorders.
While this locus is well known for AD, it has also been linked with GIT traits including IBD
RE2: GWAS meta-analysis method that adjusts for SNP effects heterogeneity.
SNP single-nucleotide polymorphism, Chr chromosome, EA effect allele, NEA non-effect allele, I 2 I-square for heterogeneity assessment, Se standard error, P P value.
GRCh37: 19:46,345,886), and gut microbiota
This premise is important given previous evidence of genetic links between dysbiosis, neurological (AD, for instance) and GIT disorders
Similar to other identified loci, the 19q13.32
locus also displays pleiotropic association with many AD-related phenotypes: intelligence
Supplementary Data 16 and 17 summarise other traits previously reported for loci at 6p21.32 (near HLA-DRA) and 17q21.32
(near ZNF652 and PHB).
Shared genomic regions identified in GWAS-PW analysis.
Using a colocalization analysis in GWAS-PW
The results of this analysis confirm all the loci identified in the meta-analyses (except on chromosome 3) are shared by AD and the respective GIT traits (model 4 posterior probability [PPA 4] > 0.9, Supplementary Data 18).
While the findings also suggest that the causal variants might be different (PPA 3 < 0.5), we note that when variants in a locus are in strong LD, which may be the case in this study, GWAS-PW is limited in its ability to correctly distinguish model 3 (PPA 3) from model 4 (PPA 4)
Additional shared genomic regions, in chromosomes 1, 6, 16, 17 and 19 having PPA 4 > 0.90 were identified for AD and the GIT traits (Supplementary Data 18).
Also, we identified a locus on chromosome 17, having PPA 3 > 0.80, and implicating the SNP rs2526380 (17q22, near TSPOAP1) in both AD and GERD.
The posterior probability that this SNP is a causal variant for both AD and GERD under model 3
Results of causal association analysis between AD and GIT disorders.
We assessed the potential causal relationship between AD (as the outcome variable) and GERD (as the exposure variable) using the two-sample MR method.
We found no evidence of a causal relationship between AD and GERD, irrespective of the direction of the analysis (AD or GERD as the outcome or exposure variable) [Table
For sensitivity testing, we implemented three additional models of MR analysis-MR-Egger, weighted median, and the MR-PRESSO (Mendelian Randomization Pleiotropy RESidual Sum and Outlier).
Results from these methods agree with those of the Inverse Variance Weighted (IVW) model supporting a lack of evidence for a causal association between AD and GERD (Table
We carried out further MR analysis assessing AD against each of PUD, PGM, IBS, diverticular disease, and IBD, and vice versa.
Findings similarly reveal no evidence for a causal relationship between AD and each of the GIT disorders assessed (Supplementary Data 19).
We also used the Latent Causal Variable (LCV) approach
The results of LCV suggest a partial causal influence of gastritis-duodenitis (genetic causal proportion [GCP] = -0.69,
P = 0.0026), on AD (Table
The result was in the reverse direction for diverticular disease (GCP = 0.23, P = 0.000272), suggesting AD may partially cause diverticular disease.
Using another set of GWAS (Table
Only one genome-wide significant SNPs available for IBS, and 3 for Gastritis-D, so we are unable to carry out MR using the traits as the exposure variable.
Note spaces marked with a dash indicate that there were no outlier SNPs and hence there was no outlier corrected results in the MR-PRESSO analysis.
Conversely, we found a significant association between AD and lansoprazole use (GCP = -0.38,
P = 0.001129).
Gene-based association analysis.
Using SNPs that overlapped AD and GERD GWAS, we performed gene-based analyses in MAGMA (implemented in the FUMA 55 platform), thereby identifying a total of 18,929 protein-coding genes for each of the traits.
Applying a threshold P-value of 2.64 × 10 -6 (0.05/18929-Bonferroni correction for testing 18,929 genes), we identified 64 genome-wide significant (P gene < 2.64 × 10 -6 ) genes for AD (Supplementary Data 20), 44 for GERD (Supplementary Data 21) and 75 for PGM (Supplementary Data 22).
Using the Fisher's Combined P-value (FCP) method, a total of 46 genome-wide significant (P FCP < 2.64 × 10 -6 ) genes shared by AD and GERD were identified (Supplementary Data 23), 10 of which were not previously significant in our AD or GERD GWAS, at the P gene < 2.64 × 10 -6 threshold, adjusting for multiple testing (Table
It is noteworthy that some of the identified AD and GERD shared genes are in chromosomal locations found in our meta-analysis, including 1p31.3 (PDE4B), 3p21.31,
(SEMA3F, HYAL2, IP6K1), 6p21.32 (HLA-DRA) and 19q13.32
(Supplementary Data 23).
Combining P-values by weighting based on sample size (the weighted Stouffer's method) produced a similar pattern of results (as the FCP) for AD and GERD (Supplementary Data 24).
We also replicated a similar pattern of findings in gene-based analysis (and FCP) using the AD and the PGM GWAS (Table
Biological pathways and mechanisms shared by AD and GIT disorders.
We performed pathway-based functional enrichment analyses in the g: Profiler platform
First, we investigated genes overlapping AD and GERD (at P gene < 0.05, FCP < 0.02) and identified several biological pathways that were overrepresented (Fig.
Pathways related to membrane trafficking and metabolism, alteration, lowering or inhibition of lipids were significantly enriched (Supplementary Data 26).
These included plasma lipoprotein assembly, remodelling, and clearance (P adjusted = 2.01 × 10 -3 ), cholesterol metabolism (P adjusted = 4.99 × 10 -2 ), plasma lipoprotein assembly (P adjusted = 3.45 × 10 -5 ), and triglyceride-rich plasma lipoprotein particle (P adjusted = 5.23 × 10 -9 ), among others.
Also, lipase inhibitors (P adjusted = 6.08 × 10 -3 ) and the statin (3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme A reductase inhibitors) pathway (P adjusted = 3.99 × 10 -2 ) were significantly enriched for AD and GERD (Supplementary Data 27), suggesting mechanisms of these medications may find therapeutic application in AD and GIT disorders.
Pathways related to the immune system were also overrepresented for both AD and GERD as evidenced by the identification of immune or autoimmune-related disorders such  as asthma (P adjusted = 3.53 × 10 -3 ), systemic lupus erythematosus (P = 7.88 × 10 -3 ), and type I diabetes mellitus (P adjusted = 2.47 × 10 -2 ).
Other immune-related pathways identified include the intestinal immune network for IgA production (P adjusted = 4.07 × 10 -2 ), programmed cell death protein 1 (PD-1) signalling (P adjusted = 5.24 × 10 -3 ), translocation of ZAP-70 to immunological synapse (P adjusted = 2.44 × 10 -3 ) and interferon-gamma signalling pathways (P adjusted = 2.45 × 10 -2 ) [Supplementary Data 26].
Following enrichment mapping and auto-annotation, the identified biological pathways were clustered into six themes of biological mechanisms, namely: 'lipoprotein particle clearance,' 'receptor signalling pathway,' 'side membrane vesicle and cell adhesion,' 'peptide antigen binding,' 'intestinal immune network,' and 'interferon-gamma signalling' (Fig.
Moreover, a pathwaybased analysis using genes that overlapped AD and PGM GWAS (at P gene < 0.05) replicated some of the pathways identified for AD and GERD, including 'plasma lipoprotein assembly, remodelling, and clearance' (P adjusted = 3.01 × 10 -4 ), 'peptide antigen binding' (P adjusted = 2.28 × 10 -3 ), and 'triglyceride-rich plasma lipoprotein particle' (P adjusted = 6.60 × 10 -8 ) [Supplementary Data 27].
Also, we performed pathway-based analysis separately for GERD and AD GWAS, the full results of which are presented in Supplementary Data 28 and 29,

Discussion
We present the first comprehensive assessment (to the best of our knowledge) of the shared genetics of AD with GIT disorders by analysing large-scale GWAS summary data using multiple statistical genetic approaches.
Consistent with previous conventional observational studies
a KEGG: Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes pathways: intestinal immune network (allograft rejection, intestinal immune network for IGA production, type 1 diabetes mellitus, systemic lupus erythematous, antigen processing and presentation, graft-versus-host disease, asthma), and cholesterol metabolism (cholesterol metabolism).
b Gene Ontology: Cellular Components: side membrane vesicle (lumenal side of membrane, MHC class II protein complex, integral component of lumenal side of endoplasmic reticulum [ER] membrane, clathrin-coated endocytic vesicle membrane, late endosome, ER to Golgi transport vesicle membrane, coated vesicle membrane, lumenal side of ER membrane, MHC protein complex, COPII-coated ER to Golgi transport vesicle, transport vesicle membrane, late endosome membrane), and plasma lipoprotein particle (chylomicron, very low-density lipoprotein [VLDL] particle, triglyceride-rich plasma lipoprotein particle, plasma lipoprotein particle, lipoprotein particle, LDL lipoprotein particle).
c Gene Ontology: Molecular Function: peptide antigen binding (peptide binding, peptide antigen binding, MHC class II receptor activity) and lipase inhibitor activity (lipase inhibitor activity).
d Gene Ontology: Biological Pathway: lipoprotein particle clearance (phospholipid efflux, VLDL particle clearance, regulation of plasma lipoprotein particle levels, plasma lipoprotein particle clearance, chylomicron remnant clearance, regulation of lipid catabolic process, regulation of VLDL particle clearance, protein-lipid complex assembly, plasma lipoprotein particle organisation, regulation of phospholipid catabolic process, VLDL particle assembly, regulation of lipid localisation, glycolipid catabolic process, triglyceriderich lipoprotein particle clearance, high density lipoprotein particle remodelling), receptor signalling pathway (T cell receptor signalling pathway, interferongamma-mediated signalling pathway, antigen receptor-mediated signalling pathway), membrane adhesion cell (cell-cell adhesion via plasma membrane adhesion molecules, homophilic cell adhesion via plasma membrane adhesion molecules), and negative regulation type (negative regulation of type I interferon production).
e Reactome, Wiki pathway and Transcription Factor Binding site: assembly clearance plasma (statin pathway, NR1H2 and NR1H3mediated signalling, plasma lipoprotein assembly, remodelling, and clearance, plasma lipoprotein clearance, NR1H3 and NR1H2 regulated gene expression linked to cholesterol transport and efflux, VLDL assembly, VLDL clearance, plasma lipoprotein assembly), interferon-gamma signalling (PD-1 signalling, generation of second messenger molecules, interferon-gamma signalling phosphorylation of CD3 and TCR ZETA chains, translocation of ZAP-70 to Immunological synapse), Factor: ZNF2 motif, and ZNF582 motif.
Supplementary Data 26 provides additional details about these biological pathways.
AD Alzheimer's disease, GERD gastroesophageal reflux disease.
relationship between AD and GIT disorders and provide into their underlying biological mechanisms.
In contrast to the positive genetic correlation between AD and other GIT disorders, LDSC found no significant genetic correlation between AD and IBD, which may be due to the relatively small number of cases and sample size of the IBD GWAS.
Based on the effective sample size estimates, the IBD GWAS is underpowered compared to other GIT data sets.
Supporting this premise, SECA revealed a significant association between AD (as data set 1) against IBD (as data set 2), but not the other way around.
The AD GWAS has a larger sample size, providing a more robust association on which to condition (select independent) SNPs for concordance analysis which may explain why the significant association was not bidirectional unlike the case for other GIT traits.
Future studies, nonetheless, need to confirm this relationship, as more powerful IBD GWAS becomes available.
Evidence of significant genetic overlap and correlation reflects not only shared genetic aetiologies (biological pleiotropy) but also suggests a possible causal association between AD and the GIT traits (vertical pleiotropy).
Using LCV, we detected a partial causal association between AD and gastritis-duodenitis, lansoprazole, and diverticular disease.
However, this partial causal association was not evident in reproducibility testing.
The inconclusive LCV findings should be cautiously interpreted, and a reassessment of the results, in future studies, is warranted.
Conversely, all MR analyses provided no evidence for a significant causal relationship between AD and GIT traits, indicating that shared genetics and common biological pathways may best explain the association between AD and these GIT disorders.
We performed GWAS meta-analysis, thereby identifying seven shared loci reaching genome-wide significance for AD and GERD.
The loci, including 1p31.3 (PDE4B), 3p21.31
(SEMA3F, HYAL2), 6p21.32 (HLA-DRA), and 19q13.32
(TOMM40, APOC2, ERCC2, BCL3, and KLC3), were replicated in AD vs PUD and AD vs PGM meta-analyses and largely reinforced in colocalisation (GWAS-PW) as well as gene-based association analyses.
Notably, the independent SNP rs12058296 (1p31.3),
mapped to the phosphodiesterase 4B (PDE4B) gene.
Inhibition of PDE4B (or its subtypes) has shown promise for inflammatory diseases
Indeed, recent evidence supports the potent anti-inflammatory, pro-cognitive, neuro-regenerative, and memory-enhancing properties of PDE4 inhibitors (PDE4B, in particular
Other identified independent genome-wide significant SNPs and loci mapped to genes including CD46, SEMA3F, HLA-DRA, MTSS2, PHB, and TOMM40.
The CD46 gene is a complement regulator which is bactericidal to Helicobacter (H) pylori
We identified biological pathways, significantly enriched for genes overlapping AD and GIT disorder (GERD, and PUD) GWAS in pathway-based analyses.
Notably, lipid-related, and autoimmune pathways were overrepresented.
There is a close link between autoimmunity and lipid abnormalities
In AD, for example, hypercholesterolaemia is believed to increase the permeability of the blood-brain barrier system, facilitating the entry of peripheral cholesterol into the CNS, and resulting in abnormal cholesterol metabolism in the brain
Amyloidogenesis, alteration of the amyloid precursor protein degradation, accumulation of Aβ, and subsequent cognitive impairment have all been linked with elevated cholesterol in the brain
Similarly, while the exact roles of lipids in GIT disorders are unclear, H. pylori is believed to cause or worsen abnormal serum lipid profiles through chronic inflammatory processes, and eradication of the infection enhances lipid homoeostasis
The mechanisms of association between AD and lipid dysregulation relate to the 'gut-brain axis', alterations in GIT microbiota and the immune system
Moreover, lipid dysregulation is central to the interplay of AD, gut microbiota, and GIT disorders
Lipase inhibitors (orlistat) prevent intestinal dietary lipid absorption, and lower total plasma triglycerides and cholesterol levels
The connection between AD, lipid dysregulation, dysbiosis and the 'gut-brain axis'
Lipases, including monoacylglycerol, diacylglycerol, and lipoprotein lipases are involved in AD pathology, and can also effectively be inhibited by orlistat
Similarly, statins possess anti-inflammatory, immune-modulating and gastroprotective properties
Statins also improve cognitive ability and reduce neurodegeneration risks, making them potentially beneficial in AD
However, there is evidence suggesting a paradoxical predisposition to reversible dementia for statins
While this finding has been challenged
Our findings have implications for practice and further studies.
First, results highlighting lipid-related mechanisms support the roles of abnormal lipid profiles in the aetiologies of the disorders, which may be potential biomarkers for AD and GIT disorders (or their comorbidity).
Second, our findings underscore the importance of lipid homoeostasis.
The dietary approach is one effective preventive as well as non-pharmacologic approach for the management of hyperlipidaemia, and overall, this is consistent with findings in this study.
Indeed, adherence to a 'Mediterranean' diet (low in lipids) is recognised as beneficial both in AD
Thus, a recommendation for healthy diets, early in life, may form part of the lifestyle modifications for preventing AD and GIT disorders.
The clinical utility of these recommendations will need to be further investigated and validated.
Third, our study identifies lipase inhibitors and statin pathways in the mechanisms of AD and GIT disorders, which may be a potential therapeutic avenue to explore in the disorders.
We hypothesise that individuals with comorbid AD and GIT traits may gain benefits from these therapies.
There is a need to test this hypothesis using appropriate study designs including randomised control trials.
Fourth, our study implicates the PDE4B, and given the evidence in the literature
Lastly, while our findings do not necessarily indicate that AD and GIT disorders will always co-occur, they support their shared biology; thus, early detection of AD may benefit from probing impaired cognition in GIT disorders.
The use of multiple, complementary statistical genetic approaches enables a comprehensive analysis of the genetic associations between AD and GIT disorders and is a major strength of this study.
Also, we analysed well-powered GWAS data, meaning our findings are generally not affected by small sample size, possible reverse causality, or confounders that conventional observational studies often suffer from.
Nonetheless, our study has limitations that should be considered alongside the present findings.
First, the GWAS for AD combined clinically diagnosed cases of AD with proxies (AD-by-proxy-individuals whose parents were diagnosed with AD).
Given the high correlation between the GWAS with and without the 'AD-byproxy' cases
Second, analyses were restricted to participants of mainly European ancestry in our study, thus, findings may not be generalisable to other ancestries.
Third, GIT traits GWAS were combinations of several data sources: primary care, hospital admission, medication use, and self-reported records.
While there is a potential for misdiagnosis or accuracy of self-reported data, their use is well justified given the correlation in effect sizes of the data with other sources
Moreover, additional data from other sources including ICD-10 were utilised with consistent results across these GWAS.
In conclusion, this study provides genetic insights into the long-standing debate and the observed relationship of AD with GIT disorders, implicating shared genetic susceptibility.
Our findings support a significant risk increasing (but non-causal) genetic association between AD and GIT traits (GERD, PUD, PGM, gastritis-duodenitis, IBS, and diverticular disease).
Also, we identified genomic regions and genes, shared by AD and GIT disorders that may potentially be targeted for further investigation, particularly, the PDE4B gene (or its subtypes) which has shown promise in inflammatory diseases
Our study also underscores the importance of lipid homoeostasis and the potential relevance of statins and lipase inhibitors in AD, GIT disorders or their comorbidity.
To our knowledge, this is the first comprehensive study to assess these relationships using statistical genetic approaches.
Overall, these findings advance our understanding of the genetic architecture of AD, GIT disorders, and their observed co-occurring relationship.
Methods GWAS summary statistics.
The GWAS data utilised in the present study are summarised in Table
The data were sourced from popular GWAS databases, repositories, and large research consortia/groups.
The GWAS summary data for 'clinically diagnosed AD and AD-by-proxy'
This GWAS has large sample size (cases = 71,880, controls = 383,378, sample size [N] = 455,258) and, thus, increased power for detecting genetic variants of small to moderate effect sizes.
More specific details about the data have been published
GIT traits including PUD (cases = 16,666, controls = 439,661, N = 456,327), IBS (cases = 28,518, controls = 426,803, N = 455,321), and IBD (cases = 7045, controls = 449,282, N = 456,327) were assessed against AD.
The GWAS for the traits were obtained from the recently published GIT GWAS
Clinically, PUD medications are indicated in GERD and gastritis, accordingly, GWAS combining diagnosis for PUD and/or GERD and/or medications commonly used for these disorders (PGM) have been conducted
This GWAS has a large sample size (cases = 90,175, controls = 366,152, N = 456,327), and as was the case in the original publication
These GIT GWAS were well characterised and, where possible, validated as described in the original publication
Additionally, we utilised a well-characterised GWAS for GERD (cases = 71,522, controls = 261,079, N = 332,601), which combined data sets from the UK Biobank and the QSKIN study
Gastritis-duodenitis (cases = 28,941, controls = 378,124, N = 407,065) and diverticular disease (cases = 27,311, controls = 334,783, N = 362,094) GWAS from the Lee Lab (
were also used in this study.
We utilised additional (available) GWAS summary data (Table
A comprehensive description of the quality control procedures for each of the GWAS data and their analysis are available through the corresponding publications (Table
Our preliminary analysis indicates that there is no significant sample overlap between the AD GWAS and each of the GIT GWAS assessed in this study (Supplementary Data 2), ruling out the possibility of bias from such occurrence.
Linkage disequilibrium score regression analysis (LDSC).
We assessed and quantified SNP-level genetic correlation between AD and GIT disorders using the LDSC
LDSC assesses and distinguishes the contributions of polygenicity, sample overlaps, and population stratification to the heritability and genetic correlation between traits
In the present study, we performed LDSC analysis using the standalone version of the software and by following the procedures provided by the program developer (
The apolipoprotein E (APOE) region has a large effect on the risk of AD; hence, we excluded APOE and the 500 kilobase (kb) flanking region (hg19, 19:44,909,039-45,912,650) from the AD GWAS for this analysis.
We also excluded SNPs in the 26-36 megabase region of chromosome six from the data given the complex LD structure in the human major histocompatibility complex (MHC).
To assess possible sample overlap between AD GWAS and each of the GIT GWAS, we performed LDSC correlation analysis with the genetic covariance intercept unconstrained.
The result of this analysis indicates that the estimated genetic covariance intercepts were not significantly different from zero (Supplementary Data 2), indicating no significant sample overlap between our AD and GIT GWAS.
Thus, we constrained the intercept in the reported genetic correlation analysis.
We applied Bonferroni adjustment for testing the effects of seven GIT traits on AD (0.05/7 = 7.1 × 10 -3 ), and all genetic correlation results surviving this adjustment were considered significant while those having P < 0.05 were regarded as nominally significant.
SNP effect concordance analysis (SECA).
We used the standalone version of the SECA software pipeline to perform SNP-level genetic overlap assessment and statistical tests between AD and GIT disorders.
A detailed description of the SECA software and methods has been published
Briefly, SECA accepts a pair of GWAS data (data set 1 and data set 2) as input and performs a range of analyses to assess concordance in effect direction between a pair of traits-AD and GIT disorders in the present study.
First, we carried out quality control to exclude all non-rsID(s) and duplicate variants in data set 1 and align SNP effects to the same effect allele across data set 1 and data set 2. Second we performed two rounds of P-value informed LD clumping in data set 1 (first clumping: -clump-r 2 0.1, -clump-kb 1000; second clumping: -clump-r 2 0.1, -clump-kb 10000) using PLINK 1.90
Third, SECA partitions independent SNPs resulting from LD clumping into 12 subsets of SNPs according to the P value for data set 1 as follows: P1 ≤ (0.01, 0.05, 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4, 0.5, 0.6, 0.7, 0.8, 0.9, 1.0).
SECA subsequently performs Fisher's exact tests to assess the presence of excess SNPs in which the direction of effects is concordant across data set 1 and data set 2 (that is, for the corresponding P value derived 12 subsets of SNPs associated in data set 2, P2).
Hence, a total of 144 SNP subsets (a 12 by 12 matrix from data set 1 and data set 2) were assessed for SNP effect concordance.
SECA calculates permuted P value for the number of significant associations with adjustment for testing 144 associations (based on permutations of 1000 replicates).
In the present study, we first assessed AD GWAS as data set 1 and each of the GIT disorders as data set 2. For comparison, we also assessed each of the GIT disorders as data set 1 against AD as data set 2. Thus, using SECA, we assessed the effects of AD-associated SNPs on each of the GIT disorders and vice versa.
Since SECA is conditioned on data set 1, the bi-directional assessment is an important analysis step to account for instances where SNPs that are strongly associated with AD do not affect GIT traits and vice versa.
Further, the bi-directional analysis (which is not possible with LDSC, for example) enables the assessment of whether the observed genetic overlap is driven primarily by only one of the traits or both thereby enhancing a better understanding of their association.
GWAS cross-traits meta-analysis.
GWAS meta-analysis pools the results of GWAS data, thereby increasing the sample sizes and augmenting the detection of genetic variants with small to moderate effect sizes.
In the present study, we used the GWAS meta-analysis method of pooling AD GWAS with each of the GIT traits (cross-disorder or cross-trait meta-analysis).
We used two models of meta-analysis: the Fixed Effect (FE), and the modified Random Effect (RE2)
The FE model estimates the FE P-value using the inverse-variance weighted method, which assumes that the AD and each of the GIT disorders' GWAS are assessing the same (fixed) effect.
The presence of effect heterogeneity is a limitation of the model.
On the other hand, by estimating P-values using the modified random effects, the RE2 model 82 allows for differences in SNP effects and the method is powerful in the presence of SNP effect heterogeneity.
Genomic loci characterisation.
Using the outputs of our cross-trait meta-analyses for AD and each of the GIT disorders, we carried out some downstream analyses including functional annotation of SNPs, and genomic loci characterisation in line with practice in the previous studies
Briefly, SNPs that were not genomewide significant in the individual AD and GIT disorder GWAS, but which reached genome-wide significance following the meta-analysis were identified.
From these, we characterised independent SNPs at r 2 < 0.6, and lead SNPs at r 2 < 0.1.
We defined the genomic locus as the region within 250 kb of each lead SNP.
We assigned lead SNPs within this region to the same locus, meaning two or more lead SNPs may be present in one locus.
We performed these downstream analyses using the Functional Mapping and Annotation (FUMA) software (an online platform)
We subsequently queried identified loci in the GWAS catalogue (
to assess their previous identification for AD, GIT disorders or other traits.



Fig. 1
Fig. 1 Study design and workflow: examining shared genetic and causality of GIT disorders with the risk of Alzheimer's disease.
GWAS genome-wide association studies, SNP single-nucleotide polymorphism, SECA SNP effect concordance analysis, LDSC linkage disequilibrium score regression, LCV latent causal variable, MAGMA multi-marker analysis of genomic annotation, MR Mendelian randomisation, MR-PRESSO Mendelian randomisation pleiotropy residual sum and outlier, KEGG Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes.


nSNP number of SNPs utilised as instrumental variables, SNP single-nucleotide polymorphism, AD Alzheimer's disease, GERD gastroesophageal reflux disease, PUD peptic ulcer disease, PGM GWAS combining disease-diagnosis of PUD and/or GERD and/or medications for their treatments, Diverticular diverticular disease, IBS irritable bowel syndrome, IBD inflammatory bowel disease, IVW inverse variance weighted, P P value, MR-PRESSO Mendelian Randomization Pleiotropy RESidual Sum and Outlier, Gastritis-D gastritis-duodenitis. a



Table 1
Summary of GWAS data sets analysed.





Table 2
Genetic correlation between AD and GIT disorders.



Table 3
SECA results: primary test for concordant SNP effects.



Table 4
Genome-wide significant independent SNPs and loci for AD and GIT disorders.



Table 5
Summary of MR analysis results for AD and GIT disorders.



Table 6
Partial causality assessment using the Latent Causal Variable approach.



Table 7
Shared genes reaching genome-wide significance for AD and GIT traits.