Human Albumin Impairs Amyloid β-peptide Fibrillation Through its C-terminus: From docking Modeling to Protection Against Neurotoxicity in Alzheimer's disease
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a neurodegenerative process characterized by the accumulation of extracellular deposits of amyloid β-peptide (Aβ), which induces neuronal death.
Monomeric Aβ is not toxic but tends to aggregate into β-sheets that are neurotoxic.
Therefore to prevent or delay AD onset and progression one of the main therapeutic approaches would be to impair Aβ assembly into oligomers and fibrils and to promote disaggregation of the preformed aggregate.
Albumin is the most abundant protein in the cerebrospinal fluid and it was reported to bind Aβ impeding its aggregation.
In a previous work we identified a 35-residue sequence of clusterin, a wellknown protein that binds Aβ, that is highly similar to the C-terminus (CTerm) of albumin.
In this work, the docking experiments show that the average binding free energy of the CTerm-Aβ 1-42 simulations was significantly lower than that of the clusterin-Aβ 1-42 binding, highlighting the possibility that the CTerm retains albumin's binding properties.
To validate this observation, we performed in vitro structural analysis of soluble and aggregated 1 μM Aβ 1-42 incubated with 5 μM CTerm, equimolar to the albumin concentration in the CSF.
Reversed-phase chromatography and electron microscopy analysis demonstrated a reduction of Aβ 1-42 aggregates when the CTerm was present.
Furthermore, we treated a human neuroblastoma cell line with soluble and aggregated Aβ 1-42 incubated with CTerm obtaining a significant protection against Aβ-induced neurotoxicity.
These in silico and in vitro data suggest that the albumin CTerm is able to impair Aβ aggregation and to promote disassemble of Aβ aggregates protecting neurons.

Introduction
Alzheimer's disease (AD) histopathological hallmarks are the extracellular aggregation of amyloid β-peptide (Aβ) in the brain, and the intraneuronal aggregation of hyperphosphorylated tau protein
The amyloid cascade hypothesis proposes that Aβ aggregation into oligomers and fibrils induces synaptotoxicity and ultimately neuronal death
The Aβ is a ~4 kDa peptide released from the amyloid precursor protein (APP)
Aβ is produced thoughout the life of an individual, being physiologically degraded in the brain by different enzymes or cleared through the blood brain barrier into the blood
During aging there is an increase in Aβ production and an impairment of Aβ clearance from brain to blood
Then, Aβ forms oligomers known to be highly neurotoxic
At present, AD prevalence is increasing as the world population ages
Unfortunately, despite the current knowledge on APP processing, there are no treatments that effectively prevent AD development or its progression.
On the other hand, the use of antibodies against Aβ to disassemble cerebral Aβ aggregates
Interestingly, clusterin (also termed apolipoprotein J) and albumin are cerebral proteins that have been reported to bind Aβ under physiological conditions
In fact, clusterin impairs Aβ aggregation in the brain
Albumin has also been demonstrated to inhibit Aβ aggregation
These findings make the study of clusterin and albumin of high relevance to understand AD etiology and to elucidate mechanisms of neuroprotection in AD.
Albumin is the most abundant protein in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) produced mostly by ultrafiltrate of plasma proteins
It is a single peptide chain of 585 amino acids with a secondary structure containing 67% α-helix, 23% extended chain and 10% β-sheet
Albumin is a flexible molecule, with the ability to change its structure depending on environmental conditions such as temperature, pH or ionic strength
It can bind a plethora of different molecules
More specifically, albumin can bind Aβ
Previously, we used the Protein-Protein Interface Prediction Server (iFRAG) to predict the interaction for short protein fragments and found that clusterin shares a common sequence with the C-terminus domain of human albumin (CTerm; Fig.
Here, we address the effect of its CTerm in Aβ aggregation using in silico and in vitro techniques.
Computational methods to predict and evaluate protein-protein interactions (PPIs) represent a feasible alternative to experimental approaches.
Although docking experiments are currently used to predict the conformation of PPIs
This is valid even when the native conformation cannot be identified among the poses
In this work, we used similar principles to assess the binding potential of clusterin, albumin and the CTerm to the alpha and beta conformations of the Aβ 1-42 peptide.
We focused our efforts on elucidating the physiological relevance of the CTerm and its interaction with Aβ 1-42 peptide by in vitro experiments using different techniques and cell cultures.

Methodology

Modeling of the Clusterin Peptide
We found the four homologous sequences between clusterin and albumin in a previous work through sequence alignments
Due to the lack of available structures for clusterin or the peptide region of interest, 5 decoys of the most promising peptide according to iFrag
The five decoys were minimized and scored with Rosetta

Aβ 1-42 -Docking Analyses
With the exception of the clusterin-peptide model, structures for all the different elements required for the docking analyse were obtained from the Protein Data Bank (PDB)
The clusterin-peptide and the CTerm structure (crystal structure PDB ID: 5FUO
Additionally, CTerm was also docked to the most terminal region of albumin (PDB ID: 5FUO, residues 539-582).
to which is normally bound (CTerm-lid).
This region of the wild-type albumin hides the putative recognition site between CTerm and Aβ 1-42 (Fig.
From the only two available NMR structures in the PDB
(see alignment of resolved residue densities for all Aβ 1-42 peptides in the PDB at
source/alpha_amyloids/alignment.highlight.aln) for two main reasons.
On the one hand, most of the standard PDB metric qualities (namely clashscore, Ramachandran outliers and sidechain outliers) are far better in 1IYT than in 1Z0Q.
On the other hand, 1Z0Q is described as an intermediate state between the α and β conformations of Aβ 1-42 while 1IYT aims to represent the stable alpha state of the peptide.
For each pair, a total of 8000 decoys were generated with Rosetta's docking protocol
Decoys were analyzed in terms of their ddG, shape complementarity and structural variation of the target binder.

CTerm Synthesis
The CTerm peptide, AETFTFHADICTLSEKERQIKKQTALVELVKHKPKamide, containing the hydrophobic domains reported to be Aβ binding sites by García et al.
It was purified to near homogeneity (97%) by reversed-phase high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC).

CTerm Analysis
Analytical reversed-phase HPLC was performed on C18 columns (4.6 × 50 mm, 3 μm; Phenomenex) in a liquid chomatrograph (LC-2010A; Shimadzu).
Solvent A was 0.045% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) in H 2 O; solvent B was 0.036% TFA in acetonitrile.
Elution was carried out with linear 15-50% gradients of solvent B into A over 15 min at 1 mL/ min flow rate, with UV detection at 220 nm.
LC-mass spectrometry (MS) was performed in a LC-MS 2010EV instrument (Shimadzu) fitted with an XBridge column (4.6 × 150 mm, 3.5 μm; Waters), eluted with a 15-50% linear gradient of B into A (A = 0.1% formic acid in H 2 O; B = 0.08% formic acid in acetonitrile) over 15 min at a flow rate of 1 mL/min, with UV detection at 220 nm.

CTerm Purification
Preparative HPLC runs were performed on a Luna C18 column (21.2 mm × 250 mm, 10 μm; Phenomenex), using linear 15-50% gradients of solvent B (0.1% in acetonitrile) into A (0.1% TFA in H 2 O), as required, with a flow rate of 25 mL/min.
Fractions of high (N95%) HPLC homogeneity were further characterized by electrospray mass spectrometry using a XBridge column C18 (Waters) and a gradient at 1 mL/min of A (0.1% formic acid in H 2 O) into B (0.08% formic acid in CH 3 CN).
Detection was performed at 220 nm.
Fractions of adequate homogeneity and with the expected mass (4067.77
Da) were combined, lyophilized, and used in subsequent experiments.
See Figs.

Circular Dichroism (CD)
CTerm was dissolved in 5 mM NaOH at a stock concentration of 1 mg/mL.
The peptide was further dissolved to yield a 50 mM concentration in 10 mM phosphate buffer at pH 7.2 in the presence or absence of 20 mM SDS.
The CD was performed as follows.
The spectral region was recorded from 190 to 250 nm, with a 0.5 nm step resolution, on a Jasco J-715 CD spectropolarimeter (Jasco Inc.) using a quartz cell of 1.0 mm optical path length at room temperature.
The scanning speed was 100 nm/min with 2 s time response, and the spectra were collected and averaged over 10 scans.
Secondary structure estimation derived from CD data was assessed using K2D3

Amyloid Preparation
Lyophilized Aβ 1-42 (Anaspec) was solubilized as previously described
Briefly, 1 mg Aβ was dissolved in 250 μL of MilliQ water and pH was adjusted to ≥10.5 using 1 M NaOH solution to avoid the isoelectric point of Aβ disassembling and aggregates that may be present.
Peptides were diluted in 250 μL of 20 mM phosphate buffer (pH 7.4).
Furthermore, the solutions were sonicated for 1 min in a bath-type sonicator (Bioruptor, Diagenode).
The preparations were immediately used for aggregation or stored in 25 μL aliquots at -20 °C until used.

Reversed-Phase Chromatography Analysis of CTerm Effect on Aβ Aggregation
Soluble and pre-aggregated (24 h at 37 °C) 1 μM Aβ 1-42 was dissolved in Ham's F12 medium and incubated in the presence/absence of 5 μM CTerm at 37 °C during 24 h for assembly and disassemble assays.
Samples were quenched in 2% trifluoroacetic acid and injected in a Waters 2690 HPLC coupled to a UV detector set to 214 nm.
A linear gradient of 25%-45% of 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid in acetonitrile was applied for 90 min into a 250 × 4.6 mm (5 μm) C4 column at a flow rate of 0.75 mL/min.

Reversed-Phase Chromatography Analysis of Control Peptide Effect on Aβ Aggregation
Random peptides with the same size that CTerm were synthetized: peptides X, Y and Z. Soluble and pre-aggregated (24 h at 37 °C) 1 μM Aβ1-42 was dissolved in Ham's F12 medium and incubated in the presence/absence of 5 μM peptides at 37 °C during 24 h for assembly and disassemble assays.
Analytical reversed-phase HPLC was performed on C18 columns (4.6 × 50 mm, 3 μm, Phenomenex) in a model LC-2010A system (Shimadzu).
Solvent A was 0.045% TFA in H 2 O; solvent B was 0.036% TFA in acetonitrile.
Elution was carried out with linear 5-95% gradients of solvent B into A over 15 min at 1 mL/min flow rate, with UV detection at 220 nm.

Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM)
Soluble and pre-aggregated (24 h at 37 °C) 1 μM Aβ 1-42 was dissolved in Ham's F12 medium and incubated in the presence/absence of 5 μM CTerm at 37 °C during 24 h for assembly and disassemble assays.
Samples of aggregated peptides obtained as described above were placed onto carbon-coated 200 mesh copper grids and incubated for 5 min.
The grids were washed with distilled water and negatively stained with 2% (w/v) uranyl acetate for 2 min.
Micrographs were obtained in a JEM-1010 (JEOL) transmission electron microscope operated at 80 kV accelerating voltage and equipped with an Orius CCD camera.

Cell Viability Assay by MTT Reduction
A human neuroblastoma cell line (SH-SY5Y cells) was seeded in poly-L-lysine coated 96-well plates at a concentration of 2 × 10 4 cells/ well.
Soluble and pre-aggregated (24 h at 37 °C) 1 μM Aβ 1-42 was dissolved in Ham's F12 medium and incubated in the presence/absence of 5 μM CTerm at 37 °C during 24 h for assembly and disassemble assays.
After they were ready the samples were added.
Cells were treated with the different samples during 24 h at 37 °C.
Cell viability was tested by 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) reduction.
10% v/v of MTT stock solution (5 mg/mL) was added.
After 2 h the media was replaced with 100 μL of dimethylsulfoxide.
MTT absorbance was determined in an Infinite 200 multiplate reader at A540 nm and corrected by A650 nm.
Data are shown compared to untreated controls (100%).

Aβ 1-42 Binding to Neuronal Processes
Primary cultures were carried out as previously reported
The procedure was previously approved by the Ethics Committee of the Institut Municipal d'Investigacions Mèdiques-Universitat Pompeu Fabra (EC-IMIM-UPF).
Cortical neurons were isolated from 18-day-old OF1 mouse embryos.
The brain was removed and the cortex aseptically dissected on ice-cold Hanks' balanced salt solution supplemented with 4.5 g/L glucose and trypsinized for 17 min at 37 °C.
In order to eliminate rests of the trypsinization medium and to disaggregate the cells, the cell solution was washed thrice in Hanks' balanced salt solution+glucose and mechanically dissociated.
Then, cells were seeded on poly-D-lysine coated coverslips in 24 well-plates with DMEM medium plus 10% horse serum at 10 5 cells/well.
Once neurons were attached to the polylysinated wells (2 h), the seeding medium was removed and Neurobasal medium was added containing 2% B27 supplement, 1% GlutaMAX and 1% penicillin/streptomycin.
On day 3 of in vitro culture, cells were treated with 2 μM 1-β-D-arabinofuranosylcytosine for 24 h to eliminate glia.
Primary cortical neurons were used at day 10
Cells were treated for 10 min at room temperature in mild agitation with 10 μM HiLyte Fluor488 labelled human Aβ 1-42 (fAβ 1-42 ) preformed in the presence/absence of 20 μM CTerm.
After three washes with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) cells were incubated on ice with 75 μg/mL red concanavaline in neurobasal medium for 20 min.
Then cells were washed again in cold PBS and fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde in PBS before mounting.
Images were obtained in a SP5 Leica confocal microscope using 40× objective.
Image fluorescence analysis was performed using Image J software.

Statistical Analysis
Data are expressed as the mean ± SEM of the values from the number of experiments as indicated in the corresponding figures.
Student's t-test or one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) with Bonferroni multiple comparisons test were used for statistical analyses.

Results

Albumin Binds Aß With Higher Affinity Than Clusterin
Clusterin is known to bind and to inhibit Aβ aggregation
We used Aβ 1-42 in in silico and in vitro experiments because it is the most aggregation-prone species of Aβ peptide and, therefore the most neurotoxic in humans
The comparison of the binding affinities of the clusterin peptides and the CTerm to both the alpha and beta conformations of the Aβ 1-42 (Fig.
Still, albumin's CTerm peptide systematically obtained significantly better scores (p b .001)
for the global distribution of all poses.
This observation suggests that the CTerm peptide can bind to the Aβ 1- 42 peptide with an affinity equal or possibly higher than clusterin.

In silico Analysis of Aβ 1-42 -CTerm Interaction
A peptide region of human albumin that had been previously identified with iFRAG
The iFRAG method predicts putative fragments that participate in the interface of an interaction through the search for similar sequences of known interactions.
We run iFRAG with the albumin and clusterin sequences interacting with the sequence of the Aβ 1-42 peptide.
We obtained several fragments of clusterin and human albumin that would putatively interact with Aβ 1-42 .
We selected the high score fragments from iFRAG and aligned the sequences with CLUSTAL
The alignment showed 40% similarity and N25% identity, which increased to N70% on a short stretch of 7 amino-acids
The analysis showed that both proteins share a common sequence located at the albumin's CTerm
The CTerm domain has 35 amino acids (AETFTFHADICTLSEKERQIKKQTALVELVKHKPK) and shows high sequence similarity to clusterin (QNAVNGVKQIKTLIEKTN EERKTLLSNLEEAKKKK)
Here, the binding affinity of the CTerm peptide was computationally evaluated against its regular partner (CTerm-lid) and Aβ 1-42 in its α and β conformations (Fig.
The score distributions obtained from the generated decoys (Fig.
Interestingly, the CTerm peptide seems to trigger strong conformational changes when binding to the Aβ 1-42 peptide.
While binding to the peptide in the α conformation translates into changes between the relative position of the two α-helices, binding to the peptide in the β conformation seems to result in a break of the β configuration that might affect the pairing with other Aβ 1-42 peptides.
The evaluation of the individual contribution of each residue of the CTerm peptide to the binding with Aβ 1-42 (Fig.
When we analyzed the top 5 best scored decoys (Fig.
These configurations compete directly with the natural helix-loop-helix segment (CTerm-lid) to which the CTerm binds.
All the data concerning the docking analysis can be found at
A video showing the docking of the CTerm with Aβ 1-42 is available at
To further confirm the different behaviour of the α and β conformations, we docked CTerm and clusterin to the described α-β transition state structure (PDB ID: 1Z0Q) and compare it with the results obtained for the α (PDB ID: 1IYT) and the β (PDB ID: 5OQV) conformation (Fig.
This comparison also allows to compensate for the difference in crystallization solvents used between 1IYT and 1Z0Q.
As expected from its described condition as transition state, 1Z0Q mostly behaves as an intermediate between the two conformations, the only exception being the RosettaScore evaluation.
This fact is not that surprising considering that some of the same metrics that define entry quality in the PDB do affect the scoring provide by Rosetta.
The differences in ddG between the binding to albumin or clusterin in 1Z0Q are lower than those we obtained for 1IYT or the β conformation.
However, it is still within the range to support that albumin can bind to the Aβ peptide with at least the same or better affinity than clusterin.

In vitro Analysis of Aβ 1-42 -CTerm Interaction
We synthesized the CTerm as explained in the Methodology Section.
The CD mean residue molar ellipticity of the CTerm is shown in Fig.
In solution, the peptide shows α-helical distinct features (minima at 204 and 223 nm), with α-helix secondary structure content of 56%.
SDS micelles (20 mM detergent) used as helical inducer, increases the propensity of the CTerm secondary structure to 90%, with minima at 206 and 223 nm and a maximum at 192 nm.
Next, we showed the anti-aggregant properties of the CTerm on Aβ 1-42 .
CTerm was used at 5 μM, which is the physiological concentration found in human CSF.
The hydrophobicity analysis of the species present in several mixtures by reversed-phase chromatography (Fig.
At early elution times (left of the chromatograph), the specific peaks due to the presence of Aβ 1-42 oligomers are absent when the CTerm is present.
In addition, we observed that the CTerm shifts the elution profile to the left, towards more hydrophilic species in the presence of Aβ 1-42 oligomers when compared with the elution profile of Aβ 1-42 alone (Fig.
This behavior indicates that the CTerm prevents the assembly of oligomeric species.
Moreover, the CTerm was also able to disassemble preformed Aβ 1-42 aggregates of high (fibrils) and low (oligomers) molecular weights (Fig.
Three peptides of the same size as the CTerm (termed X, Y, Z) were randomly generated to use as controls.
We found that the three peptides favour Aβ aggregation and stabilize the pre-existing oligomers and fibrils.
The results obtained with Peptide Y, as a representative experiment, are shown in Fig.
This pattern of interaction between Aβ and different peptides is expected since it has been reported that the binding of Aβ to proteins can act as seeds for amyloid aggregation and stabilization of fibrils
Furthermore, the anti-aggregant properties of the CTerm were studied by TEM (Fig.
When Aβ 1-42 was incubated alone for 24 h, we observed the presence of the typical amyloid unbranched fibrils (Fig.
Upon co-incubation of Aβ 1-42 with the CTerm, amorphous aggregates were the only structures present (Fig.
To study the disassemble ability of the CTerm, when Aβ 1-42 was prepared as in Fig.
The interference of CTerm in the analysis was discarded because no aggregates were observed when the CTerm was incubated alone (Fig.
These results are in agreement with those obtained in the experiment presented in Fig.

CTerm Protects Neurons against Amyloid Neurotoxicity
We also studied the effect of the CTerm on Aβ-induced neurotoxicity on a human neuroblastoma cell line.
These studies have been performed with soluble Aβ 1-42 incubated in the presence/absence of the CTerm for 24 h in vitro.
Later, the oligomers were added to cells for 24 h (Fig.
A significant protection was observed when Aβ 1-42 aggregates were preformed in the presence of the CTerm (p b .05).
Since Aβ aggregates, particularly oligomers, bind to the neuronal membrane impairing its normal function, we studied the binding of Aβ 1-42 aggregates formed in the absence/presence of the CTerm to primary cultures of cortical neurons.
We used these cell cultures to study the binding of the Aβ 1-42 aggregates to the surface of neurites mirroring what happens in vivo.
Experiments were run with concanavalin A, a membrane marker, and a fluorescent fAβ 1-42 peptide to study their colocalization (Fig.
Cortical neurons treated with fAβ 1-42 aggregates (at 10 μM to allow its visualization) showed higher binding to the membrane throughout the neurite network than oligomers formed in the presence of the CTerm.
Fluorescence was quantified and the aggregates of fAβ 1-42 formed in the presence of the CTerm showed a 25% reduction in binding to neuronal membranes (p b .001;
Fig.
Finally, we prepared Aβ 1-42 aggregates for 24 h in vitro.
Then, they were incubated with the CTerm in vitro for 24 h in order to disassemble the oligomers.
Later, human neuroblastoma cells were challenged with these samples for 24 h (Fig.
Aβ 1-42 aggregate-induced neurotoxicity was significantly impaired when the Aβ 1-42 aggregates were pre-incubated with the CTerm (p b .01;
Fig.
The CTerm alone had no effect on cell viability (Fig.

Discussion
In order to elucidate the albumin domain where the anti aggregant Aβ property is located, we determined the regions of human albumin that could interact with Aβ using the iFRAG procedure
In our previous work we had compared the sequence of clusterin, a well-known Aβ binding protein
We found that the albumin CTerm has N40% similarity (70% identity on a short 7-residue stretch) with clusterin, and therefore we focused our study on the properties of this fragment.
In the present work we show in silico evidence that the CTerm peptide produces conformational changes on Aβ 1-42 upon binding.
This interaction might impair Aβ 1-42 conformation into β sheets preventing oligomer and fibril formation.
These predictions were confirmed in vitro by reversed-phase chromatography and electron microscopy.
Moreover, the in silico results that suggest a change of the β-sheet Aβ 1-42 structure fit with the ability of the CTerm to induce disassemble of aggregated Aβ 1-42 , data that we obtained by reverse phase chromatography and electron microscopy.
As expected, the CTerm at physiological CSF concentration was able to protect neurons against Aβ 1-42 neurotoxicity.
These results are in agreement with our findings of decreased binding of Aβ aggregates to neuronal membranes when the CTerm is co-incubated with Aβ.
Since AD is proposed to begin with the insidious interference of Aβ oligomers on synaptic activity
The experimental results in this work highlight the ability of the program iFrag to predict new binding sites for medical relevant targets, for example providing the new binder CTerm for Aβ peptides.
Despite previously described interactions between albumin and Aβ peptides, CTerm is a non-exposed region of the albumin and, as such, this site had been dismissed on the prediction of the interaction by other programs.
This work confirms that iFrag had successfully identified a fully new binder for Aβ peptides capable of avoiding its aggregation.
Finally, the interest in clusterin and proteins that share common sequences and Aβ binding properties is based on the effect of subtle changes in their sequence, as it has been reported for clusterin

Conclusions
We propose that the CTerm is a key region of albumin that participates in the inhibition of Aβ assembly also favour disassemble of already aggregated Aβ, due to its specific Aβ binding capacity.
These findings could set the basis for the design of inhibitory peptides as therapeutic tools for the treatment of AD.
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at



Fig. 1 .
Fig. 1.
In silico modeling of clusterin and docking comparison with the CTerm.
A) Guiding alignment for the modeling of the clusterin peptide.
Common amino acids are labelled in blue.
B) Structures of the 5 clusterin decoys with the initial models (transparent) and the minimized structure (red).
Rosetta scores for the minimized structure are shown under each structure.
C) Comparison of scores between the docking population of clusterin (or albumin) and the Aβ 1-42 peptide (in α or β conformation).
Using a total of 8000 decoys on each docking population, the scores of albumin peptides systematically outperforms those of clusterin when binding the same target, with a statistical significance of p b .001.



Fig. 2 .
Fig. 2. Structural in silico analysis of Aβ 1-42 interaction with the CTerm.
A) Structure of human albumin.
The sequence of the CTerm is labelled in red.
The continuing structural segment (CTerm-lid) is shown in pink (top).
The α and β configurations of Aβ 1-42 are shown at the bottom.
B) Scores distribution of the docking analysis of CTerm against α-Aβ 1-42 , β-Aβ 1-42 , and CTerm-lid.
C) Individual contribution of the residues of the CTerm to the binding according to the top 200 decoys (2.5% of the total).
D) Representation of the first five top-scored decoys of the docking between the amyloid peptide (blue) and the CTerm (red).
ddG score and shape complementarity are provided under each structure.



Fig. 3 .
Fig. 3. Effect of the CTerm on Aβ 1-42 assembly and disassemble in vitro.
Soluble or aggregated 1 μM Aβ 1-42 and 1 μM Aβ 1-42 + 5 μM CTerm were incubated for 24 h to allow soluble Aβ assembly or fibrillar Aβ disassemble.
A) Fractions eluted by reverse-phase chromatography.
In the central part of the graph are the peaks of the high molecular weight fibrils and on the left the peaks that correspond to low molecular weight oligomers.
Representative peaks in terms of hydrophobicity: 1, peak corresponding to Aβ 1-42 oligomers; 2, 3, and 4, peaks that shift their hydrophobicity in the presence/absence of Aβ1 -42 fibrils.
A,a) Aggregation assay performed with soluble Aβ 1-42 .
A,b) Disassemble assay performed with aggregated Aβ 1-42 .
Data are from a representative experiment.
B) TEM images of aggregation assays.
B,a) 1 μM Aβ 1-42 aggregated for 24 h.
Insets correspond to oligomers and protofibrils.
B,b) 1 μM Aβ 1-42 + 5 μM CTerm aggregated for 24 h.
B,c) Aggregated 1 μM Aβ 1-42 + 5 μM CTerm incubated for 24 h.
B,d) CTerm alone incubated for 24 h.
Representative images are shown.



Fig. 4 .
Fig. 4. Effect of the CTerm on Aβ-induced neurotoxicity in vitro.
A) Human neuroblastoma cells were treated with 1 μM Aβ 1-42 or 1 μM Aβ 1-42 + 5 μM CTerm, which were previously incubated for 24 h to allow the assembly of Aβ. Cell viability was assayed by MTT reduction after 24 h.
Data are the mean ± SEM from 5 independent experiments performed by duplicate.
* p b .05 and ** p b .01.
B) Mouse cortical neurons were incubated with aggregated 10 μM fAβ 1-42 and 10 μM fAβ 1-42 + 20 μM CTerm for 10 min.
Binding of Aβ aggregates to the membrane was evaluated by colocalization with membrane markers (concanavalin A staining).
Representative images of fAβ 1-42 (green) and concanavalin A (red).
The quantification analysis of fluorescence intensity of fAβ 1-42 was normalized by concanavalin A (bottom, left).
Concanavalin A fluorescence was also independently analyzed (bottom, right).
Data are the mean ± SEM of 8 replicates.
*** p b .001.
C) Human neuroblastoma cells were treated with 1 μM Aβ 1-42 and 1 μM Aβ 1-42 + 5 μM CTerm, aggregates that were previously incubated for 24 h to allow Aβ disassemble by the CTerm.
Cell viability was assayed by MTT reduction after 24 h.
Data are the mean ± SEM from 8 independent experiments performed by duplicate.
* p b .05 and ** p b .01.