Atrophy of Basal Forebrain Initiates with Tau Pathology in Individuals at Risk for Alzheimer’s Disease
Evidence suggests that the basal forebrain (BF) cholinergic system degenerates early in the course of Alzheimer's disease (AD), likely due to the vulnerability of BF cholinergic neurons to tau pathology.
However, it remains unclear whether the presence of tauopathy is the only requirement for initiating the BF degeneration in asymptomatic subjects at risk for AD (AR-AD), and how BF structural deficits evolve from normal aging to preclinical and prodromal AD.
Here, we provide human in vivo magnetic resonance imaging evidence supporting that abnormal cerebrospinal f luid levels of phosphorylated tau (T+) are selectively associated with bilateral volume loss of the nucleus basalis of Meynert (nbM, Ch4) in AR-AD individuals.
Spreading of atrophy to medial septum and vertical limb of diagonal band Broca (Ch1-Ch2) occurred in both preclinical and prodromal AD.
With the exception of A+, all groups revealed significant correlations between volume reduction of BF cholinergic compartments and atrophy of their innervated regions.
Overall, these results support the central role played by tauopathy in instigating the nbM degeneration in AR-AD individuals and the necessary coexistence of both AD proteinopathies for spreading damage to larger BF territories, thus affecting the core of the BF cholinergic projection system.

Introduction
Research based on cytoarchitectonics, cytochemistry, and connectivity patterns has revealed that basal forebrain (BF) cholinergic neurons provide the major source of acetylcholine to the cerebral cortex, hippocampus, and amygdala.
Large cholinergic neurons of the nucleus basalis Meynert (nbM), termed Ch4, send projections to the entire neocortical mantle and the amygdala, while hippocampal cholinergic inputs arise from the medial septum and vertical limb of the diagonal band Broca, corresponding to Ch1 and Ch2, respectively
Given the widespread distribution of acetylcholine (ACh) receptors in the brain, the BF cholinergic system (BFCS) serves as a major cholinergic hub for brain regions implicated in cortical activation, attention, sensory processing, motivation, and memory processes, playing a central role in modulating neural dynamics underlying arousal regulation and cognitive operations
Accumulated evidence has supported significant dysfunctions of central cholinergic neurons in Alzheimer's disease (AD)
Pivotal experiments showed a deficiency of choline acetyl transferase (ChAT) in the neocortex, amygdala, and hippocampus of AD patients, revealing that cortical regions containing the greatest density of neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs) exhibited the maximum reduction of ChAT
Since then, numerous studies have reported substantial BF cholinergic deficits in mild cognitive impairment (MCI;
Human tissue-based research has also provided copious evidence of selective vulnerability of nbM neurons to NFT pathology
Furthermore, recent findings suggest that the link between tau pathology and cholinergic deficits may be initiated earlier than expected, when toxic tau oligomeric species associated with pretangle pathology accumulate in vulnerable nbM neurons
With the advent of AD biomarkers, many studies have identified AD pathology with in vivo techniques years before the development of symptoms (e.g.,
According to the revised criteria from
Previous studies have revealed that BF atrophy correlates with amyloid β burden
Moreover, recent experiments have shown that individuals with subjective cognitive decline, a risk population for preclinical AD, exhibit smaller volume of Ch1-Ch2 and Ch4 subdivisions of the BF
However, human in vivo experiments explicitly assessing the vulnerability of the BFCS to isolated AD pathology in AR-AD subjects or to both proteinopathies in preclinical and prodromal AD are still lacking.
It is also unknown when the coupling between structural deficits of BF cholinergic compartments and the atrophy of their innervated regions (i.e., amygdala, hippocampus, and neocortex) starts developing in the course of AD, considering that structural covariance between atrophy of BF cholinergic compartments and patterns of cortico-amygdalar degeneration is already present in prodromal AD
All together, this information may be of relevance for the prevention of cognitive deficits by designing tailored interventions aimed at delaying BF cholinergic degeneration and preserving the cholinergic transmission to the cortical mantle and limbic system.
To address these questions, we have compared in vivo magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) measures of gray matter (GM) volume of different BF cholinergic compartments (Ch1-Ch2 and Ch4) between cognitively normal individuals with negative AD biomarkers in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF; A-T-, control), AR-AD (either A+ or T+), preclinical (A + T+, asymptomatic), and prodromal AD (A + T+, MCI).
Based on evidence supporting the role of tau oligomers and NFTs in degeneration of nbM cholinergic neurons (e.g.,
We further expect that selective atrophy of nbM in T+ and A+T+ individuals parallels GM deficits of their innervated regions, likely revealing cholinergic denervation of these structures.

Materials and Methods

Subjects
According to the revised criteria from
Based on these criteria, the study sample consisted of 120 subjects: A-T-(n = 33), A+ (n = 33), T+ (n = 29), preclinical AD (A+T+, n = 8), and prodromal AD (A+T+, n = 17).
They were recruited at the Hospital Santa Creu i Sant Pau (Barcelona, Spain) and the University Hospital Marques de Valdecilla (Santander, Spain), as part of a crosssectional multicenter study called the "SIGNAL project."
Participants underwent a neurological exam and extensive neuropsychological assessment.
Education, defined in years of education, was assessed by self-report or close family members.
Subjects gave their informed consent prior to their inclusion in the study, which was previously approved by the local ethics committee at each center according to the Declaration of Helsinki.

CSF Measures
CSF was obtained through lumbar puncture following international consensus recommendations
Briefly, CSF was collected in the morning between 09:00 AM and 12:00 PM in polypropylene tubes and immediately centrifuged for 10 min
The first 1 cc was discarded to avoid hematic contamination.
CSF samples were aliquoted (0.5 mL) into polypropylene tubes and frozen at -80 • C. All CSF samples were shipped in dry ice to the Hospital Santa Creu i Sant Pau, where they were analyzed.
Commercially available enzymelinked immunosorbent assay kits were used to determine the levels of Aβ 1-42 (Innotest β-amyloid 1-42 ; Fujirebio Europe) and phosphorylated tau (p-tau; Innotest Phospho-Tau 181P ; Fujirebio Europe), following the manufacturer's recommendations.
The presence of amyloid (A+) and p-tau (T+) pathology was defined as CSF Aβ 1-42 ≤ 550 pg/mL and CSF p-tau ≥61 pg/mL, respectively

MRI Acquisition and Cortical Thickness Estimation
Participants were scanned in two different centers (Hospital del Mar and University Hospital Marqués de Valdecilla) using the same protocol and identical MRI scanners (Philips Achieva 3T, 8-channel receive head coil).
High-resolution structural cerebral scans were obtained with a 3D T1-weighted magnetization-prepared rapid gradient echo sequence acquired in the sagittal plane (TR/TE = 8.2/3.8 ms, flip angle = 8 • , voxel resolution = 1 mm isotropic, no gap between slices).
Neuroimaging analyses were all performed in the Laboratory of Functional Neuroscience at the Pablo de Olavide University (Seville, Spain).
MRI data were processed using the analysis pipeline of Freesurfer v6.0 (
that involves intensity normalization, registration to Talairach, skull stripping, white matter (WM) segmentation, tessellation of the WM boundary, and automatic correction of topological defects
Pial surface misplacements and erroneous WM segmentation were manually corrected on a slice-by-slice basis to enhance the reliability of cortical thickness measurements.
Individual thickness maps were further transformed into the same spherical coordinate system of cortical surfaces and then resampled to the average spherical surface by aligning each individual cortical folding pattern to the average folding pattern of the entire population.
This procedure has shown to enhance the spatial localization of cortical features among participants, thereby minimizing metric distortions
Finally, cortical thickness maps were smoothed using nonlinear spherical wavelet-based denoising schemes, which have shown superior specificity and sensitivity at detecting local and global changes compared to Gaussian filter kernels
Cortical thickness was defined as the average of the shortest distance between the pial surface and the GM-WM boundary at each vertex across the cortical mantle

Volume Estimation of BF Cholinergic Compartments, Amygdala, and Hippocampus
Voxel-based MRI data were preprocessed and analyzed using SPM12 (Wellcome Trust Center for Neuroimaging; www.fil.ion.
ucl.ac.uk/spm).
Briefly, T1-weighted images were manually reoriented to the anterior commissure and further segmented into GM, WM, CSF, and skull/scalp compartments following the unified segmentation of SPM12.
Next, the diffeomorphic anatomical registration through an exponentiated lie algebra (DARTEL) algorithm was applied to segmented brain images to obtain an enhanced inter-subject registration with improved realignment of smaller inner structures
Individual flow fields obtained from the DARTEL registration to the reference template were used to warp the GM compartment, therefore preserving the total amount of GM volume before warping.
All preprocessed GM maps were visually checked for overall segmentation and registration accuracy.
GM maps were spatially normalized to the Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI) space, and normalized modulated GM images were smoothed with a Gaussian kernel of 4 mm.
The volume of BF cholinergic nuclei (i.e., Ch1-Ch2 and Ch4) was obtained with cytoarchitectonic probabilistic maps of BF magnocellular compartments
Briefly, BF areas containing magnocellular cell groups within the septum, horizontal and vertical limbs of the diagonal band, and the sublenticular area were delineated in histological sections of 10 human autopsy brains by using a modified Gallyas silver method
Ch1-Ch2 compartments correspond to the medial septal nucleus and the diagonal band of Broca, respectively.
Given that boundaries between Ch1 and Ch2 were arbitrary, these two regions were merged into one for statistical purposes.
The Ch4 compartment largely corresponds to the NbM, extending as far rostrally as cell aggregates underneath the nucleus accumbens.
Large aggregates of darkly stained cell group within the ventrolateral edge of the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis at the border of the internal capsule/anterior commissure were also classified as Ch4.
The Ch4 compartment further includes magnocellular cell groups within a welldefined area that begins caudal to the supraoptic nucleus at the level where the optic tract adjoins the internal capsule/cerebral peduncle and extends laterally up to the most caudal level of the medial mammillary nucleus and the central nucleus of the amygdala
BF cholinergic compartments were registered to the single-subject template of the MNI atlas, and maximum probability maps of each BF compartment were obtained for statistical purposes
We further used cytoarchitectonically verified maps of the human amygdala and hippocampus for statistical analysis

Statistical Analysis
The normality assumption of demographic, biochemical, and cognitive variables was first assessed with the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test using the Lilliefors correction.
Group differences were evaluated with independent samples t-tests (continuous variables) and the chi-square test (categorical variables) using SPSS v22 (SPSS Inc.).
For each hemisphere, vertex-wise group differences in cortical thickness were first assessed with one-way analysis of covariance (ANCOVA) adjusted by age and sex.
If the one-way ANCOVA showed a significant group effect, post hoc pairwise comparisons were then performed.
Results were corrected for multiple comparisons using a previously validated hierarchical statistical model
This statistical approach first controls the family-wise error (FWE) rate at the level of clusters (P < 0.05) by applying random field theory over smoothed statistical maps, and next controls the false discovery rate at the level of vertex (P < 0.05) over unsmoothed statistical maps.
Cluster extent threshold was fixed at 90 vertices.
We further assessed group differences in GM volume of each BF cholinergic compartment (i.e., Ch1-Ch2 and Ch4), hippocampus, and amygdala, separately, using the voxel-based morphometry (VBM) approach implemented in SPM12 (one-way ANCOVA adjusted by age, sex, and total intracranial volume [ICV], corrected for FWE, P < 0.05; cluster extend threshold >5 voxels).
If the omnibus ANCOVA showed an overall difference across the groups, post hoc pairwise comparisons were then performed.
We next performed vertex-wise linear regression analyses to determine correlations between group differences in GM volume of each BF cholinergic compartment (i.e., Ch1-Ch2 and Ch4) and cortical thinning in each group separately, adjusting by age and sex.
The results were corrected for multiple comparisons (cluster extend threshold = 90 vertices) using the hierarchical statistical model mentioned above
Voxel-wise linear regression analyses were performed to assess correlations between group differences in GM volume of each BF cholinergic compartment (i.e., Ch1-Ch2 and Ch4) and group differences in GM volume of amygdala and hippocampus, separately.
These analyses were also adjusted by age, sex, and ICV and corrected for FWE (P < 0.05; cluster extend threshold > 5 voxels).
We further assessed voxel-wise group differences in WM volume with the VBM approach implemented in SPM12 (oneway ANCOVA adjusted by age, sex, and ICV, corrected for FWE, P < 0.05; cluster extend threshold > 5 voxels).
Post hoc pairwise comparisons were performed if the omnibus null hypothesis was rejected.
Significant group differences in WM volume were displayed on specific WM tracts using the Johns Hopkins University (JHU) WM tractography atlas
Voxelwise linear regression analyses allowed us to evaluate whether patterns of WM atrophy were related to volume loss of BF cholinergic compartments in each group.
These analyses were also adjusted by age, sex, and ICV and corrected for FWE (P < 0.05; cluster extend threshold > 5 voxels).
For all the analyses, we have reported the extent of change (cluster size), the P-corrected value, the statistic for the peak vertex/voxel, and the effect size obtained with the partial etasquared

Confirmatory Analysis Based on the ADNI Dataset
In order to verify results obtained with our sample, we applied the same analytical approach to the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) database.
The ADNI was launched in 2003 by the National Institute on Aging (NIA), the National Institute of Biomedical Imaging and Bioengineering (NIBIB), the Food and Drug Administration (FDA), private pharmaceutical companies, and nonprofit organizations, as a $60 million, 5-year public-private partnership.
The primary goal of ADNI has been to test whether serial MRI, positron emission tomography (PET), other biological markers, and clinical and neuropsychological assessment can be combined to measure the progression of MCI and early AD.
The principal investigator of this initiative is Michael W. Weiner, MD, VA Medical Center and University of California-San Francisco.
ADNI is the result of efforts of many coinvestigators from a broad range of academic institutions and private corporations, and subjects have been recruited from over 50 sites across the United States of America and Canada.
More information can be found in the acknowledgements section (see also
We selected individuals with normal cognitive function and MCI patients who had baseline CSF and 3T MRI data in the ADNI database.
Aβ 1-42 and total tau (t-tau) levels were measured using the multiplex xMAP Luminex platform (Luminex) with Innogenetics (INNO-BIA AlzBio3) immunoassay kit-based reagents.
In the analyses performed with the ADNI cohort, t-tau was used because it has shown a higher specificity than p-tau in the ADNI dataset (92.3% vs. 73.1%)
Using published cutoffs (192 pg/mL for Aβ 1-42 and 93 pg/mL for t-tau)

Results

Demographic Characteristics, CSF Biomarkers, and Cognitive Function
Table
All groups were statistically comparable in sex distribution and education years.
However, the one-way ANOVA showed group differences in age (F (4,115) = 8.99, P = 10 -5 ), T+, preclinical, and prodromal AD being significantly older than controls (P < 0.001).
The null hypothesis of differences across groups was rejected for all cognitive variables (Mini-Mental State Examination: F (4,115) = 20.53,
P = 10 -13 ; Boston Naming Test with education as covariate: F (4,114) = 13.79,
P = 10 -9 ; Rey figure: F (4,115) = 5.66, P = 0.0004; and VOSP: F (4,115) = 4.56, P = 0.002).
Preclinical and prodromal AD patients showed lower scores in the Boston Naming Test than controls (P < 0.001), while for the remaining tests, T+, preclinical, and prodromal AD patients showed a significant impairment when compared to controls (P < 0.05).
However, the cognitive function of individuals with A+ was comparable to that of controls.
The ANOVAs also revealed significant differences among groups for the three CSF biomarkers (Aβ 1-42 : F (4,115) = 48.35,
P = 10 -24 ; p-tau: F (4,115) = 42.14, p = 10 -21 ; t-tau: F (4,115) = 41.25,
P = 10 -21 ).
As expected, Aβ 1-42 levels were significantly lower in the three groups with amyloidosis as compared with controls (P = 10 -6 ) and T+ (P = 10 -11 ), while p-tau and t-tau were higher in the three groups with tauopathy as compared with controls (p-tau: P = 10 -6 ; t-tau: P = 10 -5 ) and A+ (p-tau: P = 10 -8 ; t-tau: P = 10 -6 ).

Group Differences in Volume of BF Cholinergic Compartments, Hippocampus, Amygdala, and Cortical Thickness
The one-way ANCOVA revealed that the volume of BF cholinergic compartment was significantly different among the five groups (Ch1-Ch2: F (4,113) = 4.79, P = 10 -5 ; Ch4: F (4,113) = 5.31, P = 0.001).
Results of these analyses are shown in Table
T+, preclinical, and prodromal AD individuals exhibited significant lower volume of Ch4 (i.e., nbM) than controls.
The extent of BF atrophy reached Ch1-Ch2 territories (i.e., medial septum and the diagonal band of Broca) in preclinical and prodromal AD.
GM volume of BF cholinergic compartments was comparable in controls and A+ subjects.
We next assessed group differences in structural integrity of brain regions that are synaptically connected to BF nuclei, such as the amygdala, hippocampus, and neocortex Table
The oneway ANCOVA yielded a significant group effect for the amygdala (F (4,113) = 5.78, P = 0.001) and the hippocampus (F (4,113) = 6.94,
P = 10 -11 ).
While A+T+ subjects exhibited significant volume loss of amygdala and hippocampus compared to controls, atrophy only affected the amygdala in T+ subjects (see Fig.
The ANCOVA also showed a significant group effect for the neocortex (left: F (4,113) = 4.18, P = 10 -4 ; right: F (4,113) = 4.96, P = 0.001).
Pairwise group differences in cortical thickness are included in Table
Compared to controls, A+ exhibited bilateral thinning of posterior cingulate and right anterior cingulate cortex together with thickening of parieto-occipital regions.
Patterns of cortical atrophy spread to frontoparietal networks and the cingulate cortex in T+ individuals.
The spatial extent of cortical thinning differed between preclinical and prodromal AD patients.
While preclinical AD subjects showed cortical deficits mostly  Note: CS, cluster size (>5 voxels), it refers to the extent of atrophy; P, cluster-level FWE correction (P < 0.05), peak MNI coordinates (x-y-z); T, peak t-value; η 2 p , peak partial eta-squared showing the effect size.
affecting the right temporal lobe, prodromal AD patients revealed bilateral thinning of temporal, left inferior parietal, and medial orbitofrontal regions together with atrophy of the right anterior cingulate cortex.
Results were slightly different when cortical GM volume was included as dependent variable instead of cortical thickness (see Supplementary Material and Supplementary Fig.
The volume of cerebral WM was also significantly different across groups (F (4,113) = 9.25, P = 10 -36 ).
With the exception of A+, the remaining groups (i.e., T+, preclinical, and prodromal AD) exhibited patterns of WM atrophy compared with controls (Table
T+ individuals showed structural WM deficits in left cingulum hippocampus (P = 10 -6 ) and right anterior thalamic radiation (P = 10 -10 ).
In the preclinical AD group, Figure 2. Group differences in GM volume of the amygdala (first and second rows) and hippocampus (third and fourth rows).
Both limbic structures receive cholinergic projections from Ch4 and Ch1-Ch2, respectively.
Results were corrected for multiple comparisons (FWE, P < 0.05).
L, left; R, right.
Note that only T+ (second column) and A+T+ subjects (preclinical and prodromal AD, third and fourth columns, respectively) showed structural deficits in these regions.
WM atrophy was evident in the inferior longitudinal fasciculus bilaterally (left, P = 10 -8 ; right, P = 10 -6 ), while in the prodromal group, WM deficits were extended to the right anterior thalamic radiation (P = 10 -40 ), right inferior longitudinal fasciculus (P = 10 -24 ), and left fronto-occipital fasciculus (P = 10 -36 /10 -21 ).
These patterns of WM atrophy were not associated with volume loss of BF cholinergic compartments for none of the groups studied.

Effect of AD Pathology on the Relationship between BF Cholinergic Compartments and Their Innervated Regions
Because cholinergic denervation mainly affects cerebral regions receiving BF cholinergic projections, we next asked whether volume loss of BF cholinergic compartments correlated with atrophy of amygdala, hippocampus, and neocortex in individuals at different risk for AD.
Results showed significant associations between volume loss of Ch4 and atrophy of amygdala in T+ (left/right amygdala: P = 10 -2 /10 -3 ), preclinical (left/right amygdala: P = 10 -5 /10 -5 ), and prodromal AD (left/right amygdala: P = 10 -6 /10 -6 ), whereas positive correlations between Ch1-Ch2 and hippocampus only affected prodromal AD patients (left/right hippocampus: P = 10 -3 /10 -3 ) (Fig.

Confirmatory Results Based on the ADNI Dataset
Results obtained with the ADNI sample showed similarities and differences with those obtained in our sample (see Supplementary Figs
Disparities are likely caused by the small size of the T+ group in the ADNI database (N = 10 vs. N = 29 in our sample) and/or for the use of t-tau (in the ADNI dataset) instead of p-tau (in our sample) for determining tau pathology in CSF.
One-way ANCOVAs confirmed that structural integrity of brain structures assessed differed significantly across groups (BF: F (4,249) = 4.95, P = 0.001; amygdala: F (4,249) = 5.42, P = 0.001; hippocampus: F (4,249) = 6.4,
P = 10 -7 ; cortical thickness: left-F (4,249) = 4.86, P = 0.006; right-F (4,249) = 4.74, P = 0.004).
Group differences in GM volume of BF compartments, amygdala, and hippocampus in the ADNI cohort were comparable to those observed in our sample, although T+ subjects of the ADNI database did not show atrophies of Ch4 and amygdala (Supplementary Figs
Individuals with preclinical and prodromal AD exhibited volume loss of Ch1-Ch2 (preclinical, left: P = 0.02, right: P = 0.03; prodromal, left: P = 0.001), Ch4 (preclinical, left: P = 0.02; prodromal, left: P = 10 -4 , right: P = 10 -4 ), amygdala (preclinical, right: P = 0.04; prodromal, left: P = 10 -6 , right: P = 10 -6 ), and hippocampus (preclinical, right: P = 0.03; prodromal, left: P = 10 -16 , right: P = 10 -16 ).
Similar to our sample, A+ subjects of the ADNI cohort did not exhibit volume changes in BF cholinergic compartments, hippocampus, or amygdala.
Note: WM, white matter; CS, cluster size, it refers to the extent of WM atrophy; P, cluster-level FWE correction (P < 0.05), peak MNI coordinates (x-y-z); T, peak t-value; η 2 p , peak partial eta-squared showing the effect size.
Location of affected WM regions was obtained with the JHU white-matter tractography atlas
Changes of cortical thickness affected all ADNI groups with AD pathology, although the spatial distribution of these changes was not identical in both datasets (Supplementary Fig.
A+ subjects exhibited patterns of cortical thinning (left cingulate cortex: P = 10 -6 ; right insula: P = 10 -6 ) and thickening (left inferior/superior parietal: P = 10 -4 /10 -3 ; right rostral cingulate: P = 10 -3 ), while T+ and preclinical AD subjects showed atrophy of the left isthmus cingulate (P = 10 -4 ) and the right superior temporal sulcus (P = 10 -3 ), respectively.
Patterns of cortical thinning spread over bilateral temporal (left: P = 10 -12 ; right: P = 10 -12 ), parietal (left: P = 10 -8 ; right: P = 10 -7 ), and frontal regions (left: P = 10 -8 ; right: P = 10 -7 ).
The relationship between volume loss of BF compartments and atrophy of hippocampus/amygdala in prodromal AD was comparable in the two cohorts, but it differed in T+ and preclinical AD groups (Supplementary Fig.
Thus, prodromal AD patients of the ADNI dataset showed significant correlations between Ch1-Ch2 and hippocampus (left/right hippocampus: P = 10 -11 /10 -11 ) and between Ch4 and amygdala (left/right amygdala: P = 10 -5 /10 -5 ).
Interestingly, correlations between Ch4 atrophy and cortical thinning in prodromal AD only emerged in the ADNI cohort (left: P = 10 -5 ; right: P = 10 -4 ), supporting previous findings obtained with comparable sample sizes

Discussion
Pioneering research in the 1970s identified a marked loss of BF cholinergic cells and altered ACh synthesis in the nbM of AD patients
The central role of ACh in cognitive function
Despite the growing body of literature supporting this hypothesis, little research has examined whether volume loss of nbM precedes symptom onset
Here we showed, for the first time in humans using in vivo MRI, that volume loss of nbM occurs in asymptomatic subjects with tauopathy (T+) but not in individuals with isolated amyloidosis (A+).
In preclinical and prodromal AD (A+T+), our results revealed that BF atrophy extends to the medial septum and vertical limb of the diagonal band Broca (Ch1-Ch2).
Cerebral regions receiving BF cholinergic projections showed well-defined patterns of structural deficits with AD CSF biomarkers, but only T+ and A+T+ (both preclinical and prodromal AD) individuals exhibited significant associations between volume loss of BF cholinergic compartments and atrophy of cholinergically innervated limbic regions.
These results were partially confirmed using the ADNI cohort.
Overall, these findings suggest that tauopathy is required for the initiation of structural deficits and cholinergic denervation of the nbM in AR-AD subjects, and the extent of this damage to larger BF territories and other innervated structures seems to be dependent on the presence of both AD proteinopathies in later stages of the AD continuum.
Long-standing evidence shows that amyloid deposition is a key event in AD pathogenesis
Research supporting the link between cholinergic deficits and Aβ deposits mainly comes from animal models (e.g.,
In one of these studies, cortical amyloidosis paralleled decreased cholinergic fiber density in neocortex rather than reduced number of magnocellular neurons in the nbM
However, we have failed to confirm any meaningful correlation between volume loss of Ch4 and atrophy of its innervated cerebral regions in A+ individuals.
Several explanations may account for the lack of BF vulnerability to abnormal CSF levels of Aβ 1-42 in the present study.
One possibility is that higher aggregation
It may also happen that isolated amyloidosis does not generate an imbalance in the nerve growth factor (NGF) metabolic pathway sufficient to initiate an impairment in the BFCS
The latter hypothesis finds experimental support in human postmortem MCI/AD studies showing that NGF signaling is resilient to brain amyloidosis but is altered with tau pathology
Despite the fact that BF cholinergic deficits are closely related to the tauopathy
By using quantitative MRI techniques, we have shown atrophy of the nbM in asymptomatic T+ that may be due to the presence of tau oligomers associated with pretangle pathology within cholinergic nbM neurons
Previous studies have shown that cytoskeletal alterations are already present in the nbM from preclinical Braak I-II stages
At this early stage of tauopathy, cholinergic axons of affected nbN neurons may become dystrophic affecting the structural integrity of their innervated regions
This assumption is indirectly supported by findings of the present study.
Thus, our T+ participants showed bilateral volume loss of nbM, amygdala, and neocortex in tandem with significant positive correlation between atrophy of nbM and amygdala.
It is worth mentioning that both the Ch1-Ch2 compartments and the hippocampus were structurally preserved in the T+ group, presumably reflecting the integrity of this cholinergic circuitry during early tau pathology.
However, MCI patients presented significant structural deficits in medial septum and vertical limb of the diagonal band Broca (i.e., Ch1-Ch2) together with hippocampal atrophy (see Figs
Accordingly, our results provide novel human in vivo evidence suggesting that structural deficits of BF cholinergic compartments arise before cognitive symptoms become evident.
This damage affects the nbM in asymptomatic T+ subjects, while the extent of this damage depends on the synergistic toxic interaction between amyloid and tau pathology in preclinical and prodromal AD.
While WM pathology has been profusely described in AD patients
Here, we have shown that T+, preclinical, and prodromal AD subjects presented patterns of WM volume loss that were unrelated to atrophy of BF cholinergic compartments.
Different lines of evidence support these findings.
Firstly, postmortem studies have revealed that nondemented subjects with histopathological AD lesions have WM shrinkage comparable to that observed in AD patients (de la Monte 1989).
Secondly, in vivo MRI experiments have shown that asymptomatic individuals with higher burden of AD pathology have specific patterns of WM atrophy
Therefore, this evidence suggests that WM degeneration precedes the onset of AD symptoms and may contribute to account for heterogeneity of AD.
These results may have implications for the identification of asymptomatic individuals AR-AD who might benefit most of cholinergic therapy.
Previous research has revealed that a reduced number of neurons in the nbM parallels cortical GM atrophy in histopathologically confirmed AD patients
In this context, we found no significant associations between volume loss of Ch4 and cortical thinning in p-tau + individuals, indicating that cortical cholinergic innervation may be still preserved in isolated tauopathy.
Long-established research suggests a role for NGF metabolic dysfunction in AD progression (e.g.,
More precisely, it has been shown that the imbalance between mature and precursor NGF may exacerbate AD-like retrograde degeneration of BF cholinergic neurons
Moreover, pharmacological evidence has strongly supported the link between NGF dysfunctions and structural deficits of the nbM.
Accordingly, early experiments revealed positive correlations in NGF levels between the nbM and regions innervated by this cholinergic compartment
nbM neurons have also shown to be highly dependent on the retrograde transport of NGF for the maintenance of their terminal synapses in the cerebral cortex
Based on this evidence, it seems reasonable to search for therapeutic strategies aimed at restoration of NGF signaling to delay degeneration of the nbM and consequently preserve the cholinergic transmission in AR-AD subjects
While delivering mature NGF directly to the central nervous system seems to be the most straightforward approach, this strategy inevitably requires from invasive techniques and the biological action of NGF may be highly unspecific
Further evidence has shown that targeting the inhibition of mature NGF degradation leads to the formation of new cholinergic boutons, providing an alternative strategy to slowing degeneration of the nbM
Although these results are promising, all the experiments conducted to date have been performed in rats and therefore require validation in humans.
Much translational research needs to be done prior to transfer NGF-related therapeutic approaches to clinical trials.
The current study has limitations that deserve mention.
First, our findings were obtained with a relatively small sample, and the level of AD pathology was only established on the basis of CSF biomarkers.
Although our results were partially confirmed with the ADNI cohort, they should be validated in further studies combining CSF biomarkers with amyloid and tau PET imaging.
Moreover, it is worth noting that our A+ group was younger than T+ and A+T+ individuals, likely lessening the neurotoxic effect of isolated amyloidosis on the BFCS.
Although all statistical analyses performed in the present study were adjusted by age, it may be the case that residual effects of age act synergistically with tauopathy boosting BF damage.
Finally, our results rely on indirect volume MRI measurements of BF nuclei derived from cytoarchitectonic probabilistic maps of BF magnocellular compartments obtained in 10 subjects
Consequently, BF volumetric changes cannot distinguish between glial and neuronal loss or between cell shrinkage and cell death.
Due to the small size of BF cholinergic compartments, findings of the present study may also reflect tissue changes other than cholinergic cell degeneration likely due to inaccurate GM segmentation and/or spatial normalization effects.
However, the high specificity of the BF atrophy pattern, the spatial extent of BF damage with AD pathology, and the relationship between specific BF cholinergic compartments and their innervated regions (i.e., Ch1-Ch2 with hippocampus, and Ch4 with amygdala) strongly argue against this possibility.
Given that BF cholinergic deficits are not unique to AD, long-term follow-up studies combining tailored cholinergic and noncholinergic therapies with in vivo MRI measurements of BF cholinergic compartments are required to determine whether pharmacological interventions are indicated in AR-AD subjects, and whether BF imaging biomarkers are predictive of future cognitive changes in late life.
Finally, we cannot rule out potential effects of lifetime alcohol consumption on cerebral changes reported in the present study (e.g.,
Future experiments should include alcohol consumption as covariate in the statistical model to disentangle its effects on structural changes of the cholinergic circuitry in asymptomatic subjects AR-AD.
In conclusion, our results showed that abnormal CSF levels of phosphorylated tau (T+) parallel bilateral volume loss of the nbM in AR-AD individuals.
The relationship between volume loss of nbM and atrophy of amygdala also emerged in T+ subjects, spreading over larger cholinergic territories in later stages of the AD continuum (A+T+).
These results argue for a significant role of tauopathy in initiating BF degeneration and cholinergic denervation in asymptomatic subjects AR-AD.
Whether T+ subjects respond best to cholinergic therapy, reducing the risk of, or completely preventing the clinical onset of AD, needs to be clarified in future studies.


, we selected 256 subjects: A-T-(n = 78), A+ (n = 45), T+ (n = 10), preclinical AD (A+T+, n = 14), and prodromal AD (A+T+, n = 109).



Figure 1 .
Figure 1.
Group differences in GM volume of BF cholinergic compartments.
Results were corrected for multiple comparisons (FWE, P < 0.05).
L, left; R, right.
Note that AD pathology, as revealed by abnormal CSF levels of Aβ 1-42 and p-tau, determines the extent of BF atrophy.



Figure 3 .
Figure 3. Group differences in cortical thickness.
Results were corrected for multiple comparisons using a previously validated hierarchical statistical model (Bernal-Rusiel et al. 2010).
L, left; R, right.
Note that A+ participants exhibited opposite patterns of cortical thickness (top panel, left and right), whereas T+ and A+T+ (preclinical and prodromal AD) individuals showed thinning patterns spreading over different cortical territories (bottom panel).



Figure 4 .
Figure 4. Patterns of WM atrophy in asymptomatic subjects AR-AD.Note that T+, preclinical, and prodromal AD subjects showed different regional patterns of WM deficits.
The location of WM atrophy was obtained with the JHU WM tractography atlas
A, anterior; P, posterior; L, left; R, right.



Figure 5 .
Figure 5. Significant correlations between GM volume loss of different BF cholinergic compartments and atrophy of their innervated regions in T+ (A), preclinical AD (B), and prodromal AD (C, D).
Results were corrected for multiple comparisons (FWE, P < 0.05).
L, left; R, right.
Note that tauopathy (T+) is a requirement for the emergence of the structural coupling between Ch4 and amygdala (A), the spatial extent of this coupling being larger in preclinical/prodromal AD than in T+ (B, C).
The structural coupling between Ch1-Ch2 and hippocampus only occurred in prodromal AD (D).



Table 1
Demographic, cognitive, and CSF data of the study population : Results are expressed as mean ± standard deviation.
m/f, male/female; SNAPs, suspected non-Alzheimer's disease pathophysiology; MMSE, Mini-Mental State Examination; VOSP, Visual Object and Space Perception Battery.
Asterisks indicate post hoc comparisons with respect to controls * P < 0.05; * * P < 10 -3 ; * * * P < 10 -6 .



Table 2
Extent of atrophy of BF cholinergic compartments, amygdala, and hippocampus in T+, preclinical AD (A+T+), and prodromal AD (A+T+) compared with controls (A-T-)



Table 3
Extent of cortical thickness changes in asymptomatic subjects AR-AD (either A+ or T+), preclinical AD (A+T+), and prodromal AD (A+T+) compared with controls (A-T-)



Table 4
Group differences in cerebral WM volume