Peripheral Biomarkers for Early Detection of Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s Diseases
Neurological disorders are found to be influencing the peripheral tissues outside CNS.
Recent developments in biomarkers for CNS have emerged with various diagnostics and therapeutics shortcomings.
The role of central biomarkers including CSF based and molecular imaging based probes are still unclear for early diagnosis of major neurological diseases.
Current trends show that early detection of neurodegenerative diseases with non-invasive methods is a major focus of researchers and the development of biomarkers aiming peripheral tissues is in demand.
Alzheimer's and Parkinson's diseases are known for the progressive loss in neural structures or functions, including the neural death.
Various dysfunctions of metabolic and biochemical pathways are associated with early occurrence of neuro-disorders in peripheral tissues including skin, blood cells and eyes.
This article reviews the peripheral biomarkers explored for early detection of Alzheimer's and Parkinson's disease including blood cells, skin fibroblast, proteomics, saliva, olfactory, stomach and colon, heart and peripheral nervous system and others.

INTRODUCTION
Despite various advancements in neurology in last few decades, there are many mysteries in understanding the pathophysiology of several neurological diseases especially with the approach and possibilities of diagnosing and treating these abnormalities.
Identifying novel biomarker for diagnosis, prognosis and treatment is very important for neurodegenerative diseases (NDs).
There are various key hurdles for identifying proximal biomarkers in neurological disorders including limited tissue availability from pathological site, requirement of lumbar puncture and CSF exploration, difficult to know biomarkers sources in CNS disorders, low quality clinical diagnosis, the complexity of brain tissue and functions, and absence of validation models.
Peripheral biomarkers play an important role in solving these limitations and providing non-invasive alternate solutions for disease diagnosis.
The exploration of biomarker models for early diagnosis is indeed an important goal for a better management of the neurological diseases.
An ideal early diagnosis biomarker is supposed to be sensitive and specific to the initial neurological changes that occurs, and should be able to differentiate among the diseased condition and normal aging conditions.
Peripheral tissues are found to be indicators of cognitive and biological changes of brain and are supposed to differentiate the changes occurring during diseased conditions with normal conditions.
This review article discuss about various peripheral biomarkers being discovered by researchers for early detection of Alzheimer's disease (AD) and Parkinson's disease (PD).

ALZHEIMER'S DISEASE (AD)
AD is considered as the most common cause of dementia and its medication costs around $ 172 billion per year in US alone.
24 million peoples are supposed to be suffering from this disease presently and the predication of it being 4 times is till year 2050
There are three forms of AD.
Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI) is an early phase of AD and 40% to 60% is progressing towards AD.
When AD occurs in young people of 30 years old and below, it is called as early onset or familial AD.
It is associated with genes like amyloid β protein precursor (AβPP), presenilin-1 (PS1) and presenilin-2(PS2).
Most common form is the last onset AD and mostly affects elderly people of 65 years old and above
It is counted as incurable and fatal NDs.
The clinical symptoms include progressively losing of memory, declining of learning and executive function.
Histopathologically, AD is diagnosed by death of neurons in the hippocampus, cerebral cortex, and other areas of the brain, finding deposit of amyloid β (Aβ) plaques in extracellular and neurofibrillary tau tangles (NFT) in intracellular regions
Fig.

Blood cells as biomarkers
There are many reports finding abnormalities or early changes of red blood cells (RBCs), white blood cells (WBCs) and platelets in AD.
Protein Kinase C (PKC) plays important role in synapse formation and involve in the function of memory.
Decreased PKC levels, its activity and cellular localization have been found in the studies of AD patient brains
PKC signalling pathways disrupts in AD patients and also in animal models
In RBCs, alteration of PKC conformations is observed in both AD patients and healthy controls.
Janoshazi et al developed a method in 2006 which used fluorescence probe and spectrum to measure conformational changes of PKC.
These conformational changes were not found in RBCs of PD patients who have no dementia
In AD and MCI group, GSK-3 activity was decreased but total GSK-3 protein was increased
In mitochondria of primary neurons, in transgenic mice which were expressing familial ADlinked forms of human APP, blocking GSK-3 activity by tau ablation can inhibit Aβ-induced transport deficits in anterograde axonal transport
Soluble amyloid precursor protein alpha (sAPPalpha) also inhibits GSK-3 activity by blocking beta-site APP-converting enzyme 1 (BACE1).
It can cause reduction of tau and Aβ
Investigation of GSK 3 activities might be a useful peripheral biomarker to diagnose early phase of AD.
Abnormalities on AD platelets is shown in Fig.
Tang et al studied blood platelet levels targeting 22-kDa fragment in 10 age matched healthy patients and 31 AD patients.
In this study, both Aβ level and activation of BACE 1 were increased but decreased APP ratios and decreased activation of ADAM10 were also observed
Baskin group did the similar research and found decreased APP ratio in AD patients who were normal in PD and haemorrhagic stroke (HS) patients
APP isoform ratio of 120KDa to 110KDa was significantly lower in carriers who have mutation for autosomal dominant AD compared to non-carriers.
In the Caudate Nucleus and Precuneus, APP is inversely correlated with amyloid imaging
Lower ratio of APP provides a potential peripheral biomarker for AD's diagnosis but further explorations are needed.
Table

MicroRNAs in the Plasma
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are attractive molecules and considered as one of the candidates for blood-based biomarkers in neurodegenerative diseases such as AD.
MiRNAs are ~22 nt small noncoding RNAs that bind to the 3′ untranslated region of their target mRNAs to direct posttranscriptional repression of the target genes by forming the RNA-induced silencing complex, which leads to mRNA destabilization or translational inhibition
Some miRNAs are encapsulated in microvesicles, such as exosomes, and present as a relatively stable form in bio-fluid, including serum or plasma
Down-regulation of exosome miR-193b and upregulation of both exosome miR-135a and miR-384 were observed in the serum of AD patients compared with normal patients.
Among three miRNAs, miR-384 was the best candidate biomarker
A significant upregulation of miR-455-3p expression in the serum, in the brains of AD patients, in the cerebral cortex of amyloid precursor protein transgenic mice, in the human and mouse neuroblastoma cells treated with the amyloid-β (1-42) peptide, revealed biomarker characteristics
MiR-501-3p levels were downregulated in the serum of AD patients but remarkably upregulated in the brains of same donors and overexpression in the cultured cells (a human neuroblastoma cell line of SH-SY5Y cells).Serum-miR-501-3p is indicator that reflects pathological events occurring in AD brains
Both miR-125b and miR-181c were down-regulated in the serum of AD patients compared with that of normal controls
MiR-125b is also decreased in the serum of AD patients as compared with Non Inflammatory Normal Disease Controls (NINDCs) (accuracy of 82%)
Six candidate
miRNAs (miR-9, miR-29a, miR-29b, miR-34a, miR-125b, and miR-146a) in plasma of AD patients and normal subjects were measured .Two plasma miR-34a and miR-146a levels in AD patients were significantly lower than in control subjects
These miRNAs maybe useful for biomarker for AD diagnosis.
Other studies showed that both, an increase and no change can occur in plasma Aβ 42 level in normal aging human without dementia
Decreased Aβ 42 level in CSF is related with the AD and disease progression but variation in human plasma Aβ is inconsistent
Ray and group did a study to find significant inflammatory biomarkers in AD patients and non-demented control subjects which found 18 significant inflammatory biomarkers with nearly 90% accuracy in examining 120 cell signalling plasma protein.
It can also differentiate between AD patients and non-demented control subjects.
The baseline amounts of these proteins can also be distinguished MCI patients and other different dementia pathologies by 81% accuracy.
There could be modified links which cause significant changing of cell signalling proteins.
These links should be explored more in future
Two research groups had shown a diagnostic accuracy of 60-70%
Liao's group, using 2-DE, found that spot densities of six plasma proteins in AD group and non-demented group were different.
Plasma level of alpha-1-antitrypsin and apolipoprotein J were tested again because of their involvement in amyloid plaque formation.
Although plasma α1 antitrypsin was more elevated in AD group (77% sensitivity and 88% specificity) than non-demented group, no difference in total apolipoprotein J concentration was found
Plasma proteomics analyses identified oxidized form of alpha-1-antitrypsin in AD patients
In a study, inflammatory biomarkers, plasma IL-6 was increased and, plasma tumour necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL) was decreased in AD group (n=40) compared with normal control group (n=40).
These two biomarkers were significantly correlated with cerebrospinal fluid levels
Table

Eyes as peripheral biomarkers

Lens
In the lens of rats and monkeys, Frederikse and colleagues found Alzheimer's precursor protein (beta APP) and A-beta
In 2002, they also found that Aβ deposition, defect in fibre cell membrane which is as similar as found in human cataract in mouse models of Down syndrome carrying human AbetaPP (hAbetaPP) gene
More lens cataract with enhanced Aβ immune-reactivity is detected in transgenic mice with AD beta-amyloid rather than wild type mice
Goldstein and colleagues in 2003 first discovered Aβ1-40 and Aβ1-42 in lenses of both AD patients and control patients
The concentration of Aβ in lens can compare with amount of concentration found in the brain.
Also concentration of Aβ1-40 in primary aqueous humour is comparable with CSF.
In AD patients, increased deposits of electron-dense Aβ immunoreactive aggregates within lens fibre-cell cytoplasm at supranuclear sub region of lens and supranuclear cataracts were found but not in the control subjects
Juliet Moncaster and co-workers analysed lenses obtained patients from Down syndrome (DS), AD and normal controls.
Same result such as Aβ aggregates within fibre cell cytoplasmic and opacification with increased Aβ deposition at supranuclear region were reported.
These findings are identical to the lens pathology in AD
In AD and DS, accumulation of Aβ shows linking between lens and brain pathology
These findings revealed Aβ accumulation as a key pathogenic determinant linking lens and brain pathology in both DS and AD
In 2013, Kerbage et al did the study to detect Aβ deposit in the lens.
They used specific fluorescent signature of ligand which bound Aβ in the supranucleus region of lens.
And then it was detected by a laser scanning device.
Fig.
They found two important results.
In both AD and control groups, the highest measurement of ligand bound fluorescence signal was obtained from deeper regions of the supranucleus (SN).
A two fold differentiation factor between control groups and AD patients was also noted
Surprisingly three reports showed opposite result.
Michael and colleagues reported that no beta-amyloid in lenses was found in cortical cataracts of both control and donors with AD
Ho et al. reported that β-amyloid, phospho-tau and α-synuclein are present in different forms at lower levels or do not deposit in the eye
Although participants with AD biomarkers positive (positron emission tomography-Pittsburgh compound B (PET-PiB) and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) levels of Aβ42) have cataracts and cortical light scattering more advanced than biomarkers negative participants, no one showed significant statistical data progressing to AD

Retinal Nerve Fiber Layer (RNFL)
Bearish et al. studied peripapillary RNFL in nine AD patients and eight age-matched control subjects by using optical coherence tomography (OCT).
They found reduced retinal blood flow with narrow veins and, significant thinning of RNFL in the superior quadrant.
But RNFL thickness in inferior, temporal, or nasal parts showed no significant differences
Three researches
Fig.
Gao et al and group revealed that RNFL thinning in the superior quadrant as well as RNFL thickness at 12:00 position in the superior quadrant
There is no relationship between RNFL thickness and mini mental state examination score but decreased thickness of RNFL in all quadrants is found in AD group compared with the control group.
These findings suggest that analysis for RNFL thickness may be useful in diagnosis of early stage of AD

Retinal vessels
For retinal vascular abnormalities in AD, a study reported that thinning of blood column diameter with decreased blood flow in major superior temporal venule.
Laser Doppler device was used to measure these parameters
Studying of the retina from AD transgenic mice revealed neuro-inflammation, elevated microvascular Aβ deposition, Aβ plaques and hyperphosphorylated tau.
Immunotherapy for Aβ showed retina plaques are clear but it makes worse in retinal amyloid angiopathy.
So investigations such as non-invasive retinal imaging are good technique to know early diagnosis and severity of AD
Thirteen significant retinal vascular parameters were found in AD (n=25) and healthy controls (n=123).
The method was that 19 vascular calibres were calculated by retinal photography in largest six arterioles and six venules [see more
Retinal photography together with vascular analysis could be a potential biomarker to detect early AD.

RGCs (Retinal Ganglion Cells)
Blanks et al in 1989 showed degeneration of RGCs in AD patients.
The degeneration is unique due to finding of frothy and vacuolated appearance in the cytoplasm of RGCs but no neurofibrillary tangles were found.
In all examined AD patients, amyloid angiopathy is found but none of neuritic plaques is found in optics nerves or retinas
In 1996, they found decrease of 25% in total neurons in the ganglion cell layer of the central retina of AD patients (n=9) compared with age-matched control subjects (n=11)
Retinal ganglion cell loss is also found in the retinas of the AD patients

Calcium
Altered Ca2+ homeostasis is found in brain of the AD patients and in the peripheral tissue.
The first report by Peterson et al in 1985 demonstrated that decreased Ca2+ uptake is found in human skin fibroblasts of AD patients compared to age matched controls
In cultured skin fibroblasts from aging and AD patients, 70% and 81% decline of cytosolic free calcium had been reported when compared with fibroblasts from age-matched controls and young adult donors
In the fibroblast cells of aging patients and AD donors, various drugs treatment (serum, 3, 4-Diaminopyridine, N-formyl-methionyl-leucyl-phenylalanine and bradykinin) can transiently elevate cytosolic free calcium but it is slower and lesser in young patients.
Alteration of both dynamic and resting calcium homeostasis has been found in cultured skin fibroblasts from aging patients and AD donor
There was more alteration of calcium homeostasis and mitochondrial functions in AD than normal aging
In mitochondria of skin fibroblasts from histologically confirmed AD patients, calcium uptake is less than in mitochondria of fibroblasts from age matched controls.
In mitochondria of AD patient, more calcium uptake than controls was seen after exposing with free radial.
Treating with U-74500A, the antioxidant drug or deferoxamine, iron chelator, prevents free radial, inducing increased calcium uptake of control mitochondria and it only protects partially in Alzheimer's mitochondria.
It showed that in the mitochondria of Alzheimer's fibroblast cells, calcium transport processes is impaired and sensitivity for oxygenic free radicals is increased
But one research group in 1992 reported that ionic calcium levels in cytoplasm of Alzheimer's fibroblast cell have no pathological or diagnostic value
Because of this result, several research groups focuses on different methods for Ca2+ to be used as a peripheral biomarker.
Etcheberrigaray et al in 1994 reported that K+ channel blocker TEA can increase intracellular Ca2+ in normal skin fibroblasts but response to TEA stimulation is low in cells of few familial AD cases and sporadic AD cases
Low dose Bradykinin can induce intracellular Ca2+ release by IP3 generation, activating phospholipase C and evokes enhanced Ca2+ signalling in AD fibroblasts
Because of these findings, response of Ca2+ in skin fibroblasts after stimulation with TEA or bradykinin was measured by using standard Ca2+ fluorescence imaging techniques.
The biochemical response was reported as the ratio of percent response after TEA stimulation and bradykinin stimulation
Targeting Ca+ homeostasis and Ca+ signalling in the skin fibroblast could be a potential peripheral biomarker for AD.
Table
PKCε, protein kinase c epsilon; s-APPα, soluble amyloid precursor protein.

PARKINSON'S DISEASE (PD)
PD is a chronic progressive and second most common ND.
It is a chronic and progressive movement disorder and mostly occurs in elderly people of 60 years and above.
It is characterized by a significant reduction of dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra together with physical signs (rigidity of muscle on passive movement, instability in posture, resting tremor and akinesia).
Currently there are no definitive diagnosis criteria or biomarkers
Clinical signs and symptoms, and post mortem examination are the criteria to diagnose PD.
Specific, sensitive and economical central or peripheral biomarkers are needed to diagnose early stage of disease, severity, differential diagnosis, prognosis and treatment of PD.
In the following sections.
peripheral biomarkers explored for early diagnosis of PD are discussed.
Fig.

α-synuclein in blood
Histologically, PD is characterized by the presence of inclusions known as lewy bodies, which is a composition of α-synuclein, in the intracytoplasmic, degeneration and reduction of dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra of brain.
It is also found in other parts of the brain such as thalamus, hippocampus, neocortex, and cerebellum
It is an unfolded protein, soluble and polymerization of α-synuclein becomes fibrils.
Accumulation of fibrils found inclusions known as glial cytoplasmic inclusions, Lewy neuritis and bodies.
It is a highly acidic, heat stable amino acid compound (140 amino acid; 14 kDa)
Its filaments are found in many NDs.
The role of α-synuclein in blood and peripheral tissue in PD is discussed.
Initially α-synuclein was considered as intracellular protein but identification in both CSF and plasma is the evidence that it is secreted from cells.
An effort for α-synuclein in CSF as a diagnostic biomarker have been underway and found that total α-synuclein in CSF is lower in PD patients than healthy control subjects
Fig.
α-synuclein protein (alphaS) aggregates from a monomer to assemblies such as oligomers, protofibrils, and mature fibrils.
While the alphaS concentration in CSF is significantly decreased in patients with PD, alphaS oligomer concentration was elevated in CSF and in the blood of PD patients.
It showed that alphaS in the CSF and in the blood could be a peripheral biomarker for PD
Three research groups tried to measure total α-synuclein
Total α-synuclein was measured by Tinsley and colleagues.
They developed a new ELISA specifically for quantifying α-synuclein in human plasma using a novel α-synuclein-specific antibody that has very high sensitivity and signal.
Although the study was done on small cohort of patients and control subjects, it is promising and has potential as peripheral biomarker
Alpha synuclein can be phosphorylated at serine129 (P-S129) by kinase(s).
The presence of highly phosphorylated αsynuclein in Lewy bodies suggests that it has an important pathological role.
In healthy brain, only 4% phosphorylated alpha-synuclein is found while approximately 90% has been observed in the brains of PD patients.
Phosphorylated alphasynuclein is toxic to dopaminergic cells.
Significant elevation of P-S129 αsynuclein leads to accumulation and increased cell death
One research group developed a novel ELISA method that detects only oligomeric αsynuclein soluble aggregates.
They found significantly elevated plasma levels of α-synuclein oligomeric forms (P=0.002) which were obtained from 34 PD patients compared to 27 control subjects (specificity of 0.852 and sensitivity of 0.529)
The mean plasma level of phospho-α-synuclein was higher than the controls (P=0.053).
It is not different for oligo-αsynuclein, total α-synuclein, or oligo-phospho-α-synuclein from 38 PD patients and 30 healthy control participants
Studying for various forms of α-synuclein is still underway, although the results are promising and have potential to be the peripheral biomarkers.

α-synuclein in peripheral tissue

Skin samples
Michell et al. in 2005 reported that a low rate of α-synuclein (19 %) was detected in skin biopsy samples of 16 PD patients and concluded that diagnosis of PD and its severity is not related with α-synuclein level.
The results showed that skin α -synuclein would not be an appropriate diagnostic biomarker for PD
But phosphorylated α-synuclein was found in the cervical skin site of all patients with Idiopathic PD (IPD) but not in the controls.
This result significantly distinguishes IPD from other forms of Parkinsonism.
It may be useful as a biomarker especially for differential diagnosis

Saliva and Salivary gland
Commented [SM6]: R1 Comment 6
A research group tried to find biomarker for PD in saliva.
The result showed significantly low α-synuclein level and a specific protein in the saliva of PD patients.
The measurement of αsynuclein in the saliva have more advantage than other biological fluids such as plasma and blood because it can be obtained easily and with less contamination than blood
Studying tissue sections of submandibular glands from patients with PD (n=9), Lewy body disease (n=3), multiple system atrophy (n=2) and control subjects (n=19) using α-synuclein immunohistochemistry revealed that lewy body pathology in all PD patients but not in patients with multiple system atrophy and controls
In another study, they used same salivary gland with different method.
From submandibular gland of living patients, needle core biopsies are obtained and found Lewy type αsynucleinopathy in 75% of cases
α-nuclein was detected in the labial salivary glands of both in PD cases (60%) and in control cases (30%)
Saliva and salivary gland is not alone to be a diagnosis biomarker but in combination with other tests can be a potential biomarker.

Olfactory
In neurological disorders including PD, a common feature is the olfactory dysfunction.
Biopsies taken from distal sigmoid colon by flexible sigmoidoscopy from patients with early stage of PD (n=7), control subjects (n=23) and subjects with inflammatory bowel disease (n=23).
All PD patients (100%) showed α-synuclein staining in nerve fibres in colonic submucosa but not in the control samples as shown in Fig.
α-synuclein inclusions were also detected in the gastric mucosa
In vivo evidence of α-synuclein in peripheral tissue with underlying PD may be useful and it can be a safe tool providing development of peripheral biomarkers.

Heart and peripheral nervous system
Both sympathetic nerve and heart tissue from 11 PD patients and 7 incidental lewy body disease patients (iLBD) were examined.
Results showed that Lewy Bodies and α-synuclein were found in the neurites in PD patients ( 9 out of 11 ) and 7 iLBD patients (100%)
Phosphorylated α-synuclein aggregates were found in the cardiac sympathetic nervous system in 90% of iLBD cases and 60% of PD cases but no phosphorylated α-synuclein is found in control subjects
α-synuclein positive neurites were also found in epicardium in PD cases (n=14) and iLBD cases (n=11), but not in normal controls (n=4)
Biopsies from gastric myenteric and submucosal plexuses were taken from 5 autopsy cases.
The brains of the autopsy cases also staged for Parkinson-associated synucleinopath and immunocytochemistry was done.
In neurons of the submucosal Meissner plexus, α-synuclein immunoreactive inclusions were observed
Biopsies from pharyngeal sensory nerves from autopsy bodies of PD (n=10) and controls (n=4) was taken by Mu et al. to detect Lewy pathology and immunohistochemistry for phosphorylated α-synuclein was done.
Axonal α-synuclein aggregates were found 100% in PD cases but no α-synuclein aggregates were found in control cases
Table
In 2010, Hong's group did a research in PD patients (n=117), AD patients (n=50) and healthy controls (n=50) by using highly sensitive Luminex technology.
They found that contamination of blood in CSF also influenced the level of DJ-1.
When several major confounders were controlled to control blood contamination, the result showed that DJ-1 is decreased in PD vs controls or AD.
There was no correlation between severity of PD and

Table 5: α-synuclein in peripheral tissue

Type of tissue
In the same year, one research group reported the similar result.
There was no correlation between severity of PD and levels of DJ-1.
DJ-1 level was decreased (more than 95% in RBCs, 1 to 4% in platelets and 1% or less than 1% in WBCs and plasma).
It showed that platelet contamination and haemolysis could be significant factors effecting DJ-1 level in serum or plasma and blood.
The results showed that DJ-1 in blood is not specific biomarker to diagnose, to know progression and severity of PD
After this setback, researchers are trying to focus on the total DJ-1 and its isoforms.
In a study of a group of 119 people including control subjects, AD patients and patients with different PD stages revealed 7 DJ-1 isoforms, 4 major post-translationally modified (PTMs), no significance of level of total DJ-1 in blood samples of control subjects and PD patients.
Four major PTMs are methionine oxidation, cysteine oxidation, phosphorylation, and

Epidermal Growth Factor (EGF)
In most of the PD patients, cognitive impairment is developed together with PD.

Apolipoprotein A-I (ApoA-I)
The role of biomarkers may improve diagnosis for NDs but none of the biomarker is a definitive biomarker to diagnose early stage of PD.
Many studies have shown that decreased levels of ApoA-I in CSF and serum in PD patients compared to healthy controls [130-133].
To identify proteins which were associated with PD, 96 proteins were measured by multiplex immunoassay in a group of 152 PD patients.
Second study was to identify top candidate biomarkers and its plasma levels in 187 PD patients by ELISA method.
Third study is to confirm the association between top biomarker and PD in the group of 134 people who are at risk but asymptomatic.
To evaluate the association of dopaminergic system integrity and plasma protein levels, they used Dopamine transporter (DAT) imaging and the best candidate protein biomarker is Apolipoprotein A1.
Early onset of PD is correlated with low levels of ApoA1
DAT deficit in putamen is also related with lower plasma levels of ApoA1
[130].
Fig.
A higher ApoA1 level has relative protection against risk of PD and drug such as statin can modify Apo-A1 level.
Continuous use of statin is associated with decreased PD risk [134] while stopping using of statin is associated with PD [135].

MicroRNAs (miRNAs)
Commented

Eyes as potential biomarker
As unmyelinated axons from retina are directly synapsing into the central nervous system, retina is considered as a prominent environment to study the neurological diseases.
Pathologic changes are identified in the RNFL of the eye and associated with neurological conditions.
Because of it, eyes are the unique environment to find a surrogate biomarker for early stages of neurodegeneration.
OCT

DISCUSSION
During the early researches, it was believed that neurological diseases are associated with brain only, but further, through the discovery of various biomarkers, it is proved to be also affecting the peripheral tissues.
For AD, Amyloid beta, the main pathological hallmark, is found in the brain as well as peripheral tissues.
Decreased PKC level, alteration of PKC conformation in RBCs
Finding plasma Aβ in cross-sectional studies of human and mouse showed no significance but longitudinal studies were more promising
Other studies showed both increasing and decreasing of Aβ in AD patients
Moreover, changes in human plasma Aβ is inconsistent, especially in sporadic AD
Complement factor H (CFH) precursor and alpha-2-macroglobulin (alpha-2M) elevation are specific for AD and correlated with disease severity.
But alternative assays would be necessary to improve sensitivity and specificity
Alpha-1-antitrypsin and apolipoprotein J were involved in AD amyloid plaque formation.
By validation with either ELISA or Western blot, plasma concentration of Alpha-1-antitrypsin showed difference between AD patients and controls but no difference for apolipoprotein J
Other plasma proteins were also investigated as potential biomarkers [see more in 151] but targeting plasma proteins as peripheral biomarkers are not promising at the current moment.
Aβ deposition is found in supranuclear region of the lens together with Aβ aggregates in cytoplasm of the lens fibre cell
But other researchers reported that no Aβ and only lower levels in different forms are present in the lens of AD patients and in controls with cortical cataract
So different groups reported different results and more research are needed to use lens as a peripheral biomarker.
Narrow retinal veins, thinning of the major superior temporal venule blood column diameter and thinning of RNFL at superior quadrant are found in AD patients
for RNFL, retina artioles and veins are promising and further investigations are needed.
Degeneration of RGCs
Decreased numbers of neurons in the ganglion cell layer (GCL) of central retina (fovea/foveola/parafoveal retina) in the eyes of AD patients were also observed
Targeting RGCs combined with imaging techniques could be a potential peripheral biomarker for AD in future
Erk1/2 phosphorylation in skin fibroblasts has higher sensitivity and specifity for AD than clinical diagnosis
Dymanic and resting calcium homeostasis is altered in skin fibroblasts of aged and AD donors
Alzheimer's fibroblast mitochondria is found to be impairing calcium transport process and increasing the sensitivity to oxygenic free radicals
Targeting Ca+ homeostasis and Ca+ signalling in the skin fibroblast showed promising results but still need more tests to be used as a peripheral biomarker.
Total GSK-3 levels demonstrate an increase in GSK-3 protein but the GSK-3β ser 9 epitope does not show a compensatory increase.
Adapted with permission from Ref.
O2 -superoxide anion; ONOO -peroxynitrite; Na+/K + -ATPase, sodium potassium ATPase pump; Ca2+, calcium.
Adapted with permission from Ref.
Adapted with permission from Ref.
Adapted with permission from Ref.
Click here to download Figure Figure


Commented [SM2]: R1 Comment 2a, b, c Deleted 2 Paragraphs before this para.



(
Dominant Alzheimer's disease; AβPP, amyloid β protein precursor; GSK-3, glycogen synthase kinase 3; HS, haemorrhagic stroke.



3 . 3 Other biomarkers from blood 3 . 3 . 1 DJ 1 DJ- 1
; IHC, Immuno Histo Chemistry; iLBD, incidental Lewy Body Disease; PD, Parkinson's disease; MSA, Multiple System Atrophy mutations are associated with PD, both familial and sporadic types.
DJ-1 ELISA kit was used to detect DJ-1 in serum of both PD patients and control subjects.
Two research groups in 2003 and 2008 reported that secreted DJ-1 level is not only different in two groups but also there is no association with age and severity of PD.
Moreover, there is no correlation with level of oxidative stress [114,115].


From a group of 70 PD patients, baseline levels of different proteins (n=102) in the plasma determined by using a bead-based immunoassay.
Cognitive status at baseline and cognitive status at annual follow-up were determined by Mattis Dementia Rating Scale-2 (DRS).
Among 11 proteins identified, EGF was the best candidate.
If baseline cognitive test scores are poor, it is associated with low levels of EGF.
For people with intact baseline cognition, cognitive decline to DRS is 8-fold greater risk at follow up.
Separate study of 113 PD patients was also done using another technical platform to know relation between levels of the top biomarker and cognitive performance.
They found that a weaker result than previous 70 PD patients study group but there was significant correlation between cognitive performance and EGF plasma level [128] .
Same study to assess cognitive functions and EGF in serum was done in a group of 65 drug naive PD patients.
At the baseline and 2-year follow-up study showed that cognitive functions of the frontal and temporal portion of PD patients are correlated with serum EGF levels and, performance on posterior and frontal cognitive function.
Although EGF is a candidate biomarker for early cognitive impairment in PD, further studies are needed to be a diagnosis marker for early stage of PD [129].


[SM7]: R1 Comment 4b (for PD) MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are non-protein coding transcripts that post transcriptionally regulate gene expression during development.
RNAs encapsulated in exosome-like microvesicles in serum were extracted analysed by quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR).
Results showed that downregulation of miR-19b and upregulation of miR-195 and miR-24 in PD patients when compared with normal patients [136].
Sixteen serum miRNAs was measured in PD patients and control subjects.
Four miRNAs (miR-29c, miR-146a, miR-214, and miR-221) were significantly down regulated in PD patients and miR-221 is the most promising biomarker [137].
Other study showed four serum miRNAs (miR-141, miR-214, miR-146b-5p, and miR-193a-3p) were significantly decreased [138].
Analysis of peripheral blood from PD patients and control subjects identified six differentially expressed miRNAs.
MiR-1, miR-22 and miR-29 expression levels allowed distinguishing non-treated PD from healthy subjects while miR-16-2, miR-26a2 and miR30a differentiated treated PD patients from untreated patients [139].
Studying of plasma by another research group identified seven over-expressed miRNAs (miR-181c, miR-331-5p, miR-193a-3p, miR-196b, miR-454, miR-125a-3p, and miR-137) [140].
These microRNAs may represent novel biomarkers for the early detection and diagnosis of PD.



A
, NC, Normal Control; PD, Parkinson's disease.



Fig. 1 :
Fig. 1: Early symptoms and peripheral biomarkers for early detection of AD.



Fig. 2 :
Fig. 2: GSK-3 immunoreactivity in white cells actin levels in three examples white cell lysates from an elderly control, a person with MCI and a person with AD are equivalent.



Fig. 3 :
Fig.3: Abnormalities on AD platelets.
Some membrane (secretases, phospholipases), cytosolic (monoamine oxidase, ciclooxigenases) and mithocondrial activities (nitric oxide synthase, sodium potassium ATPase pump) are compromised in AD platelets.
Alterations are evident in the APP processing itself, membrane fluidity and cholesterol levels; in serotonin levels/uptake and intracellular Ca 2+ levels; in nitric oxide and peroxynitrite production.Abbreviations: PLCδ, phospholipase C δ; β, β-secretase; α, α-secretase; γ-secretase complex; APP forms, amyloid precursor protein forms; CaM, calmodulin; chl, cholesterol; MAO-B, monoamino-oxidase B; PLA2, phosholipase A2; COX-1, ciclooxigenase-1, COX-2, ciclooxigenase-2; 5HT, 5-hydroxytryptamine; NOS, nitric oxide synthase; NO nitric oxide;



Fig. 4 :
Fig. 4: Fluorescence decay rates for bound (red) and unbound (green) Compound #11 to Aβ peptide.
Increase in fluorescence intensity (δI ∼ 2X) and decay rates of bound (τ = 2.4 ns) Compound #11 vs. unbound (τ = 1.4 ns) to Aβ. Fluorescence lifetime image of aggregated Aβ peptide in colour coded representation.
Figure as originally published in Kerbage, C., Sadowsky, C.H., Jennings, D., Cagle, G.D., Hartung, P.D. (2013) Alzheimer's disease diagnosis by detecting exogenous fluorescent signal of ligand bound to Beta amyloid in the



Fig. 5 :
Fig. 5: Spectral domain optical coherence tomography of the retinal nerve fiber layer (RNFL) in a patient with Alzheimer disease.
The RNFL of the superior quadrant is reduced to the 0-5 percentile for age (red), but the nasal, temporal, and inferior quadrants are normal (green).



Fig. 6 :
Fig. 6: Early symptoms and peripheral biomarkers for early detection of PD.



Fig. 7 :
Fig. 7: CSF α-synuclein concentrations in study groups.
(A) Scatter plot for CSF α-synuclein values from patients with early Parkinson's disease and healthy subjects, as measured by two different and independently operated ELISA systems (ELISA 1 and 2).
Concentrations measured by ELISA 1 and 2 correlated positively by Pearson's analysis (0.229; p = 0.01).
(B) Graphs in Whisker box plot format summarize results for the total CSF α-synuclein concentration (pg/ml) shown in A. HC denotes healthy controls; PD, Parkinson's disease.



Fig. 8 :Fig. 11 :
Fig. 8: Photomicrographs of needle core tissue from submandibular gland biopsies of subjects with Parkinson disease.
Sections were stained with an immunohistochemical method for phosphorylated α-synuclein (see Methods).
Only structures immunoreactive for phosphorylated α-synuclein (black) and morphologically consistent with nervous tissue were considered to represent a positive biopsy finding.
Sections were counterstained with Neutral Red.
(A) Typical needle core tissue sample.
(B) Single immunoreactive nerve fiber within a nerve fascicle running in connective tissue stroma adjacent to glandular parenchyma.
(C) Single immunoreactive nerve fiber within a stromal nerve fascicle.
(D) Immunoreactive puncta within the adventitia of a small artery in the stroma.
(E) Several immunoreactive nerve fibers running beneath duct epithelium.
(F) Immunoreactive nerve fibers interweaving



Figure 3
Figure 3



Figure 4
Figure 4



Figure 5
Figure 5



Figure 6
Figure 6



Figure 7
Figure 7



Figure 8
Figure 8



Figure 9
Figure 9



Figure 10 Click
Figure 10



Figure 11 Click
Figure 11



Table 1 :
Blood cells for peripheral biomarkers of AD



Table 2



Table 2 :
MicroRNAs as potential peripheral biomarker of AD



Proteomics approach for biomarker



plasma Aβ 40 and Aβ 42 were elevated in some patients but decline on the late stage of disease. Aβ 40 and Aβ 42 are strongly correlated and increasing with age. Increased level of plasma Aβ 42 is directly related with mortality in AD patients



Table 3 :
Proteomic studies of peripheral biomarkers for the diagnosis of AD


Williams PA et al. found that the dendritic integrity of RGCs was significantly decreased without RGC loss in Tg2576 mice in comparison with age-matched wild-type controls.
RGC dendrites are confined to the inner plexiform layer of the retina, imaging techniques that focus on this layer, rather than the loss of RGCs, may provide a sensitive biomarker for



Table 4 :
Skin fibroblasts for peripheral biomarkers of AD



Biomarker Tissue and Study Group Comment Reference


AD patients and early stage PD patients while it is increased in late stage PD patients.
A validation study for 114 people was done and the result was confirmed.
Because PTMs isoforms are candidate biomarkers only for late stage PD [118], more studies are needed to identify PTMs isoforms to diagnose early stage PD.
Serum urate is found to reduce the risk of PD.
It is derived from purine and has potent antioxidant action.
Church and Ward's group in 1994 reported that in the brain of PD patients, at substantia nigra region, uric acid (54%) and dopamine (85%) levels were significantly reduced [119].
Davis and colleagues did the hypothesis among men.
From 1965 to 1968, they measured serum uric acid level in 7,968 men.
From that group of study, 92 men suffered IPD.
40% reduction in IPD incidence was found in men whose uric acid concentration was above the median at the time of measurement [120].
Two groups found that serum uric acid level is inversely related with PD [121,122] and gout is inversely related with risk of PD [123].
In men, a higher dietary urate index and high plasma urate concentration were correlated with lower risk of PD [124].
But one report revealed that in



Table 6



Table 6 :
MicroRNAs as potential peripheral biomarker for PD


is a non-invasive tool used for measuring tissue at micro meter resolution [141].
The parapapillary RNFL represents axons of the ganglion cells and a thinning of this nerve in PD was first reported by Inzelberg's group in 2004 (Fig. 11) [142].
Later several other research groups found the same result [143-146].
Both eyes from 42 untreated newly diagnosed PD patients, and 40 healthy controls were examined by using spectral-domain OCT.
They found that the mean RNFL thickness is less in PD patients when compared to healthy controls.
Selective thinning of the RNFL was observed in temporal region of both PD patients and controls [147].
Jimenez's group in 2014 did the same research in larger group.
They found that peripapillary RNFL thickness gradually decreased while evolution and severity of PD progress [148,149].
Retinal dopamine loss, foveal dysfunction and visual hallucination (VH) are noted in PD patients [149].


The thickness of the RNFL in PD, as evaluated by OCT, gradually diminishes if the evolution and severity of PD progress[149,148]but one research showed no difference[150].The availability of different studies with same biomarkers shows sometime conflicting results, and the cause of these discrepancies can be related to limitations in standardization of these biomarkers, variation in laboratory conditions, interpretation of experimental data, procedure for acquisition and analysis of samples, varying severities of abnormalities conferring different prognoses, the selection of study group, period of observation or prediction and many other factors[153].
With the advancements in researches of peripheral biomarkers for early detection of NDs, although the developments are not perfectly reliable and sensitive, further studies will explore the potentials.