Analysis of Motor Function in the Tg4-42 Mouse Model of Alzheimer’s Disease
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a neurodegenerative disorder and the most common form of dementia.
Hallmarks of AD are memory impairments and cognitive deficits, but non-cognitive impairments, especially motor dysfunctions are also associated with the disease and may even precede classic clinical symptoms.
With an aging society and increasing hospitalization of the elderly, motor deficits are of major interest to improve independent activities in daily living.
Consistent with clinical findings, a variety of AD mouse models develop motor deficits as well.
We investigated the motor function of 3-and 7-month-old Tg4-42 mice in comparison to wild-type controls and 5XFAD mice and discuss the results in context with several other AD mouse model.
Our study shows impaired balance and motor coordination in aged Tg4-42 mice in the balance beam and rotarod test, while general locomotor activity and muscle strength is not impaired at 7 months.
The cerebellum is a major player in the regulation and coordination of balance and locomotion through practice.
Particularly, the rotarod test is able to detect cerebellar deficits.
Furthermore, supposed cerebellar impairment was verified by 18 F-FDG PET/MRI.
Aged Tg4-42 mice showed reduced cerebellar glucose metabolism in the 18 F-FDG PET.
Suggesting that, deficits in coordination and balance are most likely due to cerebellar impairment.
In conclusion, Tg4-42 mice develop motor deficits before memory deficits, without confounding memory test.
Thus, making the Tg4-42 mouse model a good model to study the effects on cognitive decline of therapies targeting motor impairments.

INTRODUCTION
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a neurodegenerative disorder and the most common form of dementia.
The main clinical symptoms of AD are memory impairments and cognitive deficits.
However, non-cognitive impairments especially motor dysfunctions are also associated with the disease.
The observed motor deficits range from impaired balance and gait changes to disturbed activity levels
In AD patients, motor impairments may even precede the clinical symptoms, providing a link between motor function and the development of AD
Motor signs (MOSIs) decline with age and severity of the disease.
The most affected MOSIs are speech, facial expression, rigidity, posture, gait, bradykinesia, and less frequently tremor
From mild to moderate AD the decline in motor abilities is stronger than from moderate to severe AD and associated with an increased risk of falls
Slowing in fine motor dexterity seems to depend on the severity of the disease and is associated with functional decline in the active daily living
In the 'Sydney Older Persons Study' a combination of cognitive decline and motor deficits was investigated over a 6-year period.
Motor slowing and gait abnormalities resulted in poorer outcome of patients with dementia.
Patients with decreased motor abilities were more likely to have severe cognitive impairments and even died earlier
Another study showed that gait abnormalities in aged patients without the diagnosis of dementia at baseline were related to lower cognitive performance and an increased incidence of mild cognitive impairment (MCI) or dementia
Furthermore, rigidity has been shown to be linked to death as well and to increased hospitalization in AD patients
Consistent with clinical findings, a variety of AD mouse models develop motor deficits
There are several well established behavioral tests to assess motor function, coordination and balance in rodents such as the rotarod test, balance beam task, string suspension task, inverted grip strength task and the Open Field task for locomotor activity
While the exact etiology of AD is still not fully understood, considerable evidence points to amyloid-beta peptides (Aβ) as a key player in the pathogenesis of AD.
According to the amyloid cascade hypothesis, Aβ-plaques seem to play a causative role in the pathogenesis of AD
More recent data claim that, truncated and modified Aβ variants play an important role next to full-length Aβ.
Especially N-truncated forms of Aβ enhance aggregation and neurotoxicity
Among the different species, Aβ beginning with phenylalanine at position 4 is particularly abundant in the brain of AD patients
The transgenic mouse model Tg4-42 expresses exclusively intraneuronal Aβ4-42 without human amyloid precursor protein (APP) overexpression
Intracellular Aβ accumulation is accompanied by micro-and astrogliosis that is most abundant in the hippocampus of these mice.
Tg4-42 mice develop severe synaptic impairments and neuron loss especially in the CA1 region of the hippocampus.
Furthermore, Tg4-42 mice develop age-dependent behavior and memory deficits albeit without plaque formation
The aim of the current study was to extend previous findings on the Tg4-42 model by examining motoric abilities and compare these results with the widely used 5XFAD mouse model.
We investigated mice at 3 months, with no known memory deficits in comparison with 7-month-old mice, which already present strong memory deficits.
Furthermore, we discuss the results in the context of other, well-studied AD models, to facilitate model selection for further research on the causes of motor impairments related to AD and the development of possible therapies.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Transgenic Mice
The generation of Tg4-42 mice has been described previously
Briefly, Tg4-42 mice express human Aβ4-42 fused to the murine thyrotropin releasing hormone signal peptide under the control of the neuronal Thy-1 promoter.
Tg4-42 mice were generated and maintained on a C57Bl/6J genetic background.
Only homozygous Tg4-42 mice were used in this study.
The double transgenic 5XFAD model (Jackson Laboratories, Bar Harbor, ME, United States) over-expresses the 695 amino acids isoform of the human amyloid precursor protein (APP695) carrying the Swedish, London, and Florida mutations under the control of the murine Thy-1 promoter.
In addition, human presenilin-1 (PSEN-1) carrying the M146L/L286V mutations is also expressed under the control of the murine Thy-1 promoter in 5XFAD mice
5XFAD mice used in the current study were kept on a C57Bl/6J genetic background
Wild-type littermates served as age-matched control animals.
In the current study, only female mice were used.
All animals were handled according to the guidelines of the 'Society for Laboratory Animals Science' (GV-SOLAS) and the guidelines of the 'Federation of European Laboratory Animal Science Association' (FELASA).
All experiments were approved by the 'Lower Saxony State Office for Consumer Protection and Food Safety' (LAVES).
Mice were kept on a 12 h/12 h inverted light cycle and behavior experiments were performed during the dark phase.
Mice were subjected to a battery of behavior tests at 3 and 7 months of age to assess possible motor deficits.
Weight was monitored as part of a general physical assessment.

Paw-Clasping Test
The clasping test was used to test for functional impairments
Each mouse was suspended by their tail for 30 s to provoke a clasping phenotype.
Healthy mice try to escape the grip by twisting their body and kicking their paws and therefore do not show any clasping phenotype.
Clasping behavior was scored on a scale from zero to three: 0 = no clasping behavior, 1 = fore paws clasping, 2 = one hind paw and fore paws clasping, 3 = clasping of all paws

String Suspension
Grip strength and general motor coordination were analyzed using the string suspension task as described previously
w, weeks; m, months; ns, not significant.
In brief, mice were permitted to grasp a cotton string with their fore paws and were then released.
Their ability to climb across the string was assessed using a 0 to 5 rating score: 0 = falls of string; 1 = hangs onto string by fore-or hind paws; 2 = hangs onto string by fore-or hind paws and attempts to climb onto string; 3 = hangs onto string by all four paws but no lateral movement; 4 = hangs onto string using all four paws and tail and moves laterally; 5 = escapes to the edge of string and touches wooden support beam
Each animal performed three 60-s trials throughout 1 day with a minimum of 30 min between the trials.
The average score of all three trials was taken for each mouse.

Balance Beam
Fine motor coordination and balance of mice were assessed using the balance beam test as previously described
The test essentially examines the ability of a mouse to remain upright and to walk on the relatively narrow and elevated beam to one of the platforms.
During a single day of testing each mouse was given three 60-s trials with a minimum of 10 min between the trials.
The average time of all three trials was taken as the score for each mouse.
A test trial was given to familiarize the mouse with the beam.
For each trial, the mouse was placed in the center of the beam facing one of the platforms and then released.
The latency to fall from the beam was recorded.
If a mouse escaped to one of the platforms or remained on the beam for the entire trial, the maximum time of 60 s was given.

Inverted Grip Task
Neuromuscular abilities and muscle strength were tested with the inverted grip test as previously described
Mice were placed on a metal grid and turned upside down 30 cm elevated above a padded surface.
Latency to fall within 60 s was measured in one single trial.

Rotarod
Motor performance and motor learning were tested using the rotarod (TSE Systems, Germany).
Testing consists of four trials per day for two consecutive days with intertrial intervals of 10-15 min.
Each mouse was placed on the rod, which accelerated from 4 to 40 rpm.
over the trial time of 300 s.
Trials were terminated when animals fell off or the maximum time was reached.
Up to five mice were tested simultaneously, separated by black plastic walls.
Mice were taken out of the apparatus when the last mouse fell.
Latency to fall served as an indicator of motor coordination.

F-FDG PET/MRI
18 F-fluoro-deoxy-glucose positron emission tomography/ magnetic resonance image ( 18 F-FDG-PET/MRI) acquisition and analysis were used to evaluate brain glucose metabolism in the cerebellum of 7-month-old Tg4-42 mice and 5XFAD mice.
Female Tg4-42 (n = 5), 5XFAD (n = 3) and wild-type C57Bl/6J (n = 5) control mice were fasted overnight and blood glucose levels were measured.
As previously described 9-21 MBq (mean 15.76 MBq) of 18 F-FDG were administered intravenously into a tail vein with a maximum volume of 200 µl
Mice were anesthetized with isoflurane supplemented with oxygen during the scans and were awake during the uptake period.
After an uptake period of 45 min, PET imaging was performed on a small animal 1 Tesla nanoScan PET/MRI (Mediso, Hungary).
During the scan mice were placed on a 37

Statistical Analysis
Differences between groups were tested with one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) or two-way ANOVA followed by analysis of Bonferroni multiple comparison indicated.
All data are given as mean ± standard error of the mean (SEM).
Significance levels are given as follows:

RESULTS
Normal Body Weight of Tg4-42 and 5XFAD Mice
The body weight of all mice was taken at 3 and 7 months of age.
Tg4-42 and 5XFAD mice demonstrated no altered body weight compared to wild-type mice at the tested time points [Figure
Statistically significant was the gain of weight of Tg4-42 and 5XFAD mice, but although wild-type mice gained some weight as well, this effect was not statistically significant [Figure
Clasping Phenotype in 7-Month-Old 5XFAD Mice
At 3 months none of the tested animals showed any clasping phenotype.
However, 5XFAD mice develop an age-dependent clasping phenotype [Figure
p = 0.0019; genotype: F(2,66) = 12.12, p < 0.001].
Tg4-42 mice did not show a clasping behavior at 7 months and they tried to escape the grip by twisting their body and kicking their paws similar to wild-type animals.

Impaired Sensorimotor Function in Tg4-42 Mice
Fine motor coordination and balance of mice can be assessed by the balance beam task
At the age of 3 months none of the tested animals showed impairments in the balance beam task.
However, 7-month-old Tg4-42 mice spent significantly less time on the beam compared to same-aged wild-type animals [Figure
The string suspension task evaluates motor coordination, grip and muscle strength of mice

Impaired Motor Learning Skills in Tg4-42 Mice
The rotarod task assesses motor skill learning abilities and coordination
Performance of 5XFAD mice did not differ from wild-type controls at 3 or 7 months of age.
While young Tg4-42, 5XFAD and WT mice showed an overall improved motor learning over the training trials [Figure
p < 0.0001], Tg4-42 displayed a shorter latency to fall on the last trial compared to same-aged wild-type animals [Figure
At 7 months of age Tg4-42 mice showed decreased motor learning and performed significantly Decreased Metabolic Activity in the Cerebellum of Aged Tg4-42 Mice 18 F-FDG-PET/MRI was used to determine cerebellar glucose metabolism.
Quantitative analysis of FDG-uptake was performed using a mouse brain atlas and blood glucose corrected SUV values (SUVglc) were measured within a predefined cerebellum VOI (Figure
Seven-month-old Tg4-42 and 5XFAD mice showed significantly decreased 18 F-FDG uptake in the cerebellum compared to wild-type mice [Figures

DISCUSSION
Impairments of motor abilities are an important phenotype in the progression of AD.
Several studies show a decline in motor function throughout the progression of the disease in patients
Furthermore, motor impairments can be useful in the prediction of the onset as well as the outcome of AD
In an aging society, maintaining motor performance in AD patients should be of major interest to help to facilitate independence in daily living and activity
Assessing motor deficits through physical exercise in preclinical stages of AD could delay or decline the development of AD as shown previously
Thus, motor deficits are an important symptom to study in AD.
Similar to AD patients, most mouse models mimicking AD show motor impairments as the disease progresses.
This study compared motor behavior of young and aged Tg4-42 mice with their age-matched wild-type controls and compared the results with other AD mouse models.
Motoric performance of AD mice ranges from unaltered and impaired to improved motor performance.
There are several tests to assess motor abilities in mice, but protocols and experimental apparatus differ highly between laboratories, complicating the comparison of results.
These differences in behavior tests should always be taken into consideration (Table
Weight can severely influence the outcome of behavior studies.
Therefore, the animal's weight should always be taken into consideration especially when analyzing motor performance in mice.
Previous studies showed that body weight significantly correlates with the performance of mice in the rotarod task, a test widely used to assess grip strength, motor coordination and balance
The weight of young and aged Tg4-42 mice was comparable to same-aged wild-type and 5XFAD mice in this study.
In contrast, weight loss has previously been observed in several other AD mouse models.
A reduction in the gain of body weight has been described especially in mouse models overexpressing APP
For example, 9-month-old 5XFAD mice showed a significantly reduced body weight in comparison to their wild-type littermates
Interestingly, epidemiologic studies showed that weight loss is often associated with AD and can be observed in all stages of the disease
Weight loss in AD patients often correlates with a general health decline and is suggested as a clinical predictor of mortality
In mice, weight variances can also indicate poor health and a lack of body weight gain might contribute to predicting mortality.
In contrast to 5XFAD mice, Tg4-42 mice did not show a limb clasping phenotype.
Aged 5XFAD mice exhibited motor abnormalities and abnormal extension reflexes by retracting their hind-and fore paws simultaneously when suspended by the tail.
An abnormal clasping pattern has been observed in several mouse models including mice transgenic for human four-repeat tau and mutant human APP
Interestingly, all of these mice showed signs of axonopathy
But surprisingly, the number of motor neurons of 6-month-old 5XFAD mice in the cervical spinal cord was similar to wild-type littermates
Both (D) 5XFAD mice displayed an age-dependent decreased distance traveled in the Open Field task.
Seven-month-old 5XFAD mice traveled significantly less than same-aged Tg4-42 and wild-type mice.
(E) Young Tg4-42 and 5XFAD mice showed a similar latency to fall on the accelerating rotarod on trials 1-7.
On the last trial of the test Tg4-42 mice performed worse than same-aged wild-type mice.
(F) Aged Tg4-42 mice showed a decreased performance on the accelerating rotarod compared to same-aged wild-type and 5XFAD mice.
Two-way repeated measures ANOVA, vs. 5XFAD ### p < 0.001; vs. WT * * * p < 0.001; * p < 0.05; n = 9-15 per group, data presented as mean ± SEM; WT, wild-type; m, month.
Tg4-42 and 5XFAD mice show intracellular Aβ accumulation in the spinal cord, but only 5XFAD show signs of axon swelling and axonopathy
The Open Field locomotion test can be used to examine motor function by measuring spontaneous activity in an open arena
The Open Field task is an easy task to perform and measures general locomotor activity in mice
Our results show that Tg4-42 mice did not have alterations in locomotor activity.
In contrast, 5XFAD mice showed lower activity levels consistent with previous studies
Surprisingly, O'
This variation is likely due to different experimental protocols.
However, in older 5XFAD mice the data is consistently showing reduced locomotor activity
Altered locomotor activities need to be taken into consideration when interpreting results of behavioral tests such as anxiety-related or memory-related tests
Nevertheless, Tg4-42 mice did not show any impairments in the Open Field that could possibly influence anxiety-and memory-related behavior.
In line with these findings, general motor abilities of Tg4-42 mice have been shown to be intact in the Morris water maze as swimming speed did not differ from wild-type animals
Generally speaking, APP single-transgenic mice seem to show increased locomotor activity at young ages
Similar to Tg4-42 mice, double-transgenic mice carrying single APP and PS1 mutation are less likely to have locomotor activity impairments
It has to be mentioned that the Open Field task is one of the tests with relatively high variability in experimental procedures
The material and the size of the arena, as well as the testing time, differ immensely between the protocols used in analyzing different AD models.
For example, some mice were granted time to adapt to the apparatus
The amount of time tested ranged from 5 min
In addition, most mice were placed into the center of the box
While most studies use only a single trial, other groups tested the same mouse multiple times and therefore assessing habituation rather than spontaneous locomotor activity alone
Furthermore, the experimental apparatus used for the Open Field often differs in size, material, form or transparency between laboratories
These varieties need to be taken into consideration when comparing different AD mouse lines.
Several studies suggested a link between muscle strength and cognitive decline in AD patients
In mice, the string suspension and grip strength test can be used to measure muscle strength
We could show that 7-month-old Tg4-42 and 5XFAD mice did not present any impairments in muscle strength in the string suspension or grip strength tasks, consistent with previous findings for 5XFAD mice
However, previous studies showed a loss of muscle strength in both tests beginning at the age of 9 months
In contrast, O'Leary et al. (2018a) could show deficits already beginning from 6 to 7 months of age in 5XFAD mice.
Generally speaking, a decline in muscle strength seems to be more frequent in aged AD mice (Table
Tg4-42 mice display severe memory deficits at 7 months of age and therefore mice were not tested for muscle strength at older ages, which should be investigated in upcoming studies to compare strength with other AD mouse models.
The pyroglutamate Aβ3-42 expressing mouse model TBA42 showed muscle strength deficits starting with 6 months, while muscle strength declined in Tg2576 not before 14 months, preceding memory deficits in both models
Interestingly, homozygous TBA42 had such severe motor deficits, that they had to be sacrificed at the age of 2 months
APP+PS1 mice did not show signs of strength decline before 15 to 17 months of age
APP+PS1 mice develop memory deficits at younger ages, similar to 5XFAD mice.
Noteworthy, female and male 3xTg mice show memory impairments before the onset of motor deficits with 16 months of age
These inconsistent findings with regard to onset of memory and motor deficits should be considered when choosing a suitable mouse model for research, depending on the symptom of interest.
Motor coordination is an important aspect of AD since bradykinesia and gait disturbances are part of AD motor impairments
The rotarod and balance beam test are mainly used to test motor coordination and balance in mice.
Additionally, the rotarod test assesses motor learning
The cerebellum as a major player of motor control is important for regulation of balance and locomotion through practice
Especially the rotarod task is able to detect motor disturbances through cerebellar dysfunction
We could show deficits in the balance beam task of aged Tg4-42 mice.
In context with
These findings suggest an onset of this deficit in the Tg4-42 mouse model for AD at the age of 6 to 7 months.
Deterioration in the rotarod test was already observed in young Tg4-42 mice and aggravated with age.
Early deficits in the rotarod have been described in male APP23 mice
In contrary Tg2567 mice did not show any impairment in the rotarod
APP/PS1 KI mice did not show any motor deterioration and were comparable to controls at even older ages
Strikingly, male and female 3xTg mice performed better in rotarod task than controls up to the age of 16 months
Only
Whereas other researchers found increased motor performance to be paradoxical
Thus, suggesting no direct correlation between the transgene and severity of motor deficits.
Since Tg4-42 mice did not have altered muscle strength, we presumed that impairments in the balance beam task and rotarod was rather due to learning and balance, coordination impairments than muscle function.
In previous studies we could show a severe learning deficit in the Morris water maze, beginning from the age of 5 months in Tg4-42 mice
Interestingly, despite the massive impairments in the rotarod, the ability to swim in the Morris water maze was not altered in same-aged Tg4-42 mice
The cerebellum is the center of motor function and contributes to motor learning by determining how to perform correct and accurate movements.
It has been shown that cerebellar damage leads to disturbance in movements and body support
Subsequently, we analyzed the cerebellum of Tg4-42 mice via 18 F-FDG-PET to detect possible synaptic dysfunctions. 18
F-FDG-PET, as a functional biomarker for synaptic dysfunction, confirmed findings of the behavioral tests showing reduced glucose metabolism in the cerebellum of aged Tg4-42 mice.
Findings are in line with several earlier 18 F-FDG-PET studies showing cerebellar hypo metabolism in different transgenic mouse models of AD
But furthermore, intraneuronal Aβ accumulation in the spinal cord of Tg4-42 mice have been described previously
But since strength was not yet affected in 7-month-old Tg4-42 mice we focused on the processing and coordination of motor function by in vivo imaging of the cerebellum.
Interestingly, a study by
In line with these findings, female 7-month-old 5XFAD performed as wild-type mice on the rotarod, while older mice display strong impairments (O'Leary et al., 2018a) (Table
However, 5XFAD mice showed decreased FDG-uptake as early as 7 months of age in our study.
This seems to be an indicator of early cerebellar changes, even before motor impairments occur, as glucose metabolism is known to be an early marker of neuronal dysfunction.
Mouse models allow to investigate motor abilities and are suitable tools to analyze different aspects of AD pathologies and the effectiveness of possible therapies.
Tg4-42 displays an AD mouse model with intact general motor activity and strength, but age-dependent motor impairments in motor coordination and balance present at the age of 7 months, likely due to impaired cerebellar activity.


, two-way ANOVA, genotype: F(2,66) = 3.702; p < 0.05].
Tg4-42 mice showed an age-dependent decline in balance and motor coordination [Figure2A, two-way ANOVA, Tg4-42 age: F(1,66) = 5.904, p = 0.0178; post hoc analysis Tg4-42: p < 0.05].
In contrast, aged 5XFAD mice performed similar to wild-type controls.



FIGURE 1 |
FIGURE 1 | General physical assessment Tg4-42 and 5XFAD mice.
(A) 3-and 7-month-old Tg4-42 and 5XFAD mice displayed normal body weight compared to aged-matched wild-type mice.
(B) Wild-type and Tg4-42 mice showed no clasping phenotype during the tail suspension task regardless of age.
5XFAD mice showed a clasping phenotype at 7 months of age.
Two-way repeated measures ANOVA, * p < 0.05, * * p < 0.01, * * * p < 0.001; n = 12 per group; data presented as mean ± SEM; WT, wild-type; m, months.



FIGURE 2 |
FIGURE 2 | Motor deficits in Tg4-42 mice.
(A) Tg4-42 mice showed age-dependent deficits in the balance beam.
5XFAD mice displayed no deficits in the balance beam.
Tg4-42 and 5XFAD mice performed similar to same-aged wild-type control mice in the (B) string suspension task and (C) inverted grip task.(D)
5XFAD mice displayed an age-dependent decreased distance traveled in the Open Field task.
Seven-month-old 5XFAD mice traveled significantly less than same-aged Tg4-42 and wild-type mice.
(E) Young Tg4-42 and 5XFAD mice showed a similar latency to fall on the accelerating rotarod on trials 1-7.
On the last trial of the test Tg4-42 mice performed worse than same-aged wild-type mice.
(F) Aged Tg4-42 mice showed a decreased performance on the accelerating rotarod compared to same-aged wild-type and 5XFAD mice.
Two-way repeated measures ANOVA, vs. 5XFAD ### p < 0.001; vs. WT * * * p < 0.001; * p < 0.05; n = 9-15 per group, data presented as mean ± SEM; WT, wild-type; m, month.



FIGURE 3 |
FIGURE 3 | 18 F-FDG-PET shows decreased metabolic activity in the cerebellum of 7-month-old Tg4-42 and 5XFAD mice.
(A) Quantification of 18 F-FDG uptake in the cerebellum. 18
F-FDG-uptake in the cerebellum was significantly reduced in aged Tg4-42 and 5XFAD mice compared to wild-type.
(B) Magnetic resonance image (MRI; coronal view) with volumes of interest (VOIs) of the mouse brain atlas MRIs of each mouse.
(C) Fused 18 F-FDG-PET/MRI of a wild-type mouse in coronal view.
(D) Fused 18 F-FDG-PET/MRI of a 7-month-old Tg4-42 mouse in coronal view with distinctly lower FDG uptake compared to the wild-type mouse.
One-way-ANOVA; * * p < 0.01; * p < 0.05; WT, wild-type; m, months; Cb, cerebellum; B, brainstem.



TABLE 1 |
Motor function of different AD mouse models.



TABLE 1 |
Continued