White Matter Changes in Patients with Alzheimer’s Disease and Associated Factors
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is traditionally thought of as a neurodegenerative disease.
Recent evidence shows that beta amyloid-independent vascular changes and beta amyloid-dependent neuronal dysfunction both equally influence the disease, leading to loss of structural and functional connectivity.
White matter changes (WMCs) in the brain are commonly observed in dementia patients.
The effect of vascular factors on WMCs and the relationship between WMCs and severity of AD in patients remain to be clarified.
We recruited 501 clinically diagnosed probable AD patients with a series of comprehensive neuropsychological tests and brain imaging.
The WMCs in cerebral CT or MRI were rated using both the modified Fazekas scale and the combined CT-MRI age related WMC (ARWMC) rating scale.
Periventricular WMCs were observed in 79.4% of the patients and deep WMCs were also seen in 48.7% of the patients.
WMC scores were significantly higher in the advanced dementia stage in periventricular WMCs (p = 0.001) and total ARWMCs (p < 0.001).
Age and disease severity were both independently associated with WMCs score, particularly in the total, frontal and parieto-occipital areas.
Vascular factors including hypertension, diabetes mellitus, and gender were not significantly associated with WMCs.
In conclusion, both age and severity of dementia were significantly associated with WMCs in AD patients.
These associations highlight future research targets.

Introduction
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is widely accepted to be a disease of the cerebral gray matter.
Nevertheless, some evidence has revealed the relationship of AD with both white matter changes (WMCs) and hippocampal atrophy
Several pathological changes have been noted in the white matter, including the loss of axons, oligodendrocytes and reactive astrocytosis
Additionally, vascular insufficiency
White matter changes (WMCs) have been reported to be associated with a decline in motor function in speed and fine motor coordination, and with many diseases including AD
However, WMCs were once considered to be benign and not related to dementia
Recent evidence show that both beta amyloid-independent vascular changes and beta amyloid-dependent neuronal dysfunction equally influence disease, leading to loss of structural and functional connectivity
The two-hit vascular hypothesis
Hypertension, especially in midlife, is a risk factor for AD
The effect of vascular factors on WMCs and the relationship between WMCs and severity of AD in patients remain to be clarified.
We conducted this study to investigate the characteristics of WMCs in AD patients and examine the association between vascular risk factors and WMCs.

Materials and Methods

Study Population
We retrospectively reviewed 501 patients with probable AD from the outpatient clinic of Kaohsiung Municipal Ta-Tung hospital, and who were diagnosed between October 2010 and April 2014.
All patients received a complete evaluation for dementia, including demographic data, past medical history, physical and neurological examinations, comprehensive laboratory tests, and neuropsychological tests.
Every patient underwent non-contrast brain CT or cerebral MRI scans upon the diagnosis of AD.
Neuropsychological tests, including the clinical dementia rating
The diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease was made using the DSM-IV criteria and determined by experienced neurologists based on clinical symptoms, brain imaging, laboratory examinations of blood samples, and reference to neuropsychological assessments.
Clinical Dementia Rating Scale (CDR) is a severity rating range along a 5-point scale (except for the personal care domain).
CDR-0: no cognitive impairment CDR-0.5:
questionable or very mild dementia CDR-1: mild CDR-2: moderate CDR-3: severe CDR = 0.5 is also commonly named mild cognitive impairment (MCI).
MCI is considered to be a transitional stage between normal aging and AD
The annual rate of transformation from questionable to mild dementia (CDR = 0.5 to 1) is around 10~15%
We included the most important 3 intermediate stages of AD (0.5, 1 and 2) and took MCI as our benchmark.
The diagnoses of hypertension (HTN) and diabetes mellitus (DM) were based on patient-reported medical histories assisted by their medical records.
Patients with previous stroke history were excluded.
Moreover, all patients were strictly authorized to use acetylcholinesterase inhibitor (ACEI) therapy by independent neurologists from the National Health Insurance Administration, Ministry of Health and Welfare, Taiwan.
This study was conducted in accordance with the Helsinki Declaration and was approved by the Institutional Review Board of Kaohsiung Medical University Hospital (KMUHIRB-20140063).

Evaluation of White Matter Changes
Cerebral CT or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans with standard protocols were performed on every patient.
One experienced neurologist, who was blind to all clinical information, rated the presence, location and severity of WMCs.
WMCs were rated using both the modified Fazekas scale
In the Fazekas scale, the degree of white matter changes is rated on a 4-point scale as periventricular WMCs (PVWMCs) and deep WMCs (DWMCs).
The Fazekas scale
It is the most frequently used scale for white matter changes because of its simplicity and applicability on CT and MRI
The CT-MRI visual ARWMC scale is a new rating scale with proven, almost equal sensitivity and applicability to both CT and MRI
It is a modified version of the Fazekas scale and expands analysis in topographical regions.
There are no differences between modalities in the frontal area and basal ganglia, however, in the parieto-occipital and infratentorial areas, MRI detects more WMC than CT does.
Both CT and MRI can detect equally well in larger lesions.
In order to sample large-scale samples, we used a rating scale established for both MRI and CT.
In the CT-MRI visual ARWMC scale, the degree of white matter change was also rated on a 4-point scale, including five different regions in both the right and left hemispheres.
We then summed the right and left sides according to each brain region including the total ARWMCs, frontal ARWMCs, parieto-occipital ARWMCs (P-O ARWMCs), temporal ARWMCs, infratentorial ARWMCs and basal ganglia ARWMCs
In total, 463 CT images and 38 MRI images were rated.
The neurologist responsible for rating the images was highly reliable in their ability to determine PVWMCs and DWMCs based on previous collaboration with researchers in Taiwan

Statistics
Statistical analysis was performed using SPSS Statistics version 20 (IBM, Armonk, NY, USA).
All statistical tests were 2-tailed, and an alpha of 0.05 was considered to be significant.
An analysis of variance (ANOVA) and Bonferroni's post-hoc analysis were used when comparing WMC scores across different disease severity groups.
A chi-squared test was used when comparing categorical variables in our analysis of the association of WMCs and factors including gender, CDR, hypertension (HTN) and diabetes mellitus (DM).
To evaluate age, gender and risk factors to WMCs, we performed a binary logistic regression analysis using the modified Fazekas scale

Results
In this study, we included 501 patients with very mild to moderate AD; Table
The mean age of the patients was 77.9 ± 7.7 years (range: 56-95); 69.3% of the patients were women.
Among all of the patients, 249 (49.7%) had HTN and 120 (24%) had DM.
The average duration of their education was 6.6 ± 5.2 years, and the average MMSE was 16.0 ± 6.2.
The distribution of dementia severity was 128 (24.5%) for very mild dementia, 283 (56.5%) for mild dementia and 90 (18.0%) for moderate dementia.
Of our patients, 79.4% had PVWMCs and 48.7% had DWMCs.
Table
Even in the very mild dementia group, 72.7% had PVWMCs and 41.4% had DWMCs.
Among the most severe group, as many as 84.4% had PVWMCs and 54.4% had DWMCs.
Besides, PVWMCs are around 60% more frequently seen than DWMCs in these 3 groups.
Characteristic images of WMCs are shown in Figure
Table
The mean WMC scores increased with dementia severity for all ratings.
Post hoc analysis showed that the CDR = 2 group had significantly higher scores than both the CDR = 0.5 and CDR = 1 groups.
The associations between WMCs and risk factors are shown in Table
Moreover, gender was related to Table
The mean WMC scores increased with dementia severity for all ratings.
Post hoc analysis showed that the CDR = 2 group had significantly higher scores than both the CDR = 0.5 and CDR = 1 groups.
The associations between WMCs and risk factors are shown in Table
Moreover, gender was related to PVWMCs (p = 0.028) and frontal ARWMCs (p = 0.014).
HTN showed an association with PVWMCs (p = 0.030) and frontal ARWMCs (p = 0.028).
DM did not correlate with any WMC scores.
Furthermore, we adjusted all results for gender, age, CDR, HTN and diabetes using a logistic regression model.
As shown in Table
CDR showed a significant correlation to total ARWMC score (p = 0.007), frontal ARWMC score (p = 0.004) and P-O ARWMC scores (p = 0.006).
Following adjustment, gender, HTN and DM did not achieve significance.

Discussion
Based on our results, both periventricular and deep WMCs are common in Taiwanese AD patients.
Our study indicates that the frontal areas have the most WMCs followed by the parieto-occipital areas, which is similar to reports in western AD patients
The spatial distribution of WMCs is a reasonable consequence of the normal pattern of compromised perfusion in the frontal and posterior horns of the lateral ventricles found in AD and healthy aging
Pathology reports show that sclerotic changes in the arteries supplying white matter are most prominent in the frontal lobe, followed by the parietal, occipital, and temporal lobes
Moreover, WMCs in the frontal and parieto-occipital regions are particularly associated with hippocampal atrophy
Therefore, WMCs may be a secondary phenomenon of axonal change due to cortical neuronal damage in AD patients.
Lastly, there is a large area of white matter in the frontal and parietal lobes, and an over-representation of those regions in axial slices
Even in patients with MCI, the cerebral blood flow was significantly reduced in the parietotemporal regions compared with healthy control
This evidence supports the findings that WMCs in the frontal lobe followed by the parieto-occipital lobes is a common presentation in AD patients.
Our results show that age is strongly associated with multiple parameters, including PVWMCs, DWMCs, total ARWMCs, frontal ARWMCs, P-O ARWMCs and basal ganglia ARWMCs.
It has also been reported that age is the primary indicator for cerebral WMCs in the normal elderly in addition to patients with AD
A probable mechanism for this is the age-related decrease in total cerebral blood flow that can be aggravated in aging brain pathologies
The particular blood supply for the cerebral white matter lacks anastomoses
Therefore, we believe that the universal effect of age could explain the variation in WMC prevalence across different studies.
In some small scale studies that included fewer than 50 AD patients
Our study shows that WMCs are significantly associated with CDR, especially total ARWMCs, frontal ARWMCs and P-O ARWMCs.
PVWMC increases with CDR while DWMC does not.
Moreover, moderate AD led to the accumulation of significant changes, especially in the frontal and P-O white matter and showed significantly higher scores.
The most likely reason for this is that WMC is rated on a 4-point scale, which is so small that a large sample size is needed to show statistically significant differences between groups.
Based on an abundant sample size, our findings show that the degree of WMCs correlated with the severity of AD.
A greater number of WMCs superimposed on clinically diagnosed AD patients could have a synergistic effect and result in more severe symptoms.
This concept is quite similar to that in the famous Nun study
Recently, evidence has shown that an increased total WMC volume is an independent predictor for the diagnosis of AD
In the Rotterdam study
In another study, Sawada et al. showed that white matter was influenced by Alzheimer's disease more in women than in men (p = 0.084).
Similarly, we also found a trend for higher PVWMCs (p = 0.028) and frontal ARWMCs (p = 0.014) in women, but this was not statistically significant after adjustment.
Female gender is known to be risk factor for AD, and a possible mechanism for this is that estrogens have antioxidant activities and neuroprotective effects
Therefore, women of postmenopausal age could show an increased risk of AD.
Consistent with previous studies
Chronic HTN debilitates cerebral autoregulation by damaging cerebral arterioles and capillaries
Chronic hypoperfusion leads to an incomplete form of infarction and causes certain types of WMCs
In demented patients, arteries that supply the white matter of the frontal lobe show the most sclerotic changes compared to other cerebral regions
Therefore, the frontal lobe is the region most susceptible to hypertension, resulting in more WMCs.
Moreover, in a 15-month follow-up study
The LADIS study also showed that HTN has effects on executive functions and attention, hinting at frontal lobe dysfunction.
The association between hypertension (HTN) and AD has been a subject of considerable debate.
A previous study has shown that longitudinal follow up is key to understanding the association between HTN and AD
Hypertension, especially midlife, is a risk factor for AD
In our analysis, HTN tended to result in a higher score for PVWMCs (p = 0.030) and frontal ARWMCs (p = 0.028), although this effect was not statistically significant after adjustment.
The lack of a longitudinal follow up could be the reason why hypertension seemed to be associated with periventricular WHC, but did not achieve significance in our study.
Some studies have shown that adult onset diabetes increases the risk of AD.
According to Stewart
Indeed, recent studies have demonstrated that diabetes is not associated with dementia or AD
In our study, we strictly included AD without a vascular component and found that diabetes was not associated with any WMCs.
Two advantages of this study are the inclusion of a large sample size of AD patients and the fact that all of them were authorized to use acetylcholinesterase inhibitor (ACEI) by specialists from the National Health Insurance Administration, Ministry of Health and Welfare.
With an abundant sample size, we were able to evaluate WMC locations and differences between severity groups.
Currently, there are only a few studies that have focused on WMCs and AD in Asia
Moreover, we have high inter-rater reliability for the rating of WMCs.
Our study has some limitations, such as the fact that that white matter changes are rated by a semi-quantitative scale with the inevitable disadvantages of a lack of sensitivity to small changes and a possible ceiling effect
These disadvantages could be compensated for by the large sample size.
Moreover, we included only very mild to moderate AD and did not include the duration and severity of risk factors in our retrospective design.
Therefore, further study with longitudinal follow-up would be valuable for evaluating the relationship between WMC and disease progression.
In conclusion, both periventricular and deep WMCs are more common than expected in all stages of AD in patients.
Age is the main indicator for cerebral WMCs in AD patients, and its universal effect causes the variation in prevalence across different studies.
Our most remarkable finding is that the severity of the disease plays an important role in the WMCs, with significant differences between the moderate stage and milder stages of AD.
Owing to their susceptibility to sclerotic changes in responsible arteries, myelin breakdown and over-representation on axial slices, the frontal lobe shows most WMCs followed by the parieto-occipital lobes.
Females and patients with HTN tended to have a higher degree of WMCs in the periventricular and frontal areas, while there was no correlation with WMCs and diabetes.
Further longitudinal follow up would be valuable and is necessary to clarify whether WMCs contribute to the cognitive decline in AD or they are just a sign of the disease process.



Figure 1 .
Figure 1.
White matter changes (WMCs) in AD patients, Fazekas scale.



Figure 1 .
Figure 1.
White matter changes (WMCs) in AD patients, Fazekas scale.



Table 1 .
Demographic characteristics of Alzheimer's disease participants.



Table 2 .
Relationship between white matter changes and the severity of Alzheimer's disease.Of our patients, 79.4% had PVWMCs and 48.7% had DWMCs.Table2shows the distribution of the Fazekas scale at different dementia stages.Even in the very mild dementia group, 72.7% had PVWMCs and 41.4% had DWMCs.Among the most severe group, as many as 84.4% had PVWMCs and 54.4% had DWMCs.Besides, PVWMCs are around 60% more frequently seen than DWMCs in these 3 groups.Characteristic images of WMCs are shown in Figure1.



Table 2 .
Relationship between white matter changes and the severity of Alzheimer's disease.



Table 3 .
Relationship between white matter changes and the severity of Alzheimer's disease.



Table 4 .
Factors related to white matter changes in Alzheimer's disease patients.



Table 5 .
Adjusted factors related to white matter changes in Alzheimer's disease patients.



(Female) p Value (95% CI) Age p Value (95% CI) CDR p Value (95% CI) Hypertension p Value (95% CI) Diabetes Mellitus p Value (95% CI)