Apple Cider Vinegar (ACV) and their Pharmacological Approach towards Alzheimer’s Disease (AD): A Review
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a neurological degenerative condition described by a progressive decline in memory and associated with dementia.
This disease arises usually after 65 years in individuals.
Oxidative stress is the major cause of dementia connected with Alzheimer's disease.
Here there is an imbalance between the creation and clearance of amyloid β protein, which leads to accumulation of amyloid β plaque in the brain and produces neuronal cell death.
Anti-Alzheimer's medications help to cover the symptoms of disease but do not cure the cause of disease.
Confirmatory studies suggest that a healthy diet of fruits and green vegetables containing phenolic combinations may reduce the risk of Alzheimer's disease (AD).
Apple cider vinegar (ACV) contains phenolic compounds like catechin, caffeic acid, gallic acid, chlorogenic acids and p-coumaric acid having high antioxidant potential.
Phenolic compounds are not essential for survival but it can protect against various chronic diseases.
Various researches showed that phenolic compounds cure β amyloid and tau protein correlated problems associated with AD.
Regular consumption of these healthy substances in the diet may prevent the neuronal cells from oxidative stress which leads to AD.
The purpose of this review is to highlight the health benefit role, functional property and therapeutic uses of Apple Cider Vinegar.

INTRODUCTION
The lifestyle of humans is mostly connected with the developing of numerous complicated neurological conditions associated with aging.
These conditions include intellectual abilities, language problems and memory loss.
The prolonged state of these symptoms together develops intellectual deficits in the elderly and is commonly mentioned as dementia.
It is predicted that 46.8 million people in this world have dementia and incidences are expected to grow every year and it would be 131.5 million in 2050.
lzheimer's disease (AD) is the most predominant neural condition associated with dementia.
The most troubling complication associated with AD is forgetting daily routine functions.
Although the mechanism behind this neurodegeneration is completely unknown but several genetic and environmental factors, together with vascular pathology have recently shown the growth and progression of Alzheimer's disease.
n Alzheimer's disease (AD), an individual may seem to be fit but has more and more distress making sense.
The problem associated with AD includes memory loss, poor judgment for making decisions, loss of spontaneity, time taking normal daily activity, repeating questions, mood and personality changes and anxiety and aggression.
The major cause of AD is due to amyloid β protein (amyloid plaque) aggregation outside the neuronal cells and intracellular Tau protein hyper-phosphorylation composed of neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs) and loss of cholinergic system functions

Occurrence of Alzheimer's disease
In 2005, Alzheimer's disease International Commissioned group spread consensus on dementia and created an epidemiological document acquired over recent years.
The outcomes showed that 24.2 million people suffered with dementia and 4.6 million new patients arising every year.
xpected growth rate of dementia incidence from 2001 to 2040 is 172% and 102% in Western Europe and North America higher prevalence of dementia (172% and 102%), China more than 300%, Latin America 400%, North Africa and Middle Eastern Crescent 385%.
The annual incidence rates increased exponentially with age after 65 years.
There is nearly a 15-fold increase in the frequency of dementia, predominately Alzheimer's disease between the ages of 65 to 85 years

Mechanism of Alzheimer's disease
Alzheimer's disease (AD) persuaded dementia is typically represented with synaptic injuries and loss of neurons through propagation of microglial cells.
8]
Additionally Aβ aggregations also initiate hyperphosphorylation of tau protein and their cleavage (Figure
This phosphorylation and cleavage is induced by Aβ activated enzyme such as CDK5, GSK-3β and caspases.
These enzymes induce tau phosphorylation and formation of intracellular neurofibrillary tangles which are insoluble inclusions.
4]

Risk Factors Associated With Alzheimer's
Numerous features have been associated with AD.
Diabetes, cardiovascular complications, obesity, dyslipidemia and smoking has found to increase the risk of Alzheimer's disease in old age
Remarkably cerebrovascular disease including large cortical infarcts, cerebral hemorrhage, hypoperfusion and other effects produces dementia which is associated with Alzheimer's disease.
Prescriptions which prescribe to control the improvement of AD indications become comparatively less effective after some time as Alzheimer's turns out to be worse.
Specialists are searching for new strategies to treat Alzheimer's disease (AD).
There are various clinical medications produced by pharmaceutical companies for the treatment of Alzheimer's disease.
ivastigmine, Galantamine and Donepezil mostly act on acetyl cholinesterase and prevent the hydrolysis of acetylcholine, resulting higher concentration of acetylcholine in cerebrum which produces better communication between the neurons.
Anti-Alzheimer's medication found in market shown in Table

Efficacy of Dietary Nutrients in Preventing Alzheimer's disease

Fatty acids
Several examinations have explored the properties of polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs) in avoiding or preventing AD.
The PUFAs are the important component of cell membrane and maintain the fluidity of membrane which is significant for synaptic vesicle fusion followed by neurotransmitter communication.
The PUFAs contain eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA), omega-3 fatty acids and decosahexaenoic acid (DHA).
So PUFAs show a significant dietary involvement in preventing the neuronal loss and improving learning and memory. 26

Vitamins
Vitamins have high antioxidants potential and scavenge free radicals effectively.
Free radical generation in the brain contributes to progressive failure of cognitive abilities and induces dementia.
Clinical trials on vitamin E supplementation carried out for patients with moderate AD confirmed that vitamin E reduces the progression of infection.
Other vitamins like Vitamin A and B were found to be lower in the plasma and serum of the geriatric patients with psychological defects.
In vitro studies have shown a direct correlation of the presence of Vitamin A and β-carotene in case of AD concerning improvement in brain health.

Phenolic compounds
Dietary phenolic compounds have been prescribed as a potential functional food to prevent memory decline.
henolic compounds are regular substances present in plants, natural products, vegetables and fruits.
Some polyphenols like 4-O-methyl honokiol, resveratrol, epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG) have been potential
to provide protection against Alzheimer's disease.
heir property might be because of antioxidant and anti-inflammatory properties as well as a variety of chemical enzymatic reactions and intracellular signaling pathways.
The neuronal signaling changes with aging by acting on CREB/ERK pathway explain synaptic plasticity and long-term potential effects, refining memory in humans.

Phenolic Compounds Found in Different Type of Vinegar
Polyphenolic compounds of different groups are found in vegetables and fruits.
Their biochemical deviations include thousands of combinations from phenolic acids to flavonoids compound.
Phenolic compounds have different health beneficial effects, like strong antimicrobial, anticarcinogenic and antioxidant properties which are already reported.
The interest is focused on these compounds due to uniformly higher beneficial fitness properties.
Fruits and vegetables also possess health-promoting fibers, phenolic acids,    vitamins, minerals and flavonoids.
Phenolic compounds are not a fundamental element for survival but can provide long term protection against a number of chronic diseases.
there are various phenolic compounds present in different vinegar shown in Table
Apples are essential resources of antioxidants that prevent free radical generation.
The apples have high nutritive value and their products are a good source of phenolic compounds, vitamins, minerals, calcium, potassium, phosphorus which are useful in various chronic diseases.
Apple cider vinegar is made up from renewed pressed apples, similar to apple juice, treated in the same way but it is not filtered.
ACV is formed from Cider that has undergone acetous bioconversion and contains low acetic acid (less than 5%), flavonoids, phenolic compounds, organic acids, minerals and vitamins.

Pharmacological Activities of Apple Cider Vinegar ACV act as anticancer
In 2001 Abe et al.
In 2005 Barth et al.
Pelingo apple juice suppressed the proliferation of breast cancer cells and made cell accumulation in the cell cycle G2/M phase.
In addition the apple juice also inhibited 12-o-tetra-decanoylphorbol-13-acetate (TPA) induced tumor genesis of different cell lines.
pple polyphenols contain procyanidins, flavonoids, epicatechin, catechin which significantly suppressed colon cancer cells.
Polyphenols present in apple cider vinegar has cytotoxicity effects in human urinary bladder cancer cells (TSGH-8301) associated with apoptosis and oxidative stress.
In 2008 Clarissa Gerhauser 50 has written a review article on Cancer chemoprotective potential of apple components and apple juice.
This review enclosed in vivo animal data, as well as clinical data, showed a targeted mechanism of apple products towards cancer.

ACV act as Anti diabetic
Apple cider vinegar (ACV) that is made from fermentation of Apple juice has been used as a folk medicine for diabetes.
Diabetes is the metabolic disorder characterized by the hyperglycemic effect.
In 2008, studies of shishehbor et al.
Apple derived products modulate the gut microbiota and improved high fat diet-induced body weight gain, hyperglycemia, hyperinsulinemia and other metabolic disorders in rodent models.
he metabolic disorders caused by high fat diet were improved by ACV, which proved antihyperlipidemic effect and prevented the atherogenic effects.
Apple cider vinegar (ACV) produced antihyperglycemic effect by the reduction of inflammatory response, reduced the oxidative stress-related markers and normalized the lipid profiles in the complication of Diabetes.
In 2016, studies of Morgan et al.
Based on the Meta analysis, it has been reported that apple products consumption (apple juice, sauce) was connected with a lower prevalence of obesity.
In 2016 Fathy and Drees 57 performed a study of cloudy apple juice and apple peel extract on rat pancreas.
The apple juice induced antihyperglycemic effects by the reduction of inflammation, modification of the oxidative stress and reduced the lipid profile, proposing a useful target for diabetes mellitus.

ACV act as Anti-inflammatory
In 2014 Nazıroglu et al.
Dietary flavonoids isolated from apples reduced the inflammation related markers like interleukin-11, interleukin-2 in intestinal tissue of mice.
Apple polyphenolic compounds reduced the inflammatory response of kidney via decrease the expression and activity of COX-2 in rodent model.
pple cider vinegar has a number of flavonoids and highly effective polyphenolic compounds (
In 2011 Budak et al.

ACV act as Hepatoprotective
Extract of apple polyphenolic compounds reduced the noxious effect of Aluminum in the liver of rodent species.
Polyphenolic compounds improved the SOD (Superoxide dismutase) and catalase activity associated with ATP synthesis.
In 2015 Kuzniak et al.
These results indicated that apple juice protects liver damage.
In 2015 Moura et al.

ACV act as the reduction in cardiotoxicity
Atherosclerosis is a chronic disease connected with inflammatory stimulation and oxidative stress which generates the cardio vascular diseases.
In 2018 Wu
Polyphenolic compounds in apple peel extract reduced arsenic trioxide induced cardiotoxicity in H9c2 cells.
The extract altered the activity of SOD, catalase, glutathione, GSH (Glutathione reductase) and caspase 3.
In 1994 Laranjinha et al.

ACV act as Antioxidants, Antimicrobial and Antifungal
It was found that ACV consumption increased antioxidants enzymes including SOD and glutathione peroxidase.
In 2000 Lu and Foo 71 carried out a study that showed the antioxidant and free radical scavenging activity of apple cider vinegar containing polyphenolic compounds.
In 2016 Seydim et al.
In 2018 Yagnik et al.
Apple cider vinegar (ACV) also has antifungal activity against candida species involved in denture stomatitis.
n 2011 Hyson wrote a comprehensive review on apples and apples constituents followed by a connective link between the apple products with different chronic diseases and their relationship with human health.
This review contained various in vitro studies and clinical data analysis supported to apple products.

ACV act as the reduction in Cognitive impairments, Immunomodulator
A number of studies from the Shea et al.
In this study aging showed impaired memory functions and oxidative markers in the mice brain.
When aged mice received the dilute form of apple cider vinegar in drinking water, there was a significant improvement in cognitive functions and increased antioxidant activity.
emory impairment, oxidative stress and reduction of acetyl choline signaling are the major symbols of Alzheimer's disease.
Apple juice also prevents the reduction of acetylcholine depletion connected with aging and oxidative stress and maintains the neuronal communications.
In 2017 Safari et al.

CONCLUSION
ACV (Apple cider vinegar) is a natural healthpromoting food which includes various potential health benefits.
Due to the existence of various polyphenolic compounds, it has high antioxidant, anti-inflammatory action, hepatoprotective and anti-cancer action.
The antioxidant mechanism defined essential suggestions for a protective effect of ACV not only cancer but also cardiovascular diseases, asthma and potentially diabetes.
Similarly, oxidative stress and mutation in gene coding amyloid precursor protein (APP) and aging are the main origins of Alzheimer's disease.
However, research data signifying that antioxidant effects are imperative, including the suppression of neurotoxic mediators in Alzheimer's diseases.
So regular consumption of ACV as a part of a healthy diet may prevent the oxidative effect of cells which is the main cause of Alzheimer's disease and it could be an economical and recurrent source of dietary antioxidant.
Ongoing work continues to define mechanisms behind this followed by in vivo and in vitro experiment.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This work was supported by Department of pharmaceutical Sciences and Technology, Birla Institute of Technology, Mesra for providing research support.
Authors are also gratefully acknowledged to AICTE-QIP (All India Council for Technical Education-Quality improvement programme) for providing financial support.



Figure 1 :
Figure 1: Causes of Alzheimer's disease (AD).



Figure 2 :
Figure 2: Predictive percentage increase of dementia in developed and developing regions.



Figure 3 :
Figure 3: Steps involved in the generation of Alzheimer's disease (AD).



Figure 4 :
Figure 4: Mechanisms linking vascular risk factors and Alzheimer's disease (AD).



Table 1 : Factors linked with Alzheimer's disease (AD). 16



Table 2 : Popular Medications for the treatment of AD.



Table 3 : Vinegars containing phenolic compounds.