Inflammation in mild cognitive impairment due to Parkinson's disease, Lewy body disease, and Alzheimer's disease
Inflammation appears to play a role in the progression of neurodegenerative diseases.
However, little is known about inflammation during early stages of cognitive decline or whether this differs in different disease groups.
We sought to investigate this by assessing the inflammatory profile in patients with Parkinson's disease with the early stages of cognitive impairment (PD-MCI), patients with prodromal Alzheimer's disease (MCI-AD), prodromal Lewy Body disease (MCI-LB) and controls.
We obtained venous blood samples from participants with PD-MCI (n = 44), PD-normal cognition (n = 112) MCI-LB (n = 38), MCI-AD (n = 21) and controls (n = 84).
We measured 10 cytokines using Meso Scale Discovery V-Plex Plus including interferon-gamma, interleukin (IL)-10, IL-12p70, IL-13, IL-1beta, IL-2, IL-4, IL-6, IL-8 and tumour necrosis factor alpha.
High-sensitivity C-reactive protein was measured.
There was a higher level of inflammation in patients with MCI-AD and MCI-LB compared with controls.
PD non-cognitively impaired had higher inflammatory markers than controls but there was no difference between PD-MCI and controls.
There was a decrease in inflammatory markers with increasing motor severity based on the Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale.
Inflammation may be involved in the onset of cognitive decline in patients with MCI-AD and MCI-LB but appears to be less prominent PD-MCI albeit in a small data set.
This suggests that anti-inflammatory medications may have most benefit at the earliest stages of neurodegenerative diseases.
For PD cases, this might be in advance of the development of MCI.

Introduction
There is a well-established association between neuroinflammation and neurodegenerative diseases
Microglia in the brain of patients with Alzheimer's disease (AD) co-localize with beta-amyloid (Aβ)
In Parkinson's disease (PD) microglia are particularly overactive in areas of the brain affected by dopaminergic loss early in disease
Furthermore, there appears to be an element of inflammation in Parkinson's disease dementia (PDD), with more widespread microglial activation in PDD
Increased levels of peripheral immune activation has also been repeatedly found in patients with AD and PD, suggesting that there may be an element of inter-play between the immune activation in the periphery and central neuroinflammation
There have been few studies investigating inflammatory markers in PDD, but the reported findings have been mixed
Questions still arise as to the specific role that inflammation plays in the pathogenesis of neurodegenerative diseases.
In order to gain a better understanding of this, we must understand the time point in disease in which inflammation occurs.
Peripheral cytokine levels in AD reach their peak in early disease
Genetic studies have found an association between the Human Leukocyte Antigen and increased susceptibility of PD, suggesting that immune mediators may be involved in triggering disease onset.
Whilst anti-inflammatory agents have no benefit when used in patients with established AD
We found increased inflammation in patients with dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) at the mild cognitive impairment (MCI) stage
PD with mild cognitive impairment (PD-MCI) is a particularly relevant sub-group for investigating inflammation in neurodegenerative disease; whilst this group have established Parkinson's disease, they are also at higher risk of dementia.
Studying their inflammatory profile may give us a clearer understanding of whether inflammation plays a role in the development of dementia in people with PD.
We therefore compared the systemic inflammatory profiles of patients with MCI from three different subgroups; MCI with AD subtype (MCI-AD), MCI with DLB subtype (MCI-LB), and MCI with PD subtype (PD-MCI).

Hypothesis
As previous studies have shown that inflammation occurs early in both Alzheimer's disease and Parkinson's disease, we hypothesised that patients with MCI-AD, MCI-LB and PD-MCI would have higher levels of inflammation compared with controls, and that the three MCI groups would all have similar levels of inflammation.
LewyPro study [16].
All participants were over the age of 60.
Participants all met the National Institute on Ageing and Alzheimer's Association (NIA-AA) MCI criteria
MCI-LB was diagnosed if two or more of the four consensus criteria for DLB were present, or patients had one of these and abnormal dopaminergic imaging
MCI-AD was diagnosed if none of the core symptoms for DLB were met, they had a normal dopaminergic scan, and evidence of cognitive decline as is characteristically seen in AD with no evidence of another aetiology.
The 'one year rule' was applied so that no subjects had shown evidence of Parkinsonism for more than a year before the onset of cognitive decline.
An expert consensus panel (AJT, PD, JPT) reviewed all clinical assessment data to confirm subjects met NIA-AA MCI criteria, and they rated the presence or absence of each of the four core clinical Lewy Body symptoms characteristic of DLB.
These assessments were based on taking a clinical history and neurological examination, as well as the use of various assessment tools as stated selected those who were aged over 60
Participants with newly diagnosed PD, diagnosed by a movement disorder specialist according to the Queen's Square Brain Bank criteria
Participants were classified as having PD-MCI at baseline according to the Movement Disorder Society (MDS) PD-MCI modified level 2 criteria
Participants were excluded if they had an MMSE < 24 or an existing diagnosis of dementia.
We also included the participants with Parkinson's disease (all those over 60 years old) but without cognitive impairment in order to investigate any differences in cytokine levels between patients with PD with normal cognition and PD-MCI.

Methods

Participants
Healthy controls were recruited from community settings.
They were all over 60 years old, group-matched by age either to the LewyPro participants or the ICICLE-PD participants.
All participants provided informed written consent to take part in the study.

Assessments
Clinical assessments included an assessment of parkinsonism using the Movement Disorder Society-Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale part III (MDS UPDRS III).
Illness burden was also assessed using the Cumulative Illness Rating Scale (CIRS).
An array of neuropsychological and clinical scales were performed, dependant on the study

Measurement of inflammatory markers
Venous blood samples were taken from all participants and processed in line with their study protocols.
Serum was removed for ICICLE-PD participants and plasma was removed for LewyPro participants, and samples were stored at -80 degrees until assays were performed.
Cytokine assays were measured using the Meso Scale Discovery Although it is stated in the MSD manufacturer's information that there is very little difference between using serum and plasma to measure these cytokines

Analysis
All statistical analysis was carried out using IBM SPSS statistics 23.
Data distributions were assessed for normality using Shapiro-Wilk test.
For any non-normally distributed data, where possible log transformations were attempted using log(x+1) in order to normalise any skewed data.
Associations were sought between inflammatory markers and patient demographics to assess for confounding variables.
Comparisons were made between groups using Analysis of Covariance (ANCOVA) to adjust for age and gender.
A significant difference was p<0.05, and Bonferroni correction was applied to adjust for multiple variables.
Comparisons were made between groups using Analysis of Covariance (ANCOVA) to adjust for age and gender.
A significant difference was p<0.05, and Bonferroni correction was applied to adjust for multiple comparisons.
Associations were also sought between inflammatory markers and clinical markers of PD motor severity (MDS-UPDRS III) and cognitive severity (MMSE) using Pearson's correlation.

Results

Demographics
In total 187 subjects were included; 38 had a diagnosis of MCI-LB, 21 of MCI-AD, 44 of PD-MCI and 112 of PD with normal cognition.
There were 20 controls matched to the participants in the MCI-AD and MCI-LB groups, and 64 controls matched to the participants in the PD-MCI group.
Participants in the MCI-AD and MCI-LB group were older than those in the PD-MCI group, but all groups were age-matched to their respective control (table
There were differences in gender between groups; all groups had more males than females apart from the MCI-AD group which had more females than males.
As expected the MMSE score was higher in the control groups than the MCI groups, and MDS UPDRS score was highest in both of the groups with Lewy body disease.
There was no difference in CIRS score between disease groups and their control groups.
45% of the MCI-LB group were using anti-dementia medications, in comparison to 24% of the MCI-AD group and none of the PD-MCI group (table
Between 0% and 36% of the participants in each group were using anti-inflammatory medications, not including aspirin 75mg.
Of these 24 people were using Non-Steroidal Anti-Inflammatory Drugs (NSAIDs) and the remaining 35 were using other anti-inflammatory medications such steroids and 5aminosalicylic acid.

Cytokine and CRP levels
IL-13 and IL-1beta were removed from further analysis as more than 50% of the samples had non-detectable cytokine levels.
IL-12p70 was also removed as there was high inter-assay variability.
We compared the LewyPro participants against LewyPro controls, and we compared the ICICLE-PD patients against the ICICLE-PD controls.
The MCI-AD and MCI-LB groups had significantly higher levels of IL-10, IL-2 and IL-4 than their control group (table 2).
TNF-alpha was the only cytokine which was significantly lower in MCI-AD and MCI-LB than their controls.
There was no significant differences in any of the inflammatory markers measured between PD-MCI and their control group.
As an exploratory analysis we investigated whether there were any differences between the MCI groups.
We found higher levels of IL-10, IL-2 and IL-4 in the MCI-AD and MCI-LB groups than the PD-MCI group.
Due to the differences in age, co-morbidity and sampling methods between these groups, this finding is exploratory only and is not therefore recorded in table 2.

Correlations
We also sought to investigate whether there were any correlations between PD motor severity using the UPDRS III score and cytokine level.
Control participants were excluded.
Serum and plasma samples were both included in the correlation analysis.
We found negative correlations between MDS-UPDRS III and IL-2 (r=-0.234,
p=0.017) and IL-4 (r=-0.301,
p=0.002).
(Figure
There was no correlation between MMSE and inflammatory markers in any of the MCI groups.

PD-MCI vs PD
There were no significant differences in any of the cytokines between PD-MCI and PD without cognitive impairment, except IL-8 which was significantly higher in PD without MCI (p = 0.026).
The PD group without cognitive impairment had higher levels of IL-6 and TNF-alpha compared to controls.

Discussion
In a previous study we found that peripheral inflammatory markers were high in patients with MCI-AD and MCI-LB and normal in patients with DLB and AD dementia, implying that inflammation is highest early in disease
In the current study we aimed to investigate this further in patients with PD-MCI.
We found that whilst patients with MCI-AD and MCI-LB had significantly higher levels of inflammation compared to controls, the PD-MCI group had similar levels of inflammatory markers to controls, with only slight, non-significant increases in some cytokines.
However, inflammatory markers were elevated in the PD non-cognitively impaired group.
This suggests that inflammation may play a role in the onset of cognitive decline leading to AD dementia and DLB, but in PD, inflammation may be most prominent prior to the onset of MCI.
The aetiology of PD is debated; however, inflammation is associated with PD and may play a role in the onset of disease.
It has been suggested that the pathological hallmarks of PD may be triggered by infection of the GI tract, contributing to the pre-motor symptoms of PD before also invading the CNS and leading to the more characteristic motor symptoms
It is postulated that these infections communicate to the brain via the vagus nerve
Studies have suggested that infections such as Helicobacter Pylori may be a particularly important source of enteric inflammation in PD
These findings suggest that infection and therefore inflammation are involved in the early, pre-CNS stages of disease.
We previously reported that there is evidence for increased inflammation in patients with PD, consistent with this, and that increased levels of inflammation predict faster disease progression and are associated with cognitive impairment over 3 years of follow up
This suggests not only that early inflammation may be involved in the onset of neurodegeneration, but also that a higher level of inflammation predicts a faster rate of decline.
There are few studies investigating inflammation in PDD, and those have found mixed results.
Several studies have found no significant difference in the level of cytokines in patients with PDD compared to PD and controls and one study found that whilst some cytokines are raised in patients with PDD, some have lower levels compared to PD and controls
Our findings add that there does not appear to be an overall increase in inflammation in PD-MCI.
However previous analysis of this ICICLE-PD cohort has shown that in patients with PD higher levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines are associated with having a lower MMSE over 54 months
This analysis looked at an older subset of ICICLE-PD patients (those over 60) to match the criterion in the MCI-AD and MCI-LB groups.
This difference may therefore be age related, or may relate to the criteria used to define PD-MCI which may exclusively capture those with more advanced cognitive impairment.
Furthermore, the current study included only cross sectional rather than longitudinal data.
Further research is needed, especially prospective studies with serial assessments of inflammatory markers, to more fully explore the role that inflammation plays over time in PD.
In the current study we also found a weak but significant association between immune markers (IL-2 and IL-4) with motor severity, providing preliminary evidence that the immune activation may decrease as motor severity increases, although longitudinal studies are needed to test this finding.
Furthermore, as IL-2 is generally considered to be pro-inflammatory and IL-4 anti-inflammatory, there may also be a complex disruption to the balance of pro and anti-inflammatory cytokines, particularly in the early stages of disease.
There is increasing evidence to suggest that inflammation occurs early in neurodegenerative disease progression.
In AD, studies have shown that inflammation occurs at the pre-dementia stages
This finding has been replicated in patients with DLB
A longitudinal study found that increased levels of IL-6 increases the risk of PD, suggesting that inflammation occurs at the pre-dementia stage
In keeping with the data that we report here indicating that inflammatory markers are raised in PD cases without cognitive impairment, previous findings from the ICICLE-PD study have shown that inflammatory markers are raised in PD compared to controls
One explanation is that inflammation may be highest in the earliest stages of PD and predictive of disease progression, but it is possible that this may wane once MCI manifests.
Clinically, this study provides useful information into when anti-inflammatory medications may be of benefit.
It has been shown in previous studies that inflammation occurs early in MCI-AD and MCI-DLB, and inflammation decreases as disease progresses to dementia
However, this study has shown that there does not appear an increase in the level of inflammatory markers in patients with PD-MCI to controls, perhaps because inflammation occurs in the early stages of PD, prior to the onset of MCI.
In these patients therefore, it seems unlikely that there would be any benefit of using anti-inflammatory medications at the onset of MCI.
Our analysis has some important limitations.
As we included participants from two separate studies there were some differences in demographics and methodology.
As outlined in the methodology, the way in which participants were recruited differed between participants from the LewyPro study and those from the ICICLE-PD study (from memory services and movement disorder services respectively), leading to the possibility of selection bias between groups.
Whilst plasma was used to measure cytokines in the MCI-AD and MCI-LB patients, serum was used for the PD-MCI patients.
Although the MSD manufacturer states that there is little difference between using plasma and serum for the cytokines measured
An additional limitation was the small sample size of each MCI group, with fewer than 50 participants in each group, affecting the power of analysis.
Our findings should therefore be regarded as preliminary and in need of replication using consistent methodology across all groups and larger numbers of participants in each group.
The PD-MCI participants were younger than other MCI groups, and there were differences in the gender distribution across groups.
Whilst we controlled for this in analysis, future studies should match for these variables between MCI groups.
Finally, as this was a cross sectional study correlation findings between disease severity and inflammatory markers were preliminary only, and longitudinal studies are needed in order to further investigate the association.

Conclusion
We found that whilst PD patients without MCI appear to have higher levels of inflammation than controls, those with PD-MCI seem to have similar levels of inflammation to controls.
Those with MCI-AD and MCI-LB had increased inflammatory markers compared to control subjects.
Taken with our earlier report in patients with PD who had higher levels of inflammation than controls, this suggests that immune activation might alter during the course of these diseases, perhaps being highest nearer to disease onset at clinical presentation, lower once MCI develops.
Future studies should focus on investigating the temporal profile of inflammatory markers in prospective studies of patients with PD with serial blood samples to ascertain whether, as in dementia, there is early inflammation which decreases as disease progresses, and therefore whether and when during the course of disease anti-inflammatory medications may be beneficial.

Declaration of Interest

MDS-UPDRS


Figures: 1 References: 30


MCI-AD and MCI-LB patients were recruited from memory clinics and dementia services in the North East of England as part of the National Institute for Health Research (NIHR)


below.
Clinicians were blinded to the results of the other clinicians and to scan results.
Participants were excluded if they had a diagnosis of dementia, and if they had severe physical, neurological or psychiatric illness, a past history of alcohol excess or use of psychotropic drugs.
PD-MCI patients were participants in the Incidence of Cognitive Impairment in Cohorts with Longitudinal Evaluation in Parkinson's Disease study (ICICLE-PD), and we



(
MSD) V-PLEX Plus Pro-inflammatory Panel 1, which measured Tumour Necrosis Factor (TNF)-alpha, Interleukin (IL)-1beta, IL-2, IL-4, IL-6, IL-8, IL-10, IL-12p70, IL-13 and Interferon (IFN)-gamma.
High sensitivity Creactive protein (hs-CRP) was measured separately, using V-PLEX CRP for ICICLE-PD samples and using Roche Cobas c702 for LewyPro samples.
Samples were measured in duplicate for ICICLE-PD samples, and in triplicate for LewyPro samples.


J O'Brien reports grants from Avid/Lily during the conduct of this study.
He also reports personal fees from GE Healthcare, personal fees from TauRx, grants and personal fees from Avid/Lily and personal fees from Axon outside of the submitted work.
AJ Thomas reports grants from NIHR BRU in Lewy Body Dementia and grants from Alzheimer's Research UK during the conduct of this study.
He also reports grants from GE Healthcare outside of the submitted work.



7 GenderMMSE 29 . 1 +
/-1.6 78.5 +/-1.4 75.6 +/-1.2 69.5 +/-0.8 71.1 +/-0.1 69.5 +/-6./-0.2 b,c 26.5 +/-0.6 a 26.4 +/-0.4 a 29.3 +/-0.1 e,f 27.8 +/-0.3 d 28.9 +/-1.1 d



Figure 1 .
Figure 1.
Correlations between the Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale (UPDRS) score with Interleukin (IL)-2 and IL4, with a high UPDRS score indicating worse motor features



Table 1 :
Results are presented