Refined carbohydrate‐rich diet is associated with long‐term risk of dementia and Alzheimer's disease in apolipoprotein E ε4 allele carriers
à la diffusion de documents scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non, émanant des établissements d'enseignement et de recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires publics ou privés.

Introduction
According to the World Health Organization, dementia will affect >152 million people by 2050
Currently no effective treatment is available to cure or slow down dementia progression.
After the repeated failure of clinical trials, now the most promising research focuses on preventing dementia.
Therefore, it is urgent to identify modifiable factors that could be targeted in interventions to prevent dementia and to promote better brain health in aging populations.
Among these modifiable factors, nutrition has emerged as an important issue
Refined carbohydrates are carbohydrates that are rapidly absorbed into the bloodstream, and include starches and sugars (sucrose, glucose-fructose syrup).
The glycemic and insulinemic responses progressively increase with more processed carbohydrates.
Moreover, some meals are typically high in refined carbohydrates (i.e., breakfast and afternoon snack)
In mouse models of Alzheimer's disease (AD), high sugar diet worsens AD pathophysiology, notably by causing memory impairment and increasing amyloid beta (Aβ) deposits.
These studies also demonstrated that a high-sugar diet alters brain insulin signaling and leads to insulin resistance
This suggests that diets rich in refined carbohydrates could promote dementia and AD through insulin resistance
However, insulin resistance and refined carbohydrate-rich diet are important risk factors of type 2 diabetes (T2D), therefore T2D could be a confounder in the relationship between refined carbohydrate-rich diet and dementia.
To date the direct association between refined carbohydrate-rich diet and the risk of dementia or cognitive decline has not been adequately investigated in epidemiological studies
They showed that refined carbohydrates consumption is associated with higher amyloid deposits
The few existing longitudinal studies have yielded inconsistent results
Previous epidemiological studies also suggest that a refined carbohydrate-rich diet may interact with the apolipoprotein E 4 allele (APOE-4), the principal genetic risk factor of AD and dementia.
In animal studies, APOE-4 carriers are more likely to develop insulin resistance
Nevertheless, the potential interaction between a refined carbohydrate-rich diet and APOE-4 on the risk of dementia has not been studied in humans.
The objective of this study was to determine whether high refined carbohydrate intake, estimated by quantifying the GL, is associated with the risk of dementia in a large population-based prospective cohort study with a 12-year follow-up (the Three-City Study).
The present study addressed four questions: (1) Is a refined-carbohydrate rich diet associated with dementia?
(2) Are some meals more at risk than others?
(3) Does refined carbohydrate-rich diet interact with APOE-4?
(4) Is the association independent of T2D?

Methods

Study participants
The Three-City Study is a French population-based cohort study of 9294 people, aged 65 years and over, who were randomly selected between 1999 and 2000 from the electoral roll of three French cities: Bordeaux, Dijon, and Montpellier.
A detailed description of the Three-City Study has been provided elsewhere
Participants had face-to-face interviews with trained nurses and psychologists at baseline, and at 2, 4, 7, 10, 12, and 15-years follow-up (FU; Figure
Questionnaires were used to collect data on sociodemographic and lifestyle characteristics, education level, selfreported chronic diseases, depressive symptoms, and functional status.
In addition, participants underwent a comprehensive evaluation of cognitive and physical functions.
The present study focused on a subsample of participants from Bordeaux (n = 1755) and Montpellier (n = 1690) who filled in the food frequency questionnaire (FFQ) at the first and second follow-up (i.e., 2 and 4 years after baseline), respectively (Figure
Participants with prevalent dementia at the time of FFQ completion were excluded.
A flow chart describes the participants' selection (Figure
At the end of the study, the mortality rate was 26.9% and the rate of lost participants in the FU was 21.0%.
The Ethical Committee of the University Hospital of Bicêtre (France) approved the study protocol, and all participants signed an informed consent.

Dietary data

Food Frequency Questionnaire
Dietary data were collected using a semi-quantitative, 148-item FFQ at 1-FU for Bordeaux and 2-FU for Montpellier (Figure
The FFQ was divided into: breakfast, lunch, dinner, and snacks between meals (extract from the FFQ in Table
Reported frequencies were transformed into discrete variables as follows: 0 for never or less than once a month, 0.25 for once a month, 0.5 for twice a month, 0.75 for three times a month, 1 to 7 for one to seven times per week
Discrete variables were expressed in servings per week.

24-h dietary recall interview
A 24-hour dietary recall interview was performed at the Bordeaux center at 1-FU by trained dieticians.
For each item, seven serving sizes were available.
Concordance between FFQ and 24-hour dietary recall was previously checked for fatty acids

Glycaemic load
The glycemic index values of FFQ items were obtained from the International Table of Glycemic Index
using glucose as the reference.
The glycemic index compares the rate of glucose release by measuring the 2 hours postprandial glycemia after consumption of a food portion containing 50 g of available carbohydrates.
GL reflects both the carbohydrate quantity and quality
Compared to low-GL diets, high-GL diets elicit larger glycemic and insulinemic responses
For each FFQ item (i.e., food/beverage categories), GL was calculated by multiplying the glycemic index by the amount of available carbohydrates (g) per serving, divided by 100
Foods with low carbohydrate content (e.g., meat, fish, fats) were not assigned any GL value
Then, the GL for each item was multiplied by the frequency of consumption/week reported by each participant.
Finally, the sum of this last value for all the items consumed during a meal gave the total GL for breakfast, lunch, afternoon snack ("goûter" in French, corresponding to a snack between lunch and dinner), and dinner.
The GL from the 24-hour dietary recall was estimated using precise food item data and gathered by meal.
The daily GL was either the sum of all the FFQ items or the 24-hour dietary recall.
The total GL values for breakfast, lunch, afternoon snack, and dinner from the FFQ and the 24-hour dietary recall were significantly correlated in the Bordeaux subsample (range: 0.30 to 0.57).
Precise estimation of carbohydrate content was not possible with this FFQ.

Energy intake
Energy intakes for the corresponding items in the FFQ were obtained from the Anses-Ciqual database (www.anses.ciqual.fr).
The energy intake per serving of each item was multiplied by the reported frequencies.
Then, the sum of the energy intake for the items consumed at each eating occasion gave the energy intake of each meal.
The energy intakes from the 24-hour dietary recall were derived as previously described
Although the FFQ underestimated the energy intake, the energy intakes for breakfast, lunch, afternoon snack, and dinner from the FFQ and the 24-hour dietary recall in the Bordeaux subsample were significantly correlated (range: 0.20 to 0.53).

Mediterranean-like diet score
To take into account the diet quality, a Mediterranean-like diet score was calculated.
Items were grouped according to the nine components of the Mediterranean-like diet score
For fruits, vegetables, legumes, cereals, and fish, one point was assigned when the participant's consumption was above the median, zero otherwise.
For meat and dairy, one point was assigned when the participant's consumption was below the median, zero otherwise.
For alcohol, one point was assigned when consumption was below 20 g of ethanol per day for men and 5.7 g for women (i.e., low-to-moderate alcohol consumption in this population).
For the ratio of monounsaturated fatty acids to saturated fatty acids, one point was assigned when the ratio was above the sex-specific median, zero otherwise.
The total Mediterranean like diet score ranged from zero (lowest adherence) to nine (highest adherence).

Diagnosis of dementia
The diagnosis of dementia and its classification was made at each follow-up by the Three-City Study local clinical investigators, following standardized procedures.
Then, an independent committee of neurologists examined all potential cases of dementia to obtain a consensus on the diagnosis and etiology based on the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fourth Edition
Cases of dementia, including AD, were classified according to the National Institute of Neurological and Communicative Disorders and Stroke/Alzheimer's Disease and Related Disorders Association criteria
Mixed dementia was defined as an AD-type cognitive profile with either cerebrovascular lesions on brain imaging, or a documented history of stroke and presence of prominent executive function deficits, attested by the Trail Making Test

Covariates
Education level was defined as no school, primary school, high school, or graduate level.
The Mini-Mental State Examination
Body mass index (BMI) was calculated as weight (kg) / height (m²).
Hypertension was defined by systolic blood pressure ≥140 mmHg, or diastolic blood pressure ≥90 mmHg, or use of antihypertensive drugs
History of head trauma and stroke was established using standardized questions.
Cardiovascular history included history of myocardial infarction, coronary surgery, coronary angioplasty, and arterial surgery of the legs for arteritis.
Hypercholesterolemia was defined as total cholesterol ≥6.2 mmol.L -1 .
T2D was defined as treated diabetes, fasting glycaemia >7 mmol.L -1 , and additionally self-reported.
APOE genotyping was described elsewhere
APOE-4 carriers had at least one 4 allele.
Information was also obtained on the subjectively evaluated health and smoking status (never, past, or current).
Depressive symptomatology was evaluated with the Center for Epidemiological Studies-Depression (CES-D) scale
As physical activity was assessed in a slightly different manner in the two centers

Data analysis 2.5.1 Covariates selection
First, the main confounding factors of dementia and potential confounding factors related to carbohydrates were pre-selected.
For the outcome-related covariates (dementia) proportional hazard models adjusted for center, age, sex, and education were performed.
For exposure-related covariates (daily GL) Pearson correlations (for continuous variables) or analysis of variance (ANOVA; for categorical variables) were used.
In both cases, covariates with a P value < .10 were selected.

Main analyses
Proportional hazards models were used to evaluate the association between the GL and the risk of all-cause dementia over the 11-to 13-year follow-up (mean follow-up = 11.4 ± 2 years), in five separated analyses (i.e., daily, breakfast, lunch, afternoon snack, dinner).
This modeling considers the time of dementia onset and the participants out of the study (i.e., death, loss of follow-up).
In Model 1, analyses were adjusted for age (at the time of the FFQ), sex, education, APOE-4 carrier status, BMI, T2D, hypertension, cardiovascular history, stroke, hypercholesterolemia, head trauma, good subjective health, and tobacco (i.e., the main confounding factors of dementia)
In Model 2, Mediterranean diet-like score and physical activity were also added relative to the Model 1, due to the high percentage of missing values (6.7% for the Mediterranean diet-like score and 14.3% for physical activity).
In Model 3, incomplete variables were imputed (see below) and analyses were adjusted for the same variables as in Model 2. The interaction between GL and APOE-4 was tested and was kept in the model when significant.
The proportional hazards assumption was tested with the Schöenfeld residuals method.
Kaplan-Meyer survival curves were used to graphically illustrate survival findings.

Imputation of missing values
The percentage of missing values across covariates varied between 0% and 14.3%.
To minimize the loss of power and selection bias, incomplete variables were imputed using the mice package
To include a large number of related predictor variables without encountering problems due to collinearity
Eight multiply imputed datasets were created and analyzed.
The parameters of interest were estimated in each imputed dataset separately, and combined using Rubin's rules.
The combined results of the imputed datasets are presented in Model 3.

Sensitivity analyses
First, the main analyses concerning participants from Bordeaux were replicated using the GL values estimated from the 24-hour dietary recall results.
Then, participants (both centers) with T2D were excluded to confirm that GL effect was not mediated by T2D (T2D participants had reduced GL values).
Finally, analyses were restricted to AD by excluding participants (both centers) with incident mixed and vascular dementia from the main analyses.

Results
A total of 2777 participants (n = 1376 from Montpellier and n = 1401 from Bordeaux) were included in the analyses (Table
At the time of the FFQ, the participants' mean age was 75.9 years, 61.1% were women, and 10.1% had T2D.
During a mean follow-up time of 11.4 years (SD = 2.0 years), 350 participants developed dementia: 260 cases of AD, 49 cases of mixed dementia, and 41 cases of vascular dementia were identified.

The statistical interaction between glycaemic load and APOE-ε4 carrier status is associated with the risk of dementia
We asked whether the GL, as an estimation of refined carbohydrate consumption, was associated with the risk of dementia during the 11.4 years of follow-up (Table
We did not find any direct association between dementia and the daily GL or GL value of breakfast, lunch, afternoon snack, and dinner.
However, the interaction between afternoon-snack GL and APOE-4 carrier status was significantly associated with the dementia risk.
APOE-4 carrier status was also associated with the dementia risk.
After adjustments for Mediterranean-like diet score and physical activity (Model 2), the interaction remained significant.
Significant covariates were APOE-4 carrier status, age, T2D, and history of head trauma as risk factors and living in Montpellier as protective factor (Figure
Multiple imputations (Model 3) did not change these results showing that the risk of dementia was higher in APOE-4 carriers who consumed afternoon snacks with high GL value.
To quantify this association, we stratified by APOE-4 (Figure
In APOE-4 carriers, hazard ratio for a 10-point increase in the GL value per day was 2.06 [1.07-4.0].
Finally, in categorical analyses the interaction between the higher tercile of the afternoon-snack GL and APOE-4 carrier status was significantly associated with the dementia risk (Table
Kaplan-Meyer survival curves clearly illustrated it (Figure

Sensitivity analyses
By estimating the GL on the basis of the FFQ results, we hypothesized that participants consumed standard serving sizes, leading to potential measurement errors.
To evaluate this potential bias, we ran a sensitivity analysis in the Bordeaux subsample using the GL values estimated from the 24-hour dietary recall (Table
Proportional hazards models confirmed that the interaction between afternoon-snack GL and APOE-4 carrier status was associated with dementia.
Hazard ratios estimated from the 24-hour dietary recall were comparable to those calculated using the FFQ data.
These analyses validated our results obtained with the GL values estimated from the FFQ.
Moreover, results were not modified by excluding participants with T2D from the analyses (Table
Finally, we showed that the interaction between afternoon-snack GL and APOE-4 carrier status was significantly associated with the risk of AD by excluding participants with incident mixed and vascular dementia (Table

Discussion
In this 12-year follow-up study, we found that higher afternoon-snack GL was associated with an increased risk of dementia and AD in APOE-4 carriers using two methods for GL evaluation.
This result was independent of energy intake, Mediterranean-like diet, physical activity, and remained significant after exclusion of participants with T2D.
The daily GL and GL values of breakfast, lunch, and dinner were not associated with the risk of dementia and AD.
Few previous studies have explored the association between refined carbohydrate intake and dementia or AD.
In a cross-sectional analysis, sugar-sweetened beverages were associated with several markers of preclinical AD, such as low total brain volume, and poor Immediate and Delayed Logical Memory scores
Similarly, in another study (n = 208 elderly participants), diet with high GL was associated with poor cognitive performance
The only study on the association between GL and AD did not find any significant association
As in our study, the authors tested the daily GL, but not GL by meal.
They did not check for an interaction with APOE-4 and had a shorter followup (6.3 years).
In the Framingham Heart Study (10-year follow-up) no association was found between sugar-sweetened beverages and dementia
Conversely, in the Cardiovascular Risk Factors, Aging and Dementia study, sugar intake reduction (self-reported) in midlife was associated with lower dementia risk over 16.8 years
Specifically, the association between T2D and AD was stronger among APOE-4 carriers (3.7 times higher)
The statistical interaction between APOE-4 carrier and afternoon snack GL on the risk of dementia could be explained in three ways.
First, afternoon snacks with high GL could induce oxidative stress, a favorable environment for insulin resistance.
Afternoon snacks tend to have high GL because they are usually richer in refined carbohydrates, especially sweets, cereal bars, biscuits, and sodas
Snacks are digested more rapidly than full meals because of their lower content in fat and fiber.
Thus, post-prandial glycemia quickly increases and induces a high peak in insulin secretion.
This chronically repeated high and transitory insulin peaks could promote insulin resistance through oxidative stress and inflammation
Second, APOE-4 carriers are more likely to develop insulin resistance.
As APOE-4 carriers have lower antioxidant activity than APOE-4 non-carriers
Evidence from several studies suggests that APOE-4 carriers are less sensitive to insulin.
Animal experiments provided a molecular explanation of this observation.
In mice that express human APOE-4, APOE4 impairs insulin signaling in the cortex, and the hippocampus in an age dependent manner
Moreover, in these mice, the transcription factor peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma, which increases insulin sensitivity, is downregulated
The authors found that this lower glucose metabolism was caused by impaired glucose uptake, glycolytic activity, and mitochondrial respiration.
These results are in agreement with epidemiological studies showing that APOE-4 carriers have lower brain glucose metabolism (measured by 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose positronemission tomography)
In the Uppsala Longitudinal Study of Adult Men, high fasting serum insulin and homeostasis model assessment-insulin resistance (HOMAIR) index were associated with dementia or cognitive impairment over 32 years
We could hypothesize that high intake of refined carbohydrates at afternoon-snack time induces insulin resistance that in turn promotes dementia development.
Alternatively, perhaps APOE-4 carriers spontaneously consume more refined carbohydrates to compensate for the lower glucose metabolism induced by APOE4.
However, in our sample carbohydrate-based food groups were not different between APOE-4 carriers and non-carriers (data not shown).
On the other hand, the estimated GL values for breakfast, lunch, and dinner might not reflect the real GL values resulting from the digestion of all food together (i.e., carbohydrates with vegetables, meat, fish, and fat).
During meals, carbohydrates are rarely ingested alone, and their degradation and absorption rates during digestion are modified by the other macronutrients.
For example, adding fat and/or protein components to a high glycemic index meal decreases the glycemic response
Dietary fibers have a similar effect
The order of food macronutrient intake also changes the glycemic and insulinemic responses.
Indeed, higher postprandial glycemic and insulinemic responses are observed when high glycemic index carbohydrates (e.g., rice) are eaten first and then vegetables and meat compared to eating all these foods together
The major strengths of our study are the prospective population-based design, the large number of participants, and the long follow-up period.
Data from the 24-hour dietary recall (Bordeaux subsample) validated the results obtained with the FFQ.
Moreover, we adjusted for numerous confounding factors.
Specifically, our results are independent from energy intake, BMI, diet quality, physical activity, T2D, and also from a possible protective effect of Mediterranean lifestyle (living in the Montpellier center).
However, our study presents some limitations.
First, we did not repeat the FFQ during the follow-up.
Hence, we could not determine the participants' exposure duration to the actual diet and we do not know whether participants changed their dietary habits during the follow-up.
Second, the dietary habits, assessed 12 years ago, could have already reflected changes due to the first symptoms of dementia pathology (protopathic bias).
This might have overestimated the association between afternoon-snack GL and dementia risk in APOE-4 carriers.
Third, we did not have access to fasting serum insulin data to calculate the HOMA-IR index and to test whether there is an interaction between APOE-4 carriers and insulin resistance.
Thus, we could not verify whether insulin resistance promotes dementia.
In our prospective cohort study, afternoon snacks rich in refined carbohydrates were associated with dementia risk in APOE-4 carriers.
These results pave the way to new prevention strategies.
However, large-scale studies in different populations and using a homogeneous methodology are required to replicate this observation.
Moreover, the statistical interaction between APOE-4 status and refined carbohydrate-rich diet should be assessed in future studies.
More investigations are needed to explain the mechanisms underlying the role of refined carbohydrate intake, glycemic response, and APOE-4 in dementia pathophysiology.

Research in Context
1. Systematic review: We searched for relevant literature using online databases PubMed.
We noted the scarcity of published studies dealing with the association between "dementia"
[Mesh] or "cognitive dysfunction" [Mesh] and "sugar(s)", "carbohydrate(s)", "glyc(a)emic index" or "glyc(a)emic load".
We observed that most of these studies were cross-sectional and/or had a small sample size.

Interpretation: Our findings indicate an association between afternoon-snack with a high
refined-carbohydrate diet and the risk of dementia in carriers of Apolipoprotein ε4 allele.
3. Future directions: Prospective studies are required to confirm our results.
Experimental studies are needed to further explore the relationship between refined carbohydrate diet, glycemic response and apolipoprotein E4 in the pathophysiology leading to dementia.
Table
Association between glycaemic load terciles of each meal and risk of dementia over 11.4 ± 2 years of follow-up.
Daily GL terciles was GL<90, 90<GL<115 and GL≥115 per day.
Breakfast GL terciles was GL<20, 20<GL<30 and GL≥30 per day.
Lunch GL terciles was GL<30, 30<GL<37 and GL≥37 per day.
Afternoon-snack GL terciles was GL=0, 0<GL<10 and GL≥10 per day.
Dinner GL terciles was GL<29, 29<GL<38 and GL≥38 per day.



Figure 1 .
Figure 1.
Time frame of the Three-City Study at the Bordeaux and Montpellier centres.
Diagnosis of



Figure 2 .
Figure 2. Flow chart of the study sample from the Bordeaux and Montpellier centres of the Three-



Figure 3 .
Figure 3.
Estimated hazard ratios of all covariates from Model 2 (n = 2,145).
The hazard ratio of the



Figure S1 .
Figure S1.
Stratified analysis on participants with APOE-ε4 status.
Estimated hazard ratios of all



Figure S2 .
Figure S2.
Stratified analysis on participants without APOE-ε4 status.
Estimated hazard ratios of all



Figure S3 .
Figure S3.
Kaplan-Meier survival curves according to afternoon-snack GL terciles and APOE-ε4



Table 1
Characteristics of the study population



Table 2 .
Association between glycaemic load and risk of dementia over 11.4 ± 2 years of follow-up.
Apolipoprotein E 4 allele; CI, confidence interval; GL, glycaemic load; HR, hazard ratio.
NOTE.
Proportional hazard models.
Model 1 was adjusted for inclusion centre, age, sex, education level, energy intake, APOE-ε4 status, BMI, type 2 diabetes, hypertension, cardiovascular history, history of stroke, hypercholesterolemia, history of head trauma, depressive symptomatology, subjective health, and tobacco.
Model 2 included additional adjustments for Mediterranean diet-like score and physical activity.
Model 3 is Model 2 with multiple imputations * HR for a 10-point increase in the GL value per day that is equivalent to eating an additional 30 g of a French baguette at each corresponding meal.



Table 3 .
Association between the glycaemic load, estimated from the 24-h dietary recall interview (Bordeaux centre), and the risk of dementia during 13 years of follow-up.



Table S4 .
Association between glycaemic load and risk of dementia during 11.4 ± 2 years without participants with type 2 diabetes.
Apolipoprotein E 4 allele; CI, confidence interval; GL, glycaemic load; HR, hazard ratio.
NOTE.
Proportional hazard models.
Model 1 was adjusted for inclusion centre, age, sex, education level, energy intake, APOE-ε4, BMI, hypertension, cardiovascular history, history of stroke, hypercholesterolemia, history of head trauma, depressive symptomatology, subjective health, and tobacco.
Model 2 included additional adjustments for Mediterranean diet-like score and physical activity.



Table S5 .
Association between glycaemic load and risk of Alzheimer's disease (exclusion of participants with mixed dementia and vascular dementia) during 11.4 ± 2 years of follow-up.
APOE-ε4, Apolipoprotein E 4 allele; CI, confidence interval; GL, glycaemic load; HR, hazard ratio.
NOTE.
Proportional hazard models.
Model 1 was adjusted for inclusion centre, age, sex, education level, energy intake, APOE-ε4, BMI, type 2 diabetes, hypertension, cardiovascular history, history of stroke, hypercholesterolemia, history of head trauma, depressive symptomatology, subjective health, and tobacco.
Model 2 included additional adjustments for Mediterranean diet-like score and physical activity.



Table S6 .
Number of servings per week for each meal.