Inhibition of 2-Arachidonoylglycerol Metabolism Alleviates Neuropathology and Improves Cognitive Function in a Tau Mouse Model of Alzheimer’s Disease
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the most common cause of dementia, which affects more than 5 million individuals in the United States.
Unfortunately, no effective therapies are currently available to prevent development of AD or to halt progression of the disease.
It has been proposed that monoacylglycerol lipase (MAGL), the key enzyme degrading the endocannabinoid 2-arachidonoylglycerol (2-AG) in the brain, is a therapeutic target for AD based on the studies using the APP transgenic models of AD.
While inhibition of 2-AG metabolism mitigates b-amyloid (Aβ) neuropathology, it is still not clear whether inactivation of MAGL alleviates tauopathies as accumulation and deposition of intracellular hyperphosphorylated tau protein are the neuropathological hallmark of AD.
Here we show that JZL184, a potent MAGL inhibitor, signi cantly reduced proin ammatory cytokines, astrogliosis, phosphorylated tau, and GSK3b in P301S/PS19 mice, a tau mouse model of AD.
Importantly, Tau transgenic mice treated with JZL184 displayed improvements in spatial learning and memory retention.
In addition, inactivation of MAGL ameliorates deteriorations in expression of synaptic proteins in P301S/PS19 mice.
Our results provide further evidence that MAGL is a promising therapeutic target for AD.

Introduction
Alzheimer's disease (AD), the most common form of dementia, is a degenerative brain disease characterized by neuroin ammation, accumulation of β-amyloid (Aβ) plaques and neuro brillary tangles, neurodegeneration, synaptic dysfunction, and cognitive decline.
Based on 'the 2020 Alzheimer's Disease Facts and Figures' reported by Alzheimer's Association, more than 5 million Americans age 65 and older are living with Alzheimer's dementia in 2020 and AD is the sixth-leading cause of death in the US.
However, no effective pharmacotherapies are currently available for prevention and treatment of AD.
This is largely due to the fact that etiology of AD is multifactorial and development of AD is linked to multiple mechanisms or signaling pathways.
This means that the ideal AD therapy should be able to modify the disease through multiple mechanisms.
Endocannabinoids are endogenous bioactive lipid mediators involved in a variety of physiological and pathological processes.
The endocannabinoid 2-arachidonoylglycerol (2-AG) is the most abundant endogenous cannabinoid and a full agonist for both CB1R and CB2R
Several lines of evidence indicate that 2-AG displays anti-in ammatory and neuroprotective properties in responses to harmful insults
2-AG is primarily synthesized from diacylglycerol (DAG) by diacylglycerol lipases α/β and metabolized by the enzymes, including monoacylglycerol lipase (MAGL) and α/β hydrolase domaincontaining protein 6 and 12 (ABHD6/12).
2-AG is also converted by cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) to a new class of prostaglandins, prostaglandin glycerol esters (PG-Gs), when COX-2 is excessively activated during in ammation
Although these enzymes are capable of metabolizing of 2-AG, it has been estimated that 85% of 2-AG in the brain is degraded by
Recently studies provided further evidence that 2-AG in neurons and astrocytes is primarily hydrolyzed by MAGL, while it in microglial cells is predominantly degraded by ABHD12
The immediate metabolites of 2-AG are arachidonic acid (AA), a precursor of prostaglandins catalyzed by COX-1/2 and leukotrienes via arachidonate 5lipoxygenase (LOX).
Prostaglandins (i.e., PGE2) and leukotrienes are important in ammatory mediators or proin ammatory
Apparently, inactivation of MAGL would result in augmentation of anti-in ammatory and neuroprotective 2-AG signaling, while lowering proin ammatory and neurotoxic eicosanoid levels
Indeed, previous studies from our group and others demonstrated that inactivation of MAGL reduces Aβ formation and accumulation, neuroin ammation and neurodegeneration and improves synaptic and cognitive functions in APP transgenic mice, animal models of AD
However, it is still not clear whether inhibition of 2-AG metabolism mitigates tauopathies as intracellular neuro brillary tangles that represent hyperphosphorylated tau proteins are an important neuropathological hallmark of AD
Here we show that inactivation of MAGL attenuates neuroin ammation and tau phosphorylation and prevents deterioration in synaptic proteins and cognitive decline in P301S/PS19 mice, a tau mouse model of AD, supporting generalizability of MAGL as a promising therapeutic target for AD.

Results

JZL184 mitigates neuroin ammation in P301S/PS19 mice
Neuroin ammation is one of the major pathogenic mechanisms that contribute to neuropathology and cognitive decline in AD.
Previous studies demonstrate that pharmacological inhibition MAGL attenuates neuroin ammation evident by decreases in proin ammatory cytokines and astroglial reactivity in APP transgenic mice
To determine whether inhibition of MAGL produces anti-in ammatory effects in tau P301S/PS19 transgenic (TG) mice
We rst assessed hippocampal cytokines IL-1β and TNFα in 7-month old TG mice and age-matched wild type (WT) control mice treated with vehicle or JZL184 using ELISA analysis.
As shown in Fig.
Treatment with JZl184 signi cantly decreased hippocampal IL-1β and TNFα in both WT and TG mice.
These results indicate that inhibition of 2-AG metabolism with JZL184 reduces neuroin ammation in tau TG mice.
To further con rm anti-in ammatory effects of MAGL inactivation in tau TG mice, GFAP immunoreactivity, a marker for in ammatory responses in astrocytes, was assessed in the brain of PS19 TG mice treated with vehicle or JZL184 three times a week for 8 weeks.
As shown in Fig.
Next, we detected Iba1 immunoreactivity, a marker for in ammatory responses in microglia, as microglial cells are the innate immune system of the brain and play an important role in neuroin ammatory processes.
As shown in Fig.
These results are consistent with previous observations where inhibition of MAGL mitigates neuroin ammation in APP TG mice
Inhibition of 2-AG metabolism alleviates tauopathies in P301S/PS19 TG mice Accumulation of intracellular neuro brillary tangles resulting from hyperphosphorylated tau is the neuropathological hallmark of AD
However, no studies have been conducted to assess whether disruption of 2-AG metabolism reduces phosphorylated tau (p-tau).
To this end, we assessed total tau (Tau-5) and p-tau, including p-tau Thr181 (p-tauT181), and p-tau Ser202/Thr205 (AT8) in the hippocampus of PS19 TG mice treated with JZL184.
As shown in Fig.
Importantly, while JZL184 did not induce changes in Tau-5, which is the transgene and overexpressed in this line of tau TG mice, it signi cantly reduced p-tauT181 and AT8 in TG mice, indicating that inactivation of MAGL decreases p-tau.
Since tau phosphorylation is largely regulated by glycogen synthase kinase-3β (GSK3β) and cyclin-dependent kinase 5 (Cdk5)
As shown in Fig.

Inactivation of MAGL improves cognitive function in P301S/PS19 TG mice
Inactivation of MAGL has been shown to improve spatial learning and memory in APP transgenic mice
However, it is still not clear whether inactivation of MAGL prevents cognitive decline in tau transgenic models of AD.
To determine whether inhibition of 2-AG metabolism improves cognitive function, we assessed spatial learning and memory retention using the novel object recognition (NOR) and the Morris water maze tests, as described previously
As shown in Fig.
However, the impairment was prevented in TG mice treated with JZL184.
The cognitive improvement by inactivation of MAGL in PS19 TG mice is further con rmed by the Morris water maze test.
As shown in Fig.
These results suggest that inactivation of MAGL is capable of preventing cognitive decline in both APP and tau transgenic models of AD.

Inhibition of 2-AG metabolism prevents deterioration in expression of synaptic proteins in P301S/PS19 TG mice
It has been well recognized that cognitive de cits in AD is primarily due to loss of the synaptic integrity
Proper and e cient synaptic transmission and plasticity in the brain are largely dependent on expression and function of excitatory glutamate receptors.
Our previous studies showed that inactivation of MAGL in APP TG mice prevents downregulation of glutamate receptor subunits in the brain
To determine whether JZL184 prevents deterioration in expression of glutamate receptors in tau TG mice, we detected expression of AMPA and NMDA glutamate receptor subunits, including GluA1, GluA2, GluN1, GluN2A and GluN2B, in PS19 mice treated with vehicle or JZL184.
As shown in Fig.
However, expression of these glutamate receptor subunits in mice treated with JZL184 was returned to the levels in WT mice, suggesting that inhibition of 2-AG metabolism is also capable of preventing deterioration in expression of glutamate receptor subunits.
To further assess whether inactivation of MAGL prevents changes in expression of synaptic proteins in PS19 TG mice, we also detected synaptophysin (Syn) and PSD-95, pre-and post-synaptic markers, and PPARγ, an important nuclear receptors displaying anti-in ammatory and neuroprotective effects
We observed that hippocampal expression of Syn, PSD-95, and PPARγ was signi cantly reduced in 7-months old PS19 TG mice.
However, treatment with JZL184 attenuated downregulation of Syn and PPARγ.
Although expression of PSD-95 in JZL184-treated animals was slightly increased, but no statistical signi cance.
Our results provide evidence that restraint of 2-AG metabolism by inactivation of MAGL averts downregulation of synaptic proteins in tau TG mice.

Discussion
It has been proposed that MAGL inhibition, which augments 2-AG signaling and reduces eicosanoid levels
However, MAGL proposed as a therapeutic target is largely based on the studies using the APP transgenic models of AD
Since intracellular neuro brillary tangles resulting from accumulation of hyperphosphorylated tau proteins is one of the important neuropathological hallmarks of AD, it is still not clear whether inhibition of 2-AG metabolism alleviates tauopathies.
To ascertain generalizability of the results from APP TG mice, we used P301S/PS19 TG mice, a tau mouse model of AD
We demonstrate in the present study that JZL184, a highly selective and potent MAGL inhibitor
Our results provide further evidence that inactivation of MAGL is capable of alleviating both Aβ neuropathology and tauopathies, supporting the notion that MAGL is a promising therapeutic target for AD.
It is generally accepted that the etiology of AD is multifactorial and complex.
Apparently, AD involves multiple etiopathogenic mechanisms or signaling pathways.
This means that the ideal AD therapy should be able to modify the disease through multiple mechanisms.
Several lines of evidence suggest that 2-AG is an important endogenous signaling molecule maintaining brain homeostasis against harmful insults via its anti-in ammatory and neuroprotective properties
Therefore, inactivation of MAGL, which augments 2-AG signaling and reduces its metabolites, turns on anti-in ammatory and neuroprotective signaling pathways and concurrently off signaling pathways that are detrimental to homeostatic maintenance of brain function
Previous studies provide evidence showing that pharmacological or genetic inactivation of MAGL produces profound anti-in ammatory and neuroprotective effects and improves synaptic and cognitive functions in animal models of AD and MPTP model of Parkinson's disease
These bene cial effects of MAGL inhibition are likely mediated through multiple signaling pathways.
Senile plaques and neuro brillary tangles are the two neuropathological hallmarks of AD.
Senile plaques are extracellular accumulation and deposition of Aβ, while neuro brillary tangles are intracellular deposition of hyperphosphorylated tau proteins.
The behavioral symptoms of AD are largely associated with the accumulation of plaques and tangles
Although both Aβ and p-tau contribute to neuropathology, synaptic and cognitive declines in AD, accumulated evidence suggests that tau proteins are essential or required for Aβ-induced neurotoxicity, neurodegeneration and synaptic dysfunction
This means that hyperphosphorylated tau plays an important role in driving cognitive decline in AD.
In addition, clinical trials of Aβ-targeting therapies are largely failed.
This suggests that e cacious AD therapies may need to alleviate both Aβ and tau pathologies.
The results from the previous studies where inactivation of MAGL alleviates neuropathology and improves synaptic and cognitive function in APP TG mice

Materials And Methods

Animals
P301S(PS19) transgenic mice (B6;C3-Tg(Prnp-MAPT*P301S)PS19Vle/J, stock number: 008169) were obtained from the Jackson Lab
Both male and female PS19 mice and age-matched non-transgenic wild-type (WT) littermates at 7 months of age were used in the present study.
4-Nitrophenyl-4-[bis (1,3benzodioxol-5-yl)(hydroxy)methyl]piperidine-1-carboxylate (JZL184, provided by the NIH Mental Health Institute Chemical Synthesis and Drug Supply Program), a potent and selective inhibitor of MAGL, was dissolved in the vehicle containing Tween-80 (10%), DMSO (10%), and saline (80%).
Animals were treated with either vehicle or JZL184 (10 mg/kg, i.p.) three times per week starting at 5 months of age for 8 weeks, as described previously
All the observations and assessments in mice were made at 7 months of age.
All the experiments were performed in compliance with the US Department of Health and Human Services Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals.
The care and use of the animals reported in this study were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of University of Texas Health San Antonio.
The experiments, whenever possible, were performed in a blinded fashion.

ELISA.
Levels of IL-1β and TNFα in hippocampal tissues of PS19 TG mice that received vehicle control or JZL184 were detected using a colorimetric IL1β and TNFα ELISA kits (IL-1β: Cat# RAB0275, Sigma-Aldrich, and TNFα: Cat# MBS825075, MyBioSource) according to the instructions provided by the manufacturers.

Immunoblot
Western blot assay was conducted to determine expression of GluA1, GluA2, GluN1, GluN2A, and GluN2B, tau-5, AT8, p-tauT181, p-GSK3β, p35/25, PPARγ, PSD95, synaptophysin (Syn) in the hippocampus from animals that received vehicle or JZL184.
Hippocampal tissue was extracted and immediately homogenized in RIPA lysis buffer and protease inhibitors, and incubated on ice for 30 min, then centrifuged for 10 min at 10,000 rpm at 4 o C. Supernatants were fractionated on 4-15% SDS-PAGE gels and transferred onto PVDF membranes (Bio-Rad).
The membrane was incubated with anti-GluA1 (1:1,000, Abcam, Cat# AB31232), GluA2 (1:1,000, Abcam, Cat# AB133477), GluN1 (1:1,000, Abcam, Cat# AB109182), GluN2A (1:1,000, LSBio, Cat# LS-B7707), GluN2B (1:1,000, Abcam, Cat# AB65783), tau-5 (1:1,000, ThermoFisher, Cat# AHB0042), AT8 (1:200, ThermoFisher, Cat# MN1020), p-tauT181 (1:1,000, Cell Signaling Technology, Cat# 12885), p-GSK3β (1:1,000, Cell Signaling Technology, Cat# 9323), p35/25 (1:1,000, Cell Signaling Technology, Cat# 2680), PPARγ (1:1,000, Abcam, Cat# AB27649), Syn (1:500, Abcam, Cat# AB8049), and PSD95 (1:1,000, Abcam, Cat# AB2723) at 4 o C overnight.
The blots were washed and incubated with a secondary antibody (goat anti-rabbit 1:2,000, Cell Signaling Technology, Cat# 7074) at room temperature for 1 hr.
Proteins were visualized by enhanced chemiluminescence (Amersham Biosciences, UK).
The densities of speci c bands were quanti ed by densitometry using FUJIFILM Multi Gauge software (version 3.0).
Band densities were quanti ed and converted to the total amount of protein loaded in each well as determined by mouse anti β-actin (1:2,000, Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Cat# SC-47778) as described previously

Immunohistochemistry
Immunohistochemical analyses were performed to determine astrocytic and microglial markers (GFAP and Iba1) in coronal brain sections, as described previously
Animals were anesthetized with ketamine/Xylazine (200/10 mg/kg) and subsequently transcardially perfused with PBS followed by 4% paraformaldehyde in phosphate buffer.
The brains were quickly removed from the skulls and xed in 4% paraformaldehyde overnight, and then transferred into the PBS containing 30% sucrose until sinking to the bottom of the small glass jars.
Cryostat sectioning was made on a freezing Vibratome at 40 µm and series sections (every 10th section from each animals) were collected in 0.1M phosphate buffer.
Free oating sections were immunostained using speci c antibodies for GFAP (1:500, Sigma-Aldrich, Cat# G3893) an Iba1 (1:500, Sigma-Aldrich, Cat# MABN92) followed by incubation with the corresponding uorescent-labeled secondary antibody.
4′-6-Diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI), a uorescent stain that binds strongly to DNA, was used it to detect cell nuclei in the sections.
The sections were then mounted on slides for immuno uorescence detection using a Zeiss deconvolution microscope.
The immunoreactivity (in arbitrary densitometric units) of GFAP and Iba1 in the cortex and hippocampus in each image was analyzed and quanti ed using SlideBook 6.0, as described previously

Novel object recognition
The novel object recognition (NOR) test was performed as described previously
Brie y, animals were rst allowed to acclimate to the testing environment (habituation).
The test included two stages: training and testing.
In the rst stage of the test, the animal was confronted with two identical objects, placed in an open eld, and in the second stage, the animal was exposed to two dissimilar objects placed in the same open eld: one familiar object, used in the rst phase, and the other novel object.
Exploration of an object was de ned as time spent with the head oriented towards and within two cm of the object.
The time spent exploring each of the objects in stage two was detected by a video-camera using an EthoVision video tracking system (Noldus).

Morris water Maze
The classic Morris water maze (MWM) test was used to determine spatial learning and memory, as described previously
The test was performed 24 hrs after last cessation of JZL184 injections.
A circular water tank (diameter 120 cm) was lled with water and the water was made opaque with non-toxic white paint.
A round platform (diameter 15 cm) was hidden 1 cm beneath the surface of the water at the center of a given quadrant of the water tank.
PS19 TG mice and their age-matched littermates received learning acquisition training for 7 days (7 sessions), and each session consisted of 4 trials.
For each trial, the mouse was released from the wall of the tank and allowed to search, nd, and stand on the platform for 10 seconds within the 60-second trial period.
For each training session, the starting quadrant and sequence of the four quadrants from where the mouse was released into the water tank were randomly chosen so that it was different among the separate sessions for each animal and was different for individual animals.
The mice in the water pool were recorded by a video-camera using an EthoVision video tracking system (Noldus).
A probe test to assess memory retention was conducted 24 hours after the completion of the training acquisition.
During the probe test, the platform was removed from the pool, and the task performances were recorded for 60 seconds.

Data analysis
Data are presented as mean ± S.E.M. Unless stated otherwise, one-or two-way-analysis of variance (ANOVA) followed by post-hoc tests were used for statistical comparison when appropriate.
Differences were considered signi cant when P < 0.05.

Declarations Figures


of 2-AG metabolism attenuates reactivity of astrocytes in PS19 TG mice.
Immunoreactivity of astrocytic marker GFAP (green) in the cortex and hippocampus is reduced in tau TG mice that received JZL184.
Scale bars: 40 µm.
Data are means ±SEM.
**P<0.01,
***P<0.001
compared with WT-vehicle control; § § §P<0.001
compared with TG-vehicle (ANOVA with Bonferroni post-hoc test, n=4 mice per group).



Figure 3 Inhibition of 2 -
Figure 3



Figure 4 Inactivation
Figure 4



Figure 5 Inhibition
Figure 5



Figure 6
Figure 6