Mechanisms of functional compensation, delineated by eigenvector centrality mapping, across the pathophysiological continuum of Alzheimer’s disease
Background: Mechanisms of functional compensation throughout the progression of Alzheimer's disease (AD) remain largely underspecified.
By investigating functional connectomics in relation to cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) biomarkers across the pathophysiological continuum of AD, we identify disease-stage-specific patterns of functional degradation and functional compensation.
Methods: Data from a sample of 96 participants, comprised of 49 controls, 11 preclinical AD subjects, 21 patients with mild cognitive impairment (MCI) due to AD and 15 patients with mild dementia due to AD, were analyzed.
CSF ratio of phosphorylated tau protein over amyloid beta peptide 42 (p-tau/Aβ42) was computed and used as a marker of progression along the AD continuum.
Whole-brain, voxel-wise eigenvector centrality mapping (ECM) was computed from resting-state fMRI and regression against p-tau/Aβ42 was performed.
Surviving clusters were used as data-derived seeds in functional connectivity analyses and investigated in relation to memory performance scores (delayed free recall and memory alteration) via complementary regression models.
To investigate disease-stage-specific effects, the whole-brain connectivity maps of each cluster were compared between progressive groups.
Results: Centrality in BA39-BA19 is negatively correlated with the p-tau/Aβ42 ratio and associated to memory function impairment across the AD continuum.
The thalamus, anterior cingulate (ACC), midcingulate (MCC) and posterior cingulate cortex (PCC) show the opposite effect.
The MCC shows the highest increase in centrality as memory performance decays.
In the asymptomatic preclinical group, MCC shows reduced functional connectivity (FC) with the left hippocampus and stronger FC with the precuneus (PCu).
Additionally, BA39-BA19 show reduced FC with the cerebellum, compensated by stronger FC between cerebellum and PCC.
In the MCI group, PCC shows reduced FC with PCu, compensated by stronger FC with the left pars orbitalis, insula and temporal pole, as well as by stronger FC of MCC with its anterior and ventral neighboring areas and the cerebellum.
In the mild dementia group, extensive functional decoupling occurs across the entire autobiographical memory network and functional resilience ensues in posterior regions and the cerebellum.
Conclusions: Functional decoupling in preclinical AD occurs predominantly in AD-vulnerable regions (e.g.
hippocampus, cerebellar lobule VI / Crus I, visual cortex, frontal pole) and coupling between MCC and PCu, as well as between PCC and cerebellum, emerge as intrinsic mechanisms of functional compensation.
At the MCI stage, the PCu can no longer compensate for hippocampal decoupling, but the compensatory role of the MCC and PCC ensue into the stage of dementia.
These findings shed light on the neural mechanisms of functional compensation across the pathophysiological continuum of AD, highlighting the compensatory roles of several key brain areas.

Introduction
AD is a devastating neurodegenerative disease bolstered by a complex mechanism that has remained the subject of investigations for over a century since its initial characterization
During a tacit process of disease incubation that can last several decades, the disease remains asymptomatic.
Once symptoms such as episodic memory decline, cognitive impairment and neurodegeneration become apparent, the disease is already in an advanced stage
Subjects at the early stages of the pathophysiological continuum of AD maintain neuropsychological performance that is indistinguishable from healthy participants on the individual level
Due to this reason, preclinical AD offers a unique window into mechanisms of functional compensation that enable the brain to exhibit resilience, reorganize adaptively and maintain unaffected functionality under the pressure of biological changes that eventually lead to neurodegeneration.
FMRI methods are beginning to distinguish subtle functional changes that precede irreversible neurodegeneration
The cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) ratio of phosphorylated tau protein to amyloid beta peptide 42 (p-tau/Aβ42) has been used as a marker of individual pathophysiology alterations along the continuum from normal cognition to dementia due to AD
The p-tau/Aβ42 ratio has scored well as a predictor of cognitive decline in non-demented older adults
Evidence suggested the p-tau/ Aβ42 ratio as the most effective biomarker index for distinguishing dementia due to AD from semantic and frontotemporal dementias
Effects of amyloid beta levels on resting state functional connectivity (FC) have recently been investigated in cognitively normal subjects
In contrast to biomarkers based on measurements of only amyloid or only tau, the p-tau/Aβ42 ratio increases without saturating across the pathophysiological continuum of AD
Thus, using the p-tau/Aβ42 ratio as a regressor of interest, enables addressing incremental and progressive connectomic changes along the entire continuum of AD, including healthy controls and the evasive preclinical phase.
Contemporary theories of network-based degradation and compensation propose that in the face of neurological insult, brain network nodes with low neural reserve degrade first while nodes with high neural reserve perform a compensatory role
Recent evidence shows that early β-amyloid accumulation occurs predominantly in the DMN, concurrently affecting functional connectivity in an inverted u-shaped manner, centered around the threshold of amyloid positivity
This is consistent with previous accounts of an initial increase of posterior DMN connectivity in the preclinical stage of AD, followed by a decrease of DMN connectivity in AD patients
The DMN is not only associated to task-induced deactivations
In this context, the increased functional connectivity observed in the asymptomatic stages of the pathophysiological continuum of AD, appears to reflect processes of functional compensation.
Eigenvector centrality mapping (ECM) is an assumption-free, datadriven procedure that can be performed to identify network nodes acting as hubs of connectivity and influence
ECM can use the timeseries from all voxels to compute the eigenvector centrality (EC) of each voxel and can be particularly useful in uncovering small-world networks via functional connectivity
A previous study has shown that ECM of rs-fMRI in AD patients reveals similar patterns as FDG-PET, although less pronounced, across brain lobes
Another pioneering study investigated changes of rs-fMRI in AD patients using voxel-wise ECM
In that study, EC during rs-fMRI was compared in AD patients versus their healthy family members and group differences of EC were observed in the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) and cuneus.
To our knowledge, the present study is the first to investigate resting-state EC in AD with voxel-wise resolution at 3 Tesla.
Therefore, compared to previous ECM studies in AD, the present study features increased sensitivity in small subcortical areas that are of particular interest in AD, due to increased magnetic field strength
Moreover, our study is one of the first fMRI studies to use biomarkers for AD staging, in accordance with recent research guidelines
Importantly, this is the first functional neuroimaging study to use a data-driven method for the derivation of seeds used in functional connectivity (FC) comparisons across multiple, consecutive disease stages and the first study of ECM in AD that includes the cerebellum in its field of view.
By pairing the specificity of the p-tau/Aβ42 CSF biomarker with ECM, complemented by advanced normalization techniques to control for differences in brain morphology, we identify brain regions that become incrementally less central as the disease progresses and regions that concurrently compensate by becoming more central.
Further testing confirms that centrality changes in these regions are implicated in memory function and the regions are used as seeds to investigate the underlying, intrinsic, progressive changes in FC that occur in each specific stage of AD.
Due to its involvement in memory loss and neurodegeneration, the hippocampus and other previously established ADvulnerable areas, e.g.
inferior parietal lobule (IPL), angular gyrus, precuneus (PCu) and visual cortex
We expected that clusters which were decreasing in EC across the AD continuum would be decreasing FC with the rest of the brain (e.g.
Excluding most areas belonging to the DMN, for which we also expected to observe FC decreases
Finally, with regards to the PCC/PCu in particular, we expected to observe increased FC in the preclinical stage and decreased FC in the rest of the pathophysiological continuum of AD

Material and methods

Subjects
A total of 96 subjects participated in the study, at the 'AD and other cognitive disorders unit', Hospital Clinic i Universitari, (Barcelona, Spain): 49 controls, 11 preclinical AD subjects, 21 patients with mild cognitive impairment due to AD (MCI) and 15 patients with mild dementia due to AD.
The study was approved by the local ethics committee and informed consent was obtained from all participants and caregivers in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki.
A larger number of subjects had undergone clinical and neuropsychological assessment, lumbar puncture (LP), MRI scanning, and CSF analysis.
Final inclusion eligibility was determined based on: a) completeness of data (anatomical T1 data, rs-fMRI data, CSF p-tau and Aβ42 values, Apolipoprotein E genotype, neuropsychological tests and demographics); b) unambiguous diagnosis by two neurologists and one neuropsychologist; c) no comorbid clinical pathology; d) no excessive movement during functional neuroimaging.
Categorization into groups was based on the following criteria: a) Controls were CSF Aβ42 negative (over 550 pg/mL) and presented no evidence of cognitive impairment on any of the administered neuropsychological tests, in accordance with the National Institute on Aging-Alzheimer's Association (NIA-AA) criteria
After accounting for the effects of age and education, MCI subjects scored below 6 on the Functional Activities Questionnaire and they also scored below 1.5 standard deviations from the sample mean on the total recall measure of the Free and Cued Selective Reminding Test (FCSRT;
d) Subjects of the dementia due to AD group, fulfilled the NIA-AA criteria for dementia due to AD, were CSF Aβ42 positive and in the mild stages of the disease, i.e. a score of 4 on the Global Deterioration Scale

CSF sampling and calculation of the CSF biomarker index
All subjects underwent lumbar puncture during standard morning hours (9:00-12:00 AM).
Polypropylene tubes were used to sample ten milliliters of CSF from each subject.
Samples were centrifuged and stored at -80 °C within one hour from collection.
Using enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay kits (Furirebio-Europe, previously known as Innogenetics, Ghent, Belgium), levels of amyloid peptide Aβ42 and phosphorylated tau (p-tau) were measured.
The p-tau/Aβ42 ratio, was calculated for each subject, as previously described

Image acquisition
All subjects underwent MRI scanning on a 3 T MRI scanner
Each scanning session comprised of one high-resolution three-dimensional structural T1-weighted image acquisition (MPRAGE; TR = 2300 ms, TE = 2.98 ms, matrix size = 256 × 256, 240 sagittal slices, voxel size = 1 × 1 × 1 mm 3 ) and one ten-minute resting state fMRI acquisition (300 volumes, TR = 2000 ms, TE = 16 ms, matrix size = 128 × 128, 40 axial slices, voxel size = 1.72 × 1.72 × 3 mm 3 , interslice gap = 0.75 mm).
Subjects were instructed to remain still with their eyes open.

Image processing and analysis
To enable maximal cortical segmentation accuracy, T1 images were subjected to the N4 nonparametric nonuniform intensity normalization bias correction function
VBM8 (Structural Brain Mapping Group, University of Jena, Jena, Germany;
and SPM12 (Wellcome Department of Imaging Neuroscience Group, London, UK;
Whole-brain images with removed cranium were also derived through graph-cut
Using SyGN, neuroanatomically plausible symmetric diffeomorphic matrices were computed to transform each subject's anatomical data to the optimal template and subsequently to MNI space
The cranium of the ICBM template had also been removed, similarly as for the anatomical data, prior to the normalization of datasets.
Using Matlab 2014b (MathWorks Inc.
Natick, MA) and SPM12, functional data were subjected to a typical rs-fMRI preprocessing pipeline comprised of slicetime correction, estimation of movement   The participants' groups have differed in terms of the relative prevalence of ApoE4 carriers.
However, the differences are taken to reflect the actual prevalence of ApoE4 in Alzheimer's disease.
Due to the small number of ApoE4 carriers in our sample, including this information in the statistical models would not produce more reliable findings.
Due to regional differences and historical changes in the educational system, education was modeled as an ordinal variable with a coding of "0" corresponding to no education, "1" corresponding to elementary school education, "2" corresponding to middle school education, "3" corresponding to high school education and "4" corresponding to university education.
parameters, coregistration, bandpass filtering between 0.01 and 0.1 Hz and second order detrending to remove slow signal drifts.
In all subjects, movement remained below 3 mm for all translation parameters and below 1°for all rotation parameters.
For further quality control, the effect of scanning-induced systematic vibration
Average CSF signal, average white-matter signal and 24 Volterra expansion movement parameters were regressed out of each participant's timeseries.
The five first and five last fMRI volumes of each series were discarded to avoid artefacts often produced at the edges of timeseries due to preprocessing procedures, resulting in a total of 290 functional volumes for each subject.
Each subject's functional data were masked by the grey matter of their equivalent anatomical datasets using FSL and then normalized to MNI space in accordance with their respective diffeomorphic matrices using ANTs.
Using Leipzig Image Processing and Statistical Inference Algorithms (LIPSIA; version 2.2.7 -released in May 2011; Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences, Leipzig, Germany;
That is, negative correlations were set to 0 and no arbitrary thresholding was applied.
In each grey matter voxel, the correlation matrix with all other grey matter voxels was computed and summed to produce the EC value of the first iteration.
In following iterations, during the summation of each voxel's correlation matrix, the correlation with each other voxel was weighted by that other voxel's EC value from the previous iteration.
In this manner, the EC of each voxel was adjusted iteratively, until further iterations had no effect.
With regards to using positive correlations only, it should be noted that EC was initially conceptualized and eventually popularized, due to its success in applications of social network theory and Internet search engines respectively
Moreover, current implementations of ECM for neuroimaging, do not yet offer parameter settings for utilizing negative correlations for the computation of the complementary, yet conceptually distinct, betacentrality
Alternative parameter settings generate results that are not intuitively interpretable as representing the magnitude of influence that EC is meant to capture
The "add" method of adding 1 to all correlation coefficients gives an advantage to low negative correlations over high negative correlations, which is meaningful in the context of social cliques
Similarly, the "abs" method of using absolute correlations allows both positive and negative correlations to contribute to EC values equally, thereby leading to arbitrarily mixed and potentially uninterpretable results.

Statistical inference
To enable second-level parametric inference, ECM images were gaussianized voxel-wise across all subjects
Statistical inference was performed using LIPSIA.
Gaussianized ECM images from all subjects were entered into a second-level general linear model (GLM) with p-tau/Aβ42, age, gender, and education as regressors.
The effect of p-tau/Aβ42 was computed, producing a z-score contrast image representing the correlations of EC with p-tau/Aβ42 in each grey matter voxel, while accounting for the effects of age, gender and education as covariates of no interest.
Clusters with significant correlation between EC and p-tau/Aβ42 were identified following correction for multiple comparisons by using a combination of singlevoxel probability thresholding as well as cluster-size and cluster-z-value thresholding, through 1000 iterations of Monte Carlo simulations.
The initial naive cluster threshold of randomly generated maps of z-values was set to a probability level equivalent to a two-tail significance level of 0.05, because of the exploratory nature of the regression between ptau/Aβ42 and EC.
The Monte Carlo simulations accounted for anatomical priors through hemispheric symmetry and generated thresholds for cluster sizes and peak z-values given the initial threshold and the specific geometrical properties of the images (i.e.
number of voxels, voxel size, spatial extent and spatial smoothness) to control for false positives and obtain the final activation maps corrected for multiple comparisons at the 0.05 level of significance.
This was accomplished using the LIPSIA vmulticomp algorithm
Similarly to other state-of-the-art methods for multiple comparisons correction: 1) vmulticomp uses random permutations, robust to assumptions of random field theory
Moreover, according to the recent recommendation of incorporating anatomical information in fMRI statistical inference methods
The algorithm first generates a random noise image via permutations.
It then applies to the random image a Gaussian smoothing kernel to make it comparable to data that have been normalized and smoothed during preprocessing.
The size of this kernel should not exceed the FWHM smoothness value that was used during preprocessing plus the intrinsic smoothness of the normalized data, which for 3x3x3 isomorphic voxels is equal to 6.
The kernel also features a standard deviation derived from the data.
Clusters are obtained by applying the naïve cluster threshold to the smoothed random noise image.
The algorithm then computes how many clusters would survive by chance, given the specified cluster threshold as well as different triplets of cluster sizes, activation levels and hemispheric symmetry indices.
The cluster threshold can be adjusted depending on the effect size under investigation without violating any statistical assumptions, thanks to the robustness of the Monte Carlo framework
Hemispheric symmetry indices are computed by comparing the degree of co-activation between all voxels in a given cluster and their homotopic voxels in the contralateral hemisphere, by making use of the Talairach stereotactic coordinate system.
Clusters characterized by combinations of features that could have been obtained by chance, according to the specified alpha level, are eliminated
Using a data-driven approach to FC seed derivation, enabled to focus on the progressive FC changes of the brain regions predominantly implicated throughout AD, via an unbiased and information-efficient procedure.
Every ECM cluster was used as a seed cluster to calculate its standardized FC, via Fisher's r to z transformation
Second-level GLM design matrices accounting for the effects of age, gender and education as covariates of no interest, were utilized to compute two-sample t-tests and discover voxel-wise FC differences of each ECM cluster between: a) control and preclinical groups; b) preclinical and MCI groups; c) MCI and dementia due to AD groups.
Clusters featuring significant FC changes with the seed clusters were identified following correction for multiple comparisons, performed identically as for the EC clusters with the exception of setting the initial naive cluster threshold of the randomly generated maps of z-values to a probability level equivalent to a one-tail significance level of 0.05, because of directional hypotheses regarding the FC of ECM clusters and DMN regions.
Note that using LIPSIA we computed and corrected for multiple comparisons a single contrast image for each ECM cluster, that contained both positive and negative z-scores.
This approach is more parsimonious than computing positive and negative versions of the same contrast separately, because all positive as well as negative clusters have to compete with each other in terms of size, strength and anatomical plausibility to survive the correction for multiple comparisons (in other software positive clusters only compete with positive and negative only with negative).
Moreover, this is what enabled us to test directional hypotheses regarding both positive and negative FC differences, at once.
To investigate whether the primary findings were associated with memory processes, we performed correlation testing between the average ECM of each seed cluster and scores on two important memory tests: delayed free recall score from the FCSRT
Because both memory scores showed highly significant correlations with average ECM values in most seed clusters, we repeated the main regression analysis, using identical thresholds but replacing ptau/Aβ42 by each memory score.
We then computed the conjunctions with the p-tau/Aβ42 regression results.
The purpose of this process was to precisely assess the specificity of the correlations with the memory performance scores and to identify the memory processes that each seed cluster was most strongly involved in.

Results

Eigenvector centrality across the pathophysiological continuum of AD
An extensive left lateral parieto-occipital ECM cluster, encompassing parts of IPL, posterior Postcentral Gyrus (PGp), BA19 and angular gyrus (BA39), correlated negatively with p-tau/Aβ42 (Table
Concurrently, three distinct clusters that correlated significantly with p-tau/Aβ42 were localized in the cingulate cortex: one in the medial cingulate cortex (MCC), primarily localized at the posterior part of BA24; one in the PCC, primarily localized at the intersection of BA31 and BA23; and one in the ACC, at the intersection between the anterior parts of BA32 and BA24 (Table
An additional cluster in the thalamus, including the ventral anterior nucleus, also correlated positively with p-tau/Aβ42 (Table
Average EC in all ECM clusters correlated with FCSRT delayed free recall and M@T scores.
However, the correlations survived correction for multiple comparisons only in the MCC, thalamus and BA39-BA19 (Table
The conjunction between the regression maps for p-tau/Aβ42 and memory scores revealed a significant positive correlation of EC within the BA39-BA19 cluster with FCSRT delayed free recall score and significant negative correlations of EC within the MCC and thalamus clusters with M@T score (Fig.

Functional connectivity in the preclinical AD group
In the preclinical group, compared to the control group, the ECM cluster in BA39-BA19 showed significantly lower FC with the right postcentral, precentral and supramarginal gyri (including parts of BA2, BA4 and BA3), the right frontal pole, the superior and medial frontal gyrus (primarily BA10) and an occipito-cerebellar cluster including parts of the cuneus, PCu, declive and lingual gyri bilaterally (Table
The ECM cluster in MCC showed significantly lower FC with the left hippocampus and concurrently higher FC with the PCu in the preclinical group (Table
The ECM cluster in the PCC showed significantly lower FC with the cerebellum in the preclinical group (Table
The ECM clusters in the ACC and the thalamus did not show any significant differences of FC between the control and the preclinical AD groups.

Functional connectivity in the MCI due AD group
In the MCI due to AD group, compared to the preclinical AD group, the ECM cluster in the PCC showed significantly lower FC with PCu and concurrently higher FC with the right insula (Table
Additionally, the MCC cluster showed significantly higher FC with the middle part of BA24 and cerebellum in the MCI group (Table
The ECM clusters in BA39-BA19, ACC and the thalamus did not show any significant differences of FC between the preclinical and MCI groups.

Functional connectivity in the dementia due to AD group
In the dementia due to AD group, compared to the MCI due to AD group, the BA39-BA19 cluster showed significantly lower FC with the middle and superior frontal gyri, including ACC, BA9, BA32, BA10, BA11, as well as the right middle and superior temporal gyri, BA21 and the superior temporal pole (Table
Concurrently, significantly higher FC was observed between BA39-BA19 and cerebellum (declive, culmen and vermis lobules VI-VIII).
The MCC cluster showed significantly lower FC with the PCu, posterior cingulate cortex (PCC) and right temporal gyrus in the dementia due to AD group and concurrently increasing FC with the lingual gyri bilaterally (Table
The ACC showed significantly lower FC with the cerebellum, the fusiform gyri bilaterally and the lingual gyri bilaterally in the dementia due to AD group compared to the MCI due to AD group (Table
The PCC cluster showed significantly higher functional connectivity with the PCu, cerebellum and lingual gyri bilaterally in the dementia due to AD group (Table
The ECM cluster in the thalamus did not show any significant differences of FC between the MCI and dementia groups.

Discussion

Eigenvector centrality across the pathophysiological continuum of AD
The extensive left lateral parieto-occipital cluster encompassing BA19 and BA39, that correlated negatively with p-tau/Aβ42, is known to be an area vulnerable to regional cortical thinning in AD
A meta-analysis suggests the BA39-BA19 intersection to be important in episodic auto-biographical memory
In healthy young adults, the BA39-BA19 intersection comprises a central part of the cortical hub that features the maximal degree of connectivity with the rest of the brain and is considered to be part of the foremost cortical hub with the highest metabolic demands
The observation of a correlation of EC in BA39-BA19 with FCSRT delayed free recall score, suggests the involvement of this region in free recall (Fig.
The BA39-BA19 region plays an important role in further memory processes, as well as in the flexible coupling between the default mode network and the frontoparietal control network subserving autobiographical planning
Therefore, given our novel observation of decreasing EC throughout the AD continuum and the lack of cognitive impairment during the preclinical stage of AD that may last up to twenty years
This interpretation, is highly plausible because meta-analyses and scientific review articles show: a) the particular parts of MCC (posterior BA24) and ACC (BA32-BA22 intersection) to be involved in working memory

Functional connectivity in the preclinical AD group
FC differences of hippocampus and BA24 had previously been observed only between control and MCI groups
Our results suggest that the onset of the functional decoupling between the hippocampus and BA24 occurs earlier than previously believed, during the preclinical stage.
Given no significant alterations in cognitive performance during the preclinical stage
The PCu, possesses extensive Fig.
Eigenvector centrality across the pathophysiological continuum of AD.
The panel shows the correlation between eigenvector centrality maps and the CSF biomarker p-tau/Aβ42, across the AD continuum from health to Alzheimer's dementia.
Clusters of centrality values significantly correlating positively with p-tau/Aβ42 were indicated in the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), midcingulate cortex (MCC), posterior cingulate cortex (PCC) and left thalamus.
One cluster of centrality values significantly correlating negatively with p-tau/Aβ42 was indicated in the inferior parietal lobule (IPL; BA39-BA19).
These five clusters were used as seed regions for functional connectivity analyses (Figs.
Images are shown in neurological convention; all results are corrected for multiple comparisons (P < 0.05).
Coordinates refer to MNI space.

Table 3
Correlations between average ECM values in clusters correlating with p-tau/Aβ42 and score on administered memory tests.
Only correlations with p < 0 .001
remained significant after Bonferroni correction for multiple comparisons.

Fig. 2. Conjunction analysis.
The main eigenvector centrality regression analysis was repeated twice, replacing p-tau/Aβ42 with score on memory alteration test (M@T) and score on delayed free recall of the free and cued selective reminding test, controlling for age, gender and level of education.
Results were corrected for whole-brain multiple comparisons using identical methods to the main analysis.
Top row left: significant positive correlations between EC and p-tau/Aβ42; top row middle: significant negative correlations between EC and M@T scores; top row right: green voxels display regions where EC correlated significantly with both p-tau/Aβ42 and M@T scores.
Bottom row left: significant negative correlation between EC and p-tau/Aβ42; bottom row middle: significant positive (red) and significant negative (blue) correlations between EC and scores of delayed free recall; bottom row right: green voxels display regions where EC correlated significantly with both p-tau/Aβ42 and delayed free recall scores.
(For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
Seed-regions used for the functional connectivity analyses were the data-driven clusters observed in the ECM results (ECM correlation with p-tau/Aβ42).
For example, the MCC (which showed a positive correlation between centrality values and p-tau/Aβ42) showed decreased functional connectivity with the left hippocampus and increased functional connectivity with the precuneus in the preclinical group (compared to the control group).
Entries in brackets indicate the peak voxel labels with the highest cytoarchitectonic probabilities according to the SPM Anatomy Toolbox
The outermost right column indicates the maximal z-value of voxels within a cluster (with the mean z-value of all voxels within a cluster in parentheses).
No significant differences were observed in the thalamus and ACC.
Abbreviations: MCC: Middle Cingulate Cortex; PCC: Posterior Cingulate Cortex; ACC: Anterior Cingulate Cortex; IPL: Inferior Parietal Lobule; PCG: Precentral Gyrus; SMG: Supramarginal Gyrus; PCG: Postcentral Gyrus; MFG: Middle Frontal Gyrus; SFG: Superior Frontal Gyrus; SMG: Superior Medial Gyrus; HATA: Hippocampus-Amygdala Transition Area.
connectivity with several other important brain areas
The meta-analysis of fMRI studies in AD is also aligned with the supposition that the PCu plays a compensatory role during the early stages of the disease, prior to any perceivable cognitive decline
The functional purpose of the increased FC between PCu and BA24, given a functional decoupling between BA24 and hippocampus, could be related to maintaining spatial navigation abilities
With regards to the latter, it is also plausible that the concerned FC increase is further compensating the preclinical decoupling between PCu and BA39-BA19 (Fig.
During the preclinical stage, BA39-BA19 decouples not only from the PCu but also from the cuneus, cerebellum, lingual gyri, fusiform gyri, the frontal pole and a cluster containing parts of the right precentral, postcentral and supramarginal gyri.
The FC decrease of BA39-BA19 with the cerebellum, lingual gyri and fusiform gyri is compensated by FC increases of PCC with the cerebellum, linguaI gyri and fusiform gyri (Fig.
However, the FC decrease of BA39-BA19 with the part of the occipital cluster localized in the primary and secondary visual cortices remains uncompensated.
Our findings suggest that the FC decrease of BA39-BA19 with the visual cortex is prolonged through the subsequent stages of AD, plausibly relating to AD-characteristic regional cortical thinning of both the IPL and the visual cortex
Further areas with early uncompensated FC decreases are the right lateral cluster spreading between the postcentral, precentral and supramarginal gyri and the cluster located in the frontal pole.
Collectively, the uncompensated decreases of FC in the preclinical stage correspond to the neural correlates of subtle cognitive effects accounting for changes in global cognitive ability
To our knowledge, this is the first evidence of cerebellar FC changes occurring in the preclinical stage of AD.
Similar cerebellar subregions to the ones identified in our study, specifically Crus I/II and lobule VI, are targeted by atrophy in AD and frontotemporal dementia, respectively
Although the exact details of these patterns remain to be clarified, current evidence suggest FC of Crus I/II predominantly with the executive network and of lobule VI with the salience network
Additionally, both cerebellar regions have been found to correlate with the anterior prefrontal cortex.
In the present study, noticeable overlap between the clusters shown in Fig.
Given no noticeable cognitive impairment in the preclinical stage, our observation supports the idea that the  increase in FC between the PCC and cerebellum is compensating the decrease of FC between BA39-BA19 and the cerebellum.
Although technological factors that have limited the investigation of the cerebellum

Functional connectivity in the MCI due to AD group
As AD progresses into the MCI stage, characterized by hippocampal neurodegeneration
This is evident from the functional decoupling of PCu/cuneus from PCC (Table
In response, functional coupling of PCC with the insula, BA47, superior temporal gyrus and left temporal pole emerges as an unexpected tertiary compensatory mechanism (Fig.
During the MCI stage of AD, functional coupling of MCC with the cerebellum, the posterior part of BA32 and the left BA8 can account for the emergence of new cognitive strategies that MCI subjects employ in order to compensate memory and cognitive impairments and manage to cope with their daily activities.
In particular, the observed subregion of the cerebellum supports executive function
The observed subregion of BA32 subserves working memory
Additional evidence suggests that BA8 is one of the main loci of autobiographical memory
Based on all evidence, it is plausible that the stronger coupling between MCC and cerebellum in the MCI group, represents an effort to counteract the uncertainty that results from loss of memory due to hippocampal atrophy, via increased processing in areas with uncompromised neural capacity, in order to maintain the ability to execute complete sequences of actions.

Functional connectivity in the dementia due to AD group
As expected, extensive and uncompensated functional decoupling is observed in the stage of dementia due to AD (Fig.
The right BA21, involved in prosody processing
The BA39-BA19 and MCC clusters additionally decouple from the ACC and PCC respectively, exhibiting in this stage for the first time an anticorrelation pattern among ECM clusters.
Moreover, the lingual gyrus decouples from ACC but increases FC with MCC and PCC, continuing the compensatory effort commenced during the preclinical stage.
The functional decoupling of the middle temporal gyrus, superior temporal gyrus and BA21 from both the BA39-BA19 and MCC (BA24) clusters, in combination with the decoupling of BA39-BA19 from an extensive medial frontal cluster that includes ACC, BA32, BA9, BA10 and BA11, remain uncompensated and appear to be underpinning the dysfunctional state of dementia due to AD.
Indeed, BA21 and BA22 are involved in the crucial function of memory integration
Moreover, the observed frontal cluster engulfs the neural substrates of the self-memory system subserving episodic autobiographical memory, semantic autobiographical memory and memory of the conceptual self
The extensive functional decoupling of these areas with BA39-BA19 is illustrating the final collapsing of memory functions in dementia due to AD.

Relevance to contemporary theories
Our findings provide evidence of convergence between two complementary theoretical frameworks: a) the 'compensation-related utilization of neural circuits hypothesis' (CRUNCH; Reuter-Lorenz and Cappell, 2008) and b) the 'network-based degeneration' theory
The integration of these two perspectives has been suggested in a recent meta-analysis of functional network alterations in AD, proposing that in the preclinical stage, compensatory mechanisms arise in the form of increased functional connectivity to counteract connectivity loss in other regions, while in more advanced stages this compensatory mechanism breaks down as a result of increasing local and global neurodegenerative pathology
We provide voxel-wise maps that depict in unprecedented detail the progressive processes that have been proposed by these contemporary theories, while highlighting their relevance to cognitive functions.
NIfTI images of our findings will be shared upon request, along with the scripted analysis pipeline, to facilitate replicable Open Science practices.

Limitations and future directions
We have adopted the most straightforward interpretation of considering decreases in EC and FC to be due to AD progression and spatially linked concurrent increases to correspond to compensatory mechanisms.
Moreover, we assumed that functional decoupling between two brain regions represents functional degradation and can be compensated by concurrent coupling of either decoupled region with alternative ones.
Two further implicit assumptions were that the crosssectional p-tau/Aβ42 ratio is a valid marker of position along the AD continuum and that diagnostic categories are sequential and irreversible.
Although our assumptions are largely supported in literature, by the current theoretical framework
Moreover, due to directional testing, we observed a few findings that were neither expected nor entirely supported by the statistical framework employed, e.g. at the insula.
We note these unexpected findings in the Supplementary Material, because many of them have plausible interpretations that may be useful for the formation of future experimental hypotheses.
It will be Fig.
The first column shows seed clusters derived by the data-driven ECM analysis.
The results of the comparison of functional connectivity maps between dementia and MCI due to AD (Dementia > MCI) are shown in each row, separately for four seed regions (MCC: first row, PCC: second row, ACC: third row, IPL (BA39-BA19): fourth row).
The remaining ECM cluster, in the thalamus, did not show functional connectivity differences between dementia and MCI groups.
Increases are depicted in red and decreases in blue color; images are shown in neurological convention; all results are corrected for multiple comparisons (P < 0.05); coordinates refer to MNI space.
(For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
important for the main findings to be replicated and confirmed in longitudinal studies using larger samples, especially with regards to the preclinical group.
Nevertheless, we believe that the patterns of voxelwise connectomics revealed here can be informative for future diagnostic procedures and contribute valuable insights towards appreciating the distributed functional capacity of the human brain.

Conclusions
Preclinical functional decoupling occurs predominantly in AD-vulnerable regions (e.g.
hippocampus, cerebellar lobule VI / Crus I, visual cortex, frontal pole) and each AD stage is characterized by distinct patterns of FC.
Plausible mechanisms of functional compensation across the AD continuum, appear primarily in three specific forms of changes in connectivity as: a) increased EC of thalamus, BA24, BA31, BA23 and BA32 across the entire continuum; b) increased coupling of MCC with PCu and of PCC with cerebellar declive, BA18, lingual gyri and fusiform gyri in the preclinical stage and c) increased coupling of MCC with BA32, BA8 and cerebellar uvula and of PCC with inferio-anterior insula and BA47 in MCI.


r = -0.386
p < 0.001 r = -0.267
p = 0.008 r = -0.374
p < 0.001 r = -0.232
p = 0.023 r = 0.357 p < 0.001 Memory alteration r = -0.406
p < 0.001 r = -0.2748
p = 0.007 r = -0.394
p < 0.001 r = -0.233
p = 0.022 r = 0.392 p < 0.001



Fig. 3 .
Fig. 3. Functional connectivity in the preclinical AD group.
The first column shows seed clusters derived by the data-driven ECM analysis.
The results of the comparison of functional connectivity maps between preclinical and control groups (Preclinical > Control) are shown in each row, separately for three seed clusters (MCC: first row, PCC: second row, IPL(BA39-BA19):third row).
Each of the two remaining ECM clusters, in the ACC and thalamus, did not show functional connectivity differences between preclinical and control groups.
Increases are depicted in red and decreases in blue color; images are shown in neurological convention; all results are corrected for multiple comparisons (P < 0.05); coordinates refer to MNI space.
(For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)



Fig. 4 .
Fig. 4.Functional connectivity in the MCI due to AD group.
The first column shows seed clusters derived by the data-driven ECM analysis.
The results of the comparison of functional connectivity maps between mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and preclinical groups (MCI > Preclinical) are shown in each row, separately for two seed regions (MCC: first row, PCC: second row).
Each of the three remaining ECM clusters, in the ACC, thalamus and IPL (BA39-BA19), did not show functional connectivity differences between MCI and preclinical groups.
Increases are depicted in red and decreases in blue color; images are shown in neurological convention; all results are corrected for multiple comparisons (P < 0.05); coordinates refer to MNI space.
(For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)



Table 1
Demographics and background data.



Table 2
Results of the Eigenvector Centrality Mapping (ECM) correlation with p-tau/ Aβ42.



Table 4
Results of the group-specific functional connectivity analyses for the Preclinical > Control contrast.



Table 5
Results of the group-specific functional connectivity analyses for the MCI > Preclinical contrast.-regionsusedfor
the functional connectivity analyses were the data-driven clusters observed in the ECM results (ECM correlation with p-tau/Aβ42).Entries in brackets indicate the peak voxel labels with the highest cytoarchitectonic probabilities according to the SPM Anatomy Toolbox(Eickoff et al.,  2005).The outermost right column indicates the maximal z-value of voxels within a cluster (with the mean z-value of all voxels within a cluster in parentheses).No significant differences were observed in the thalamus, the ACC and BA39-BA19.Abbreviations: MCC: Middle Cingulate Cortex; PCC: Posterior Cingulate Cortex; ACC: Anterior Cingulate Cortex; SMG: Supramarginal Gyrus; IPL: Inferior Parietal Lobule; IFG: Inferior Frontal Gyrus; STG: Superior Temporal Gyrus.a
The noted cluster was most extensively localized in Lobule VIIIb, however the peak voxel was localized in left Lobule IX and two further local maxima were observed in right lobule VIIIa and right lobule VIIb



Table 6
Results of the group-specific functional connectivity analyses for the Dementia > MCI contrast.Seed-regions used for the functional connectivity analyses were the data-driven clusters observed in the ECM results (ECM correlation with p-tau/Aβ42).Entries in brackets indicate the peak voxel labels with the highest cytoarchitectonic probabilities according to the SPM Anatomy Toolbox(Eickoff et al., 2005).The outermost right column indicates the maximal z-value of voxels within a cluster (with the mean z-value of all voxels within a cluster in parentheses).No significant differences were observed in the thalamus.Abbreviations: MCC: Middle Cingulate Cortex; PCC: Posterior Cingulate Cortex; ACC: Anterior Cingulate Cortex; IPL: Inferior Parietal Lobule; MTG: Middle Temporal Gyrus; SMG: Supramarginal Gyrus; STG: Superior Temporal Gyrus; SMG: Superior Medial Gyrus.a
The noted cluster covered 80% of the fastigial nucleus bilaterally and 12% of the left subiculum.
b The noted cluster covered 97% of the left fastigial nucleus.