MicroRNAs in Alzheimer’s Disease
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a progressive and devastating neurodegenerative disorder.
It is the leading cause of dementia in the world's rapidly growing aging population.
The characteristics of AD are memory loss and cognitive impairment, meaning patients cannot carry out their daily activities independently.
The increase of AD cases poses heavy burdens on families, society and the economy.
Despite frequent efforts being made to research the etiology of AD, the causes of AD remain unknown, and no curative treatments are available yet.
The pathological hallmarks of AD are amyloid plaques and neurofibrillary tangles in the brain.
MicroRNAs are endogenous ∼22 nucleotides non-coding RNAs that could regulate gene expression at a post-transcriptional level by transcript degradation or translation repression.
MicroRNAs are involved in many biological processes and diseases, particularly multifactorial diseases, providing an excellent tool with which to research the mechanisms of these diseases.
AD is a multifactorial disorder, and accumulating evidence shows that microRNAs play a critical role in the pathogenesis of AD.
In this review, we will highlight the effect of microRNAs in different pathological processes throughout AD progression.

INTRODUCTION
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is an irreversible progressive neurodegenerative disorder, and is the main cause of dementia in the global elderly population.
In 2010, it was estimated that there were 35.6 million people living with dementia across the globe; these numbers are expected to double every 20 years until 2050
The characteristics of AD are cognitive impairment and memory loss, causing most AD patients to lose the ability to perform daily activities independently.
The cost of caring for these patients is rising, with increasing numbers of AD incidents around the world, posing heavy burdens for individuals, families and society.
Although mounting efforts have been made to research the etiology of AD, the causes remain unknown, and effective treatments are not yet available
The pathological hallmarks of AD are senile plaques consisting of accumulated β-amyloid peptides (Aβ) and neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs) primarily containing highly phosphorylated Tau
The two most commonly accepted hypotheses, the Aβ hypothesis and the Tau hypothesis, are also based on these two pathological characteristics.
The amyloid cascade hypothesis (see Figure
The Aβs are produced from processing the amyloid precursor protein
In physiology, Aβ-degrading proteases mediate proteolytic degradation and receptor-modulated endocytosis function to clear the Aβ
The proteolytic system includes neprilysin and an insulin-degrading enzyme
The most toxic forms of Aβ are soluble oligomers and intermediate amyloids
Tau are microtubule-associated proteins which stabilize the microtubule and promote vesicle transportation.
In neurons, the microtubules are essential for the maintenance of neuronal structure, axonal transportation and neuronal plasticity
Highly phosphorylated Tau can lose its stabilization ability and may start to self-form NFTs.
Tau are phosphorylated by types of kinases, and the phosphate residues are removed by phosphatases
The imbalance between the hyper-phosphorylated and de-phosphorylated forms of Tau could lead to the formation of NFTs (see Figure
Tauopathies are considered to be an indicator of the severity of AD.
MicroRNAs, a class of non-coding RNAs, have been acknowledged as important regulators for post-transcriptional gene expression by either repressing translation or degrading target mRNAs
Since their discovery, microRNAs have been identified as the regulators most frequently implicated in many critical biological events, such as development, growth, differentiation and neurodegenerative processes
One microRNA could target numerous genes and one gene could be regulated by multiple microRNAs, making microRNAs a potential tool to investigate multifactorial diseases, for example AD
The study about examining the 13-brain associated microRNAs abundance in human hippocampus samples from fetal and aged adults, age-matched AD patients suggest that misregulation and alterations of specific microRNAs might make contributions to the process of AD
Afterward, tremendous researches have demonstrated the alterations of several microRNAs between AD patients and age-matched control, further prove that microRNAs might play an important role in the pathogenesis of AD
In this review, we will focus on the microRNAs involved in the two most accepted hypotheses of AD pathogenesis: the Aβ hypothesis and the Tau hypothesis.

MicroRNAs INVOLVED IN THE Aβ HYPOTHESIS
Since microRNAs have been used to research AD, accumulating microRNAs have been identified as regulators in the process of Aβ production and clearance.
The amyloid cascade hypothesis mentions that the imbalance between the production and clearance of Aβ42 could trigger synaptic loss and neurotoxicity.
Section "MicroRNAs Involved in the Aβ Hypothesis" describes the microRNAs implicated in the Aβ hypothesis (as shown in Figure

MicroRNAs Involved in Aβ Production
Mounting evidence has shown that specific microRNAs play a key role in regulating the expression of APP and BACE1, which restrict the production of Aβ.

MicroRNAs Regulate APP Expression
Accumulating evidence demonstrates that increased APP expression could promote Aβ production, resulting in neurotoxicity, synaptic failure and, eventually, dementia
Many microRNAs have participated in the process of regulating APP expression; for example,
Later, the Hebert group found that the miR-20 families (miR-20a, miR-17-5p, and miR-106b) could also regulate APP expression via the binding of APP 3 UTR.
In addition, in accordance with miR-20 overexpression in neuron cells, the expression level of APP decreased
Similarly, miR-101
Moreover, the low level of miR-153 contributed to the accumulation of Aβ in sporadic AD patients.

MicroRNAs Regulate BACE1 Expression
The division of APP by BACE1 is the first and rate-limit step for Aβ formation, and upregulated BACE1 expression levels and enzymatic activities have been detected in sporadic AD brains
Several microRNAs regulating BACE1 expression and activity have been found; for example, the miR-29 family implicated in regulating BACE1 expression has been well studied.
Further analysis showed that miR-29a/b-1 could regulate BACE1 expression in vitro and in vivo.
Moreover, it was validated that decreased levels of miR-29a/b-1 could promote the production of Aβ and contribute to the pathogenesis of AD
Afterwards, miR-29c, another miR-29 family member, was also found to be downregulated with abnormally high levels of BACE1 in sporadic AD brains; additional validation experiments found that overexpressed miR-29c could induce BACE1 downregulation in human neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y cells via the binding of BACE1 3 UTR
Another well studied microRNA is miR-107.
The expression of miR-107 decreased significantly with BACE1 increased in AD patients.
Then, it was revealed that miR-107 regulated the expression of BACE1 through recognizing and binding the 3 UTR of BACE1 in a cell culture reporter assay
Afterwards, Nelson and Wang also demonstrated that miR-107 levels negatively correlated with BACE1 mRNA levels, leading to Aβ accumulation
Moreover, some studies have shown that miR-107 was implicated in preventing the neurotoxicity and bloodbrain-barrier dysfunction induced by Aβ
Other negative regulators of BACE1 also include miR-298/328

Other MicroRNAs Involved in Aβ Production
Recent cases have reported that the miR-132/212 cluster plays an important role in Aβ production; for example,
In another study,
Other microRNAs implicated in Aβ production include miR-34a, miR-146
All these provide further evidence that specific microRNAs play a critical role in the pathogenesis of AD.

MicroRNAs Involved in Aβ Clearance
Aβ deposits result from an imbalance between the production and clearance of β amyloid peptides.
Thus, the dysfunctional clearance of Aβ could also contribute to the accumulation of Aβ peptides.
As such, in Section "MicroRNAs Involved in Aβ Clearance" we describe a number of microRNAs involved in Aβ clearance.
The endosomal-lysosomal system degrades accumulated proteins and functions as a protective factor in the central nervous system.
Aβ degradation improved when miR-128 was inhibited in monocytes from AD patients
Another microRNA involved in Aβ clearance was miR-34a which, when upregulated in AD patients, repressed the clearance of Aβ by inhibiting the expression of TREM2
TREM2, a myeloid/microglial cell surface amyloid sensor-receptor implicated in recognizing and digesting Aβ and extracellular amyloidogenic debris, plays a key role in the clearance of over-expressed Aβ
The expression of TREM2 also correlated with blood-derived monocytes (BDMs)
Immune-related microRNAs
Additionally, several researchers have revealed that differentially expressed apoE isoforms also play a role in Aβ clearance
It has been validated that miR-1908 could inhibit ApoE expression in mRNA and protein levels in human macrophage cell line THP-1 and astrocytoma cell line U87.
In AD patients, the level of miR-1908 was negatively related to ApoE expression, which suggested that miR-1908 played a crucial role in inhibiting Aβ clearance through repressing ApoE expression

MicroRNAs Involved in Aβ Induced Neurotoxicity
Aβ could induce neurotoxicity, and this section describes several microRNAs involved in this process.
In 2016, it was discovered that miR-302 could restore Aβ induced neurotoxicity via the PTEN/Akt/Nrf2/HO-1 pathway in AD neurons
It has been reported by many groups that miR-132 decreased significantly in AD brains.
In the same year,
It was reported that MiR-124 could alleviate neurotoxicity via regulating the expression of BACE-1 in AD cellular models
These microRNAs provide us with a new way to understand the pathogenesis mechanisms of AD.

MicroRNAs Involved in the Aβ Induced Synaptic Failure
Aβ could lead to the synaptic failure and numerous microRNAs involved in this process.
It was reported that the level of miR-34c increased significantly in the transgenic mice model, AD patients and Aβ exposed neuron cells.
Further investigation demonstrated that inhibiting the expression of miR-34c could rescue the synaptic dysfunction and memory loss induced by Aβ by up-regulating the expression of VAMP2
Additionally,
Moreover, further research found that the loss of miR-34a could improve cognitive functions through rescuing synaptic dysfunction by repressing the expression of AMPA and NMDA receptors
Additionally,
They confirmed that BDNF was a target of miR-10a using a dual luciferase gene reporter assay
Recently, a novel pathway, the miR-124/PTPN1 pathway, has been reported to involve in synaptic transmission deficits.
The level of miR-124 increased significantly with the expression of its target, PETN1, decreased dramatically in AD brains.
The overexpression of miR-124 or the knockdown of PTPN1    in mice could induce AD-like phenotypes, containing synaptic transmissions and plasticity deficits.
Moreover, the inhibition of miR-124 expression or the over-expression of PTPN1 could alleviate the synaptic deficits in AD model mice
A noticeable thing is that Aβ could induce the synaptic loss, changes in neurotrophin and inflammations, conversely, these deficits could affect the clearance and degradation of Aβ.
NF-κB, a pro-inflammatory transcription factor, could be activated by Aβ, and the activation of NF-κB could lead to the upregulated of six inducible miRNAs: miR
Those NF-κB sensitive upregulated miRNAs in AD brain contributed much to the neuropathological characteristics.
For example, upregulated miR-125b may impair the Aβ clearance via repressing the TREM2 expression, induce chronic innateimmune and inflammatory signaling by inhibiting the expression of CFH (complement factor H), repress neurotransmitter package and release, and decrease the neurotrophin within the brain through regulating the expression of .
Similarly, miR-146a may be responsible for promoting amyloidogenesis through regulating the expression TSPAN12 (tetraspanin12) and/or failing to modulate the NF-κB through regulating IRAK-1 and IRAK-2 (interleukin-1 receptor associated kinase)

MicroRNAs INVOLVED IN THE TAU PHOSPHORYLATED IMBALANCE
Neurofibrillary tangles were largely composed of hyperphosphorylated Tau as a result of the imbalance between Tau phosphorylation and de-phosphorylation through regulating the expressions and activities of a number of related kinases and phosphatases
In Section "MicroRNAs Involved in the Tau Phosphorylated Imbalance, " we describe several microRNAs involved in the process of phosphorylation and de-phosphorylation (as shown in Figure
It is reported that the expression levels of miR-125b are increased significantly in AD patients
In both neuron cells and in mice, over-expression of miR-125b induced Tau hyper-phosphorylation through the targeting of phosphatases DUSP6 and PPP1CA, while inhibition of miR-125b induced a reduction in Tau phosphorylation and kinase expression/activity
Moreover,
MiR-125b might be implicated in this process through targeting the forkhead box Q1(FOXQ1) directly
They also revealed that the delivery of miR-132 mimics into AD mice could reduce the metabolism of Tau
miR-132 has been recognized in numerous studies as one of the most significant downregulated microRNAs, and it has been implicated in the process of Tau hyper-phosphorylation through the targeting of  EP300, GSK3b, Rbfox1, proteases Calpain2 and caspases 3/7
The expression level of miR-138 is up-regulated in AD patients.
They further confirmed that miR-138 could promote Tau phosphorylation via the RARA/GSK-3β pathway in N2a/APP and HEK293/tau cells
The level of miR-26b also increased significantly in the pathological areas of postmortem AD brains.
It was confirmed that the elevated levels of miR-26b contributed to the pathology of AD through cell cycle entry, Tau hyper-phosphorylation and apoptosis in post-mitotic neurons
MicroRNA-922 was also reported to contribute to the pathogenesis of AD via regulating the expressions of UCHL1.
The levels of UCHL1 were decreased in sporadic AD patients, and the overexpression of UCHL1 rescued the synaptic and cognitive function in AD model mice.
And in the AD model mice, the expression levels of miR-922 were upregulated with UCHL1 protein levels decreased.
Thus, they suggested that miR-922 involved in the pathogenesis of AD through regulating the phosphorylation levels of Tau by targeting UCHL1
The expression levels of microRNA-146a was increased in AD patients' brains, and the dysregulation of microRNA-146a biogenesis was involved in the tau hyperphosphorylation and AD pathogenesis.
In neural cells, it was confirmed that miR-146a targeted the coiled-coil containing protein kinase1 (ROCK1) directly, and the inhibition of ROCK1 could induce abnormal tau phosphorylation, which was related with the low phosphorylation levels of the phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN).
Additionally, the ROCK1 colocalised with the hyperphosphorylated tau in the early neurofibrillary tangles with decreased ROCK1 protein levels in AD patients.
Moreover, in 5xFAD mice, the inhibition of miR-146a through intrahippocampal delivery induced upregulated ROCK1 protein levels and repressed tau hyperphosphorylation, and restored memory function partly
Similarly, the expression level of miR-106b was downregulated with the upregulation of Fyn in the temporal cortex of AD patients.
In tau stably expressed SH-SY5Y cells (SH-SY5Y/tau), the overexpression of miR-106b inhibited Aβ42 induced tau phosphorylation at Tyr18 without changes at Ser396/404.
It was validated that miR-106b could target Fyn directly and repress the protein levels of Fyn in SH-SY5Y cells.
The phosphorylation level of tau at Tyr18 was decreased when Fyn was knockdown, and the inhibitory effects could be rescued when the expression of miR-106b was inhibited.
Thus, miR-106b might inhibit Aβ42 induced tau phosphorylation at Tyr18 via regulating the expression of Fyn
The expression levels of miR-124b was decreased in the brain of AD patients and in N2a/APP695swe cells.
The overexpression of miR-124-3p could rescue cell apoptosis and attenuate the abnormal hyperphosphorylation of tau with the upregulation of Caveolin-1, phosphoinositide 3kinase (PI3K), phosphor-Akt (Akt-Ser473)/Akt, phosphorglycogen synthase kinase-3 beta (GSK-3β-Ser9)/GSK-3β in N2a/APP695swe cells.
It was suggested that miR-124-3p could inhibit abnormal hyperphosphorylation of tau through targeting Caveolin-1 and regulating the pathway Caveolin-1-PI3K/Akt/GSK-3β

Perspectives
Notably, the pathological functions of multiple miRNAs regulated genes in AD-affected brain are overlapped and highly interactive, and the effects of interactive and overlapped functions network are greater than the individual one.
Another noticeable problem is that specific brain enriched miRNAs are relatively labile and short-lived
Thus, down-regulated microRNAs may be an artifact of the degenerative aspects of the disease.
While the up-regulated miRNAs and their down-regulated mRNAs targets are a better bet to study especially in post-mortem tissues
In 2018, the National Institute of Aging and Alzheimer's Association proposed that "Alzheimer's Disease" was a process of accumulated neuropathological changes, then defined as "AD" by biomarkers in vivo or by postmortem examination, not clinical symptoms
The most commonly used biomarkers include CSF (cerebrospinal fluid) Aβ42 or Aβ42/Aβ40 ratio, amyloid PET, CSF phosphorylated Tau, CSF total Tau, Tau PET, anatomic MRI and FDG PET, which all focus on Aβ and Tau in bio fluids and neuroimaging techniques
However, none of them could individually diagnose AD, and these methods still arrived too late for early and effective intervention.
In recent decades, many studies have shown that microRNAs are implicated in the pathogenesis of AD (described in sections "MicroRNAs Involved in the Aβ Hypothesis" and "MicroRNAs Involved in the Tau Phosphorylated Imbalance" and summarized in Tables
Most microRNA biomarker lists were produced by conducting microRNA profiles through qPCR
Although mounting microRNAs have been identified as potential biomarkers for AD diagnosis, few have been validated in more than two studies, making their widespread use difficult
It was proved that the expression levels of miR-15, miR-181c, miR-125b in AD CSF were up/downregulated compared with normal controls in more than two studies, and so these specific microRNAs were suggested to be potential biomarkers for AD
Despite this, extensive validation and follow-ups in larger cohorts of patients are still necessary.
There are still no drugs that are both safe and effective for AD use, even though multiple agents have been researched and tested.
Studies about microRNAs in AD have provided prominent insights into our understanding of molecular mechanisms, shedding light on potential drugs by targeting specific microRNAs.
The regulatory characteristics of microRNAs are sequence-specific and multiple genes regulation, providing an exciting avenue for regulating this complicated disease networks and pathways.
Approximately 500 patents were issued and published in United States and European in 2016, suggesting that the therapeutic potentials of microRNAs have attracted a great deal of attention.
A number of preclinical studies also have been performed, for example,
They identified that miR-16 could inhibit the expression of APP and BACE1, repress the production of Aβ and the phosphorylation of Tau in cells.
Additionally, the delivery of miR-16 into mice induced a decrease in APP, BACE1, and Tau levels in a region dependent method.
Moreover, miR-16 has also been found to associate with oxidative stress and inflammation in AD
This successful preclinical study provided support for future microRNA therapy researches.
It is important to note that the off target effect of microRNAs should not be ignored at the same time.
Although studies about microRNA therapies in AD are still in their infancy, with increasing attention being paid to this field, we believe that researchers will fully understand this at some point, even if there is still a long way to go.



FIGURE 1 |
FIGURE 1 | A schematic of the Aβ hypothesis of AD pathogenesis and the microRNAs involved in each step.
The Aβs were produced as a result of processing the amyloid precursor protein



FIGURE 2 |
FIGURE 2 |The imbalance between the hyper-phosphorylated and de-phosphorylated processes of Tau could lead to the formation of NFTs.
The microRNAs involved in the phosphorylated and de-phosphorylated processes play a role in AD pathogenesis.



TABLE 1 |
A summary of the microRNAs involved in AD.



TABLE 1 |
Continued



TABLE 1 |
Continued



TABLE 1 |
Continued



TABLE 2 |
microRNAs modulating Aβ plaques formation and tau phosphorylation.



TABLE 2 |
Continued