Omics-based Biomarkers for the Early Alzheimer Disease Diagnosis and Reliable Therapeutic Targets Development
Background: Alzheimer's disease (AD), the most common cause of dementia in adulthood, has great medical, social, and economic impact worldwide.
Available treatments result in symptomatic relief, and most of them are indicated from the early stages of the disease.
Therefore, there is an increasing body of research developing accurate and early diagnoses, as well as diseasemodifying therapies.
Objective: Advancing the knowledge of AD physiopathological mechanisms, improving early diagnosis and developing effective treatments from omics-based biomarkers.
Methods: Studies using omics technologies to detect early AD, were reviewed with a particular focus on the metabolites/lipids, micro-RNAs and proteins, which are identified as potential biomarkers in non-invasive samples.
Results: This review summarizes recent research on metabolomics/lipidomics, epigenomics and proteomics, applied to early AD detection.
Main research lines are the study of metabolites from pathways, such as lipid, amino acid and neurotransmitter metabolisms, cholesterol biosynthesis, and Krebs and urea cycles.
In addition, some microRNAs and proteins (microglobulins, interleukins), related to a common network with amyloid precursor protein and tau, have been also identified as potential biomarkers.
Nevertheless, the reproducibility of results among studies is not good enough and a standard methodological approach is needed in order to obtain accurate information.
The assessment of metabolomic/lipidomic, epigenomic and proteomic changes associated with AD to identify early biomarkers in non-invasive samples from well-defined participants groups will potentially allow the advancement in the early diagnosis and improvement of therapeutic interventions.

INTRODUCTION
Alzheimer's disease (AD), clinically characterized by the progressive impairment of memory, and cognitive, behavioural and functional abilities, has great public health, social, and economic impacts since it is the most common form of dementia and the principal cause of adult disability.
The growing number of patients and mortality and morbidity associated to AD is becoming a major concern in countries with aging populations
In general, the incidence level of AD after 70 years of age reaches 9% of the population
In addition, taking into account the demographic change, it is estimated that in 2030, approximately 56.5 million people will suffer from AD in the world
Nowadays, available treatments only achieve a symptomatic relief, and most of them are indicated at early stages of the dementia
In this sense, some biomarkers of AD pathology and physiopathology improve the in vivo diagnosis and their use is modifying the classic concept of this entity.
Actually, research about early and minimally invasive AD biomarkers, as well as potential disease-treatment therapies using omics techniques were reviewed in this work.
abilities.
Briefly, its symptomatic development consists of three phases: i) preclinical phase, characterized by a normal cognitive status while ongoing brain pathology is being generated; ii) Mild cognitive impairment (MCI), characterized by the presence of symptoms and signs of cognitive deficit secondary to fully developed brain pathology.
The habitual performance on daily life activities, however, is not altered; and iii) dementia, characterized by progressively greater cognitive impairment affecting the ability of carrying out every day's activities
Cognitive markers are altered at the MCI phase, while image and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) markers start to get alter from the preclinical phase
Current research diagnostic criteria from the National Institute on Aging and the Alzheimer's Association (NIA-AA) propose the simultaneous use of neuropsychological evaluations, neuroimaging techniques, and biomarkers in CSF samples in order to obtain a reliable and early AD diagnosis
In this sense, the standard diagnosis of MCI due to AD is based on global neuropsychological evaluations (Clinical Dementia Rating, CDR
Currently, AD diagnostic criteria allow in vivo diagnosis by means of pathological processes detection; however, they show some limitations to be introduced in clinical practice.
In fact, MRI features are relatively not AD specific or sensitive, PET is a very expensive imaging procedure not available in most hospitals, CSF samples are obtained by an invasive procedure with some contraindications and secondary effects, so it is commonly rejected by patients, and neuropsychological evaluations are timeconsuming
A non-invasive and non-expensive diagnostic method is required in the AD research field and in the global dementia assistance network to improve treatment and prognosis management.
In the searching for specific and reliable AD biomarkers in non-invasive biological samples, the omics technologies play an important role since they can address the complex diagnosis from different molecular levels.

Physiopathological Mechanisms of Alzheimer's Disease
95% cases of AD are late-onset and sporadic, while around 5% of AD cases are early-onset and associated to genetic mutations in some proteins (e.g.
presenilin 1, presenilin 2, amyloid precursor protein), which is known as familial AD.
Interestingly, biochemical changes produced in familial AD seem similar to those in sporadic AD
In general, the physiopathology of AD is characterized by a loss of synapses
This β-amyloid substance comes from the cleavage of the amyloid precursor protein (APP) by the beta-site APP-cleaving enzyme 1 (BACE1)
Another histological mark of the disease is tau protein intracellular accumulation.
This protein is involved in the maintenance of the cellular cytoskeleton microtubule network, and its function is enzymatically regulated by different phosphorylation degree.
In fact, this hyperphosphorylated protein is less functional and forms oligomers that tend to autoaggregate and sedimentate, resulting in the formation of neurofibrillary tangles
Also, chronic inflammation could be an important physiopathological mechanism, contributing to the metabolism and accumulation of β-amyloid peptide
Both amyloid and tau pathologies usually spread from medial temporal lobe grey matter to the rest of cortical grey matter in a relatively predictable pattern.
Initial involvement in medial temporal lobe structures that are involved in the correct episodic memory working, explains the memory impairment as the first disease symptom.
Nevertheless, variations in pathology spreading would explain the different damage degrees in brain cor- tex among patients, involving in some cases also language disturbance, frontal lobe dysfunction, and even agnostic or apraxia syndromes.
Moreover, advanced-age patients show concurrent brain comorbidities (e.g.
depression, psychiatric disorders…).
However, the prevalent vision of the physiopathological mechanisms of AD is considered incomplete, and it could be the cause of inability to develop effective therapeutic targets based on the AD molecular pathogenesis.
Recent studies suggest that MCI due to AD is the result of an imbalance in the interactions among different brain cells types, pathogenic forms of tau and amyloid proteins, and the brain signaling pathways impairment
In this way, the neurodegenerative process would affect each cell type at multiple levels (epigenomic, transcriptomic, metabolomic/lipidomic, proteomic).
Therefore, a complete knowledge of the AD mechanisms could be achieved from a multi-omic approach applied to different biological samples.
In this sense, the omic tools would contribute importantly to the knowledge of the early AD physiopathological mechanisms and develop specific and reliable AD biomarkers in common biological samples.

Omic Sciences and Alzheimer's Disease
The development of omic platforms and advances in bioinformatics are generating a large volume of data from pa-tients with AD and healthy people, at the same age
Therefore, in the next few years, the omic studies will allow a relevant advance in the knowledge of AD at multiple levels: i) Identification of biomarkers to be used in the diagnosis or prognosis of the disease; ii) Advance in the knowledge of possible physiopathological mechanisms; iii) Development of new and effective therapeutic strategies.
Metabolomics, epigenomics and proteomics rank among the most widely employed omic tools in clinical studies.
Fig.
Of note, the potential use of omics techniques in the development of early AD biomarkers is very relevant, since small changes at molecular or genomic levels can be detected with high specificity and sensitivity several years before the clinical characteristics appear.
However, nowadays CSF biomarkers and imaging-based technologies are quite good at diagnosis once the disease has been established.

Metabolomics
Metabolomics reflects changes in the metabolome representing a precise biochemical phenotype of the organism in health and disease that can be easily applied to different biofluids
This allows a reliable approach to the com- plex AD nature in the efficient development of a therapeutic strategy.
Of note, only a few studies have applied nontargeted approaches to identify global changes in metabolites and metabolic pathways in AD
Among these, some studies in plasma have identified several pathways affected in AD (biosynthesis and metabolism of amino acids, cholesterol, lipids, neurotransmitters, urea cycle and Krebs cycle)

Epigenomics
Epigenomics is an interesting approach to the knowledge of the physiopathology of AD since the expression patterns of certain genes implicated in the development of the disease (APP, PSEN1, PSEN2, BACE1), as well as secretase enzymes and inflammatory response, are altered by epigenetic modifications (DNA methylation
These impairments lead to the deposition of β-amyloid plaques.
Currently, there are few studies that evaluate the diagnostic capacity of epigenetic changes in peripheral fluids from AD patients
However, next generation sequencing (NGS) technology is presented as a viable approach to carry it out

Proteomics
The proteomic studies in biological fluids of AD patients are promising, since there is a molecular exchange between the brain and these fluids.
Specifically, the brain uses signaling proteins, found in blood, to control bodily functions (e.g.
peripheral and central inflammatory, and immune mecha-nisms)
Therefore, changes in these signaling proteins probably cause a specific phenotype of AD in blood samples
In this sense, proteomics also constitutes an important approach to the development of efficient therapeutic targets.
Recent studies in plasma have identified characteristic proteomic signatures of AD

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Data search was completed on March 29 th 2018.
Literature references were obtained after a systematic searching of PubMed, ISI Web of Science, and ScienceDirect databases.
Keywords used in databases were: "Alzheimer Disease" AND "Mild cognitive impairment" AND "Metabolomics or Epigenomics or Proteomics" AND "biomarker".
Studies in English with human subjects, carried out in non-invasive samples and in the last 5 years (2013-2018) were considered for inclusion.
Data search was supplemented with the reference lists from all the studies included.
In Fig.

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Several studies using omic technologies to identify early AD biomarkers in non-invasive biological samples have been revised.
Most of these studies have been carried out in patients diagnosed with MCI or AD by means of classic Petersen or National Institute of Neurological and Communicative Disorders and Stroke, and the Alzheimer's Disease and Related Disorders Association (NINCDS-ADRDA) criteria (neuropsychological evaluation, neuroimaging-MRI)
Use of obsolete criteria defining a pathologic group of patients highly contrasts with the intended high-performance omic technologies, which have the advantage of identifying small changes at molecular level even before the first clinical manifestations appear.
In this sense, omics technologies potentially constitute a relevant tool in the development of early AD biomarkers in asymptomatic individuals.
The reviewed studies have been classified as metabolomics/lipidomics, epigenomics and proteomics studies, and their corresponding biomarkers (metabolites/lipids, proteins, microRNAs), type of sample and results are summarized in Table
As we can see, most of them developed metabolomics or proteomics analysis, the participants were classified into 3 groups (AD, MCI, and healthy control (HC)), and the sample types most used were plasma and serum.
In general, these omic tools identified lipids, aminoacids, and nucleic acids metabolisms as early AD impaired pathways

Metabolites
Metabolic alterations triggered by the development of AD involve changes in the concentration of different metabolites, providing information about its physiopathology.
In Table
In addition, glutamine homeostasis
A recent study showed high levels of biomarkers related to hypoxia (glutamic acid, 2,4-dihydroxybutanoic acid) in serum from patients at early stages of AD
In general, most of the metabolites identified as potential biomarkers are related to lipid and amino acid metabolisms (Table
Actually, multiple aminoacids (glutamine, glutamic acid, tyrosine) showed decreased levels in AD
In this sense, tyrosine is the precursor of neurotransmitters dopamine and norepinephrine, which play an important role in cognitive control; while tryptophan is the precursor of neurotransmitter serotonin and the hormone melatonin.
However, some studies showed increased levels in AD or no differences between participants' groups for some aminoacids
As regards the lipid metabolism, significant differences in the levels of some compounds were observed between early AD and HC groups (Table
Actually, plasma levels of sphingolipids and sphingomyelins showed statistically significant difference between AD and HC patients
Specifically, lower concentrations of phosphatidylcholines (PC) were found in AD plasma and in soluble lysates of platelets
According to their predictive ability, sphingomyelin and PCs
However, discrepant trends were observed for these metabolites in different studies
In addition, fatty acids
Specifically, low levels of triglycerides were found in AD patients
On the other hand, inconsistent results were observed for ceramides
Nevertheless, the reproducibility of the studies' results is very low.
It can be explained by the high heterogeneity of clinical cohorts (stable or progressive MCI, mild or moderate disease severity, probable AD)
In addition, few studies employed a CSF biomarker-confirmed diagnosis
Other studies include a limited number of participants and so they are more easily affected by selection bias or random associations, as well as by the lack of reproducibility across clinical cohorts
From previously identified metabolites showing differences between MCI-AD and HC participants, some metabolomics studies have generated panels of biomarkers
According to this, satisfactory accuracy was obtained from cholesteryl esters selected by a random forest approach (Area under curve receiver operating characteristic (AUC-ROC) 0.792, 82% sensitivity, 77% specificity)
In another final model that accurately distinguished MCI-AD from HC participants (AUC-ROC 0.826)
However, most of the studies did not evaluate the individual diagnostic performance of potential biomarkers
Regarding metabolites specificity among diseases, no differences were found for 2,4-dihydroxybutanoic acid (hypoxia metabolite) across AD, normal pressure hydrocephalus and brain tumour samples
So, metabolomics is considered a useful tool to identify early
Lipidomics Acylcarnitines (ACCs).
plasma Significant ↓ levels of medium-chain ACCs in AD.
Logistic regression modelling allowed a statistically significant prediction of MCI and AD from HC, and MCI from AD.
(Table

Refs. Participants Omics
[26] AD (n = 172), HC (n = 109) Epigenomics microRNAs: hsa-miR-9-5p, hsa-miR-29a-3p, hsa-miR-106a-5p, hsa-miR-106b-5p, hsa-miR-107, hsa-miR-125a-3p, and hsa-miR-125b-5p.
blood Expression of hsa-miR-9-5p ↓, hsa-miR-106a-5p ↓, hsa-miR-106b-5p ↓, and hsa-miR-107 ↓ in AD.
Notably, hsa-miR-106a-5p displayed, as a predictor variable, 93% specificity and 68% sensitivity.
(Table
Multivariate analysis found that a subset of 13 proteins predicted AD with an accuracy of AUC of 0.70.

Refs. Participants Omics

Plasma and serum
The overall accuracy of the algorithm using our specific profile was superior when using serum (AUC = 0.96) versus plasma (AUC = 0.76).
The 10 most important proteins in the serum proteomic profile are: IL7 ↑, TNF-alpha ↑, IL5, IL6 ↑, CRP ↓, IL10, TNC, sICAM1, FVII, I309 ↑ in AD. 4 different proteomic signatures, each using 5 to 14 analytes, differentiate AD from control patients with sensitivity and specificity ranging from 74% to 85%.
Key proteins were differentially expressed in mitochondria from AD, MCI and HC.
Plasma Genetic variation takes on new importance and they are considered in interpretation of proteomic results.
CFHR1 level accounting for 40 percent of total variation of the protein level.
An association between this protein and some SNPs (rs6677604, rs6677604, rs7517126) were found.
78 other SNP-protein associations in the ADNI sample exceeded genome-wide significance.
These results confirmed previously identified gene-protein associations for interleukin-6 receptor, chemokine CC-4, angiotensin-converting enzyme, and angiotensinogen.
and reliable AD biomarkers, and to study the progression of the disease, but further research looking for specific AD biomarkers among neurodegenerative diseases is required.

Abbreviation
Our group has validated analytical methods based on chromatography coupled with mass spectrometry (UPLC-MS/MS) for the determination of oxidative stress biomarkers (isoprostanes, isofurans from arachidonic acid, neuroprostanes, neurofurans from docosahexaenoic acid, dihomoisoprostanes, dihomoisofurans from adrenic acid) in different biofluids (serum, plasma, whole blood, urine, CSF)
These biomarkers are being studied in patients with MCI-AD and mild dementia-AD, as well as in healthy participants of the same ages
By now, the results obtained are promising, especially for neuroprostanes and dihomoisoprostanes, which reflect the oxidation of highly concentrated lipid components in the grey and white brain matter.
These biomarkers have potential interest in diagnostic and prognostic issues, and biomarkers related to molecular mechanisms could be therapeutic targets in further pharmacological developments.

MicroRNAs
Among epigenetic biomarkers, the microRNAs constitute a key element in cell signalling pathways.
In recent years, they have been postulated as powerful biomarkers for the diagnosis of neurodegenerative diseases
In fact, there is evidence that they could be more sensitive than messenger RNA, or even proteins used as clinical markers
Recent epigenomic studies in AD using NGS have shown the existence of microRNAs with altered expression in both brain and CSF
However, other studies carried out in peripheral biofluids using quantitative Reverse transcription Polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) provided inconsistent results
Some studies summarized in Table
Nevertheless, some discrepancies regarding microRNAs levels and expression patterns may be explained by confounding factors, such as the different ethnic groups, sample handling, and bias or random findings because small samples have been employed in each study.
In fact, it seems that medication and disease duration can influence on the microRNAs' profiles
In this sense, a previous study found a limitation in the ability to diagnose patients with late AD from the microRNAs identified
In addition, some exosomal microRNAs (miR-135a and miR-384) were up-regulated in AD patients compared with HC subjects, while another (miR-193b) was down-regulated in AD, but these microR-NAs were not specific of AD, and can be also found altered in Parkinson's disease with dementia and vascular dementia
According to this, epigenomics constitutes a potentially useful tool in the development of microRNA signatures and cost-effective diagnostic models with satisfactory accuracy (89-96 %)
However, no study evaluating the diagnostic performance of different microRNAs expression between MCI-AD and HC participants was found.
Therefore, further studies in blood or exosome samples from welldefined MCI-AD and HC subjects, and following a standard protocol, are required to achieve consensus on microRNAs as specific biomarkers in AD.
On the other hand, lncRNAs can also regulate gene expression at epigenetic level, but few studies have focused on the role of lncRNAs as minimally invasive AD biomarkers

Proteins
Proteins involved mainly in synapse and immunity functions are important AD biomarkers.
In a recent study in CSF samples from MCI-AD patients high levels of several proteins (Chromogranin A, neurexin3, neuropentraxin1) were found, reflecting early events in the physiopathology of AD
Another study found significant relationships between AD and high levels of certain proteins in blood (kinases, pancreatic polypeptide, β-microglobulin (2), carcinoembryonic antigen, superoxide dismutase)
Recent proteomic studies (Table
Most of them are related to inflammatory reaction, complement and coagulation cascades, hemostasis, immune response, lipid metabolism, and oxidative stress
Actually, selenoprotein P was found at higher level in MCI than in HC
Although most of these proteins were reported as potential AD biomarkers in some studies
Also, a combination of peptides allowed the development of a satisfactory diagnostic model discriminating between dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) and AD groups
Similarly, multivariate analysis confirmed correlations between some proteins (PSA, clusterin, fetuin B and glycans) and AD
As regards to inflammatory pathways, some related proteins (TNFα, IL5, ILI, IL7, L10, IL18, TARC) were found deregulated in MCI-AD patients
Most of the AD diagnostic models developed in literature from omic tools were based on proteomic signatures and showed satisfactory accuracy (70-94%)
Regarding discrimination between MCI patients and controls, a diagnostic model developed from TNFα, IL10, and TARC biomarkers showed satisfactory indexes (accuracy 96%, sensitivity 82%; specificity 97%)
Another study that evaluated the blood screen obtained a positive predictive value and a negative predictive value of 0.74 and 0.93, respectively
A biomarker profile, based on IL-18 and T-lymphocyte-secreted protein I-309, showed poor accuracy for the MCI group (AUC-ROC 0.58), while it was highly accurate for the AD group (AUC-ROC 0.94)
On the other hand, there is evidence that human blood proteome has gender specific profiles
In general, the proteomics findings were characterized by high AD specificity and they contributed importantly in the advance of knowledge about the physiopathological mechanisms involved.
For instance, a combination of two peptides (1737 and 5002 m/z) showed sensitivity of 95.0% and specificity of 93.3% for discriminating the dementia with Lewy bodies group from the AD group
However, different proteomics signatures were obtained from these results, indicating inconsistency and low reproducibility among studies.
As regards sources of variability, it is important to highlight ethnicity
Moreover, gene polymorphism constitutes important characteristic that could contribute to different levels of some proteins in different reports
Other important limitations in omic technologies are the use of non-standardized experimental protocols, and the high variability of assays platforms and analytical techniques
Moreover, there are few studies validating the potential biomarkers in independent samples
Therefore, more studies are needed to validate changes of some proteins in AD, and develop reliable biomarkers with clinical utility.

Novel Therapeutic Targets in Early AD Treatment
In the initial phases of AD, differentiation between patients and the general population, which presents a great variability, harbours great difficulty.
However, an early and accurate diagnosis would be required, since it is precisely in the early stages of AD when available treatments show higher efficacy.
The previously described omics-based biomarkers constitute an important source of information to develop novel and effective diagnostic tools and therapeutic strategies.
From the metabolomics pathways with relevancy in AD development, lipid metabolism impairment plays an important role.
In fact, lipid signatures have been developed in order to predict the disease progression
Since some lipid metabolites such as acylcarnitines, phosphatidylcholines, plasmalogens, sphingolipids, triglycerides, showed lower levels in plasma from AD patients than in HC subjects
Therefore, a potential therapeutic strategy could be based on special diets and/or pharmacological preparations aimed at maintaining the normal levels of these metabolites from early AD stages.
In addition, some studies have shown that amino acids and neurotransmitters mecha-nisms were impaired in AD.
In fact, some of them showed higher levels of metabolites, such as, taurine, glutamic acid, alanine, methionine, and asparagine
In the same way, some amines (2aminoadipic acid, tyrosine) were under-expressed in AD
In some cases, discrepancy can be due to differences in methodology, as well as the lack of validated analytical methods.
Taking into account the results obtained in the epigenomic studies, there are some microRNAs that show different levels between AD and HC groups, so modifications in the expression of genes regulated by these microRNAs could be the base for a potential therapeutic strategy, trying to maintain the expression of these genes at levels close to HC subjects.
From the proteomic studies, some downregulated proteins in MCI-AD were identified (apolipoprotein A-1, AIV, B-100, H, alpha-2-HS-glycoprotein, and afamin, complex galactosylated and sialylated, C1 inhibitor and factor H, fibronectin, ceruloplasmin, and vitamin D-binding protein)
These findings may indicate that these proteins, involved in some pathways, such as, inflammation, coagulation, hemostasis, immune response, lipid metabolism, and oxidative stress could act as therapeutic targets for AD treatment.
The main limitation of new omics-based biomarkers is their still limited clinical use.
In fact, few potential biomarkers have been clinically validated may be due to experimental difficulties (e.g.
there is not a validation protocol), and high economic cost (e.g.
large scale and an in-depth investigation of critical parameters).
Also, once a test has been validated in the laboratory, it is necessary to determine its validity in the real clinical practice.
Another important limitation in the development of omics-based biomarkers is the influence of diverse aging brain comorbidities coexisting in AD, and they can be differentiated into non-degenerative processes (e.g.
general somatic, metabolic or vascular secondary brain impairment), or degenerative brain diseases (e.g.
Parkinson disease, frontal lobe type degenerations).
However, studies reviewed in this work did not evaluate the impact of potential AD co-morbidities.
On the other hand, differentiation between distinct degenerative processes can be especially difficult in the absence of specific diagnosis biomarkers, so further research on omics-based biomarkers using well defined groups could contribute significantly in this field.
Finally, regarding the high heterogeneity of AD, the integration of omics data obtained using different technologies constitutes a promising approach to advance in the knowledge of the AD physiopathology, and subsequently in the development of an efficient therapeutic strategy.
Nevertheless, there is a lack of integration studies, so further research in this line is required.

CONCLUSION
Currently, most of the research lines are focused on the early, accurate and safe diagnosis of Alzheimer disease, and in the development of efficient therapeutic strategies.
Omics techniques can allow identifying biomarkers for early diag-nosis or prognosis, and they can aid in the development of new therapeutic strategies.
Nowadays, there is little translational experience in the application of the results of omic techniques to the clinical practice.
In fact, no comparative studies between new omics-based biomarkers and standard diagnosis biomarkers (CSF amyloid, tau, p-tau, atrophy or hypometabolism on neuroimaging procedures) have been found in the literature, and few potential biomarkers have been clinically validated.
As an improvement, research using strictly selected case and control groups, an appropriate sample size, as well as standardized and repeatable laboratory techniques, could provide reliable information on the molecular mechanisms that occur in the affected tissue, related tissues and at a systemic level.
On the other hand, some omics variations could be specific of AD, while others could constitute unspecific markers of neurodegeneration or neurological damage of any kind.
In this sense, studies including other neurodegenerative diseases and diverse conditions causing neurologic damage will be necessary to elucidate these possibilities.
To conclude, omics biomarkers can provide an easy, nonexpensive and non-invasive approach useful in clinical practice replacing actual expensive neuroimaging techniques, time consuming neuropsychological assessment or invasive sampling procedures.
In addition, omics based-biomarkers are not limited to diagnostic or prognostic issues, but also they can be used as risk biomarkers, group definition biomarkers, as well as definite or surrogate therapeutic biomarkers.
Finally, there is an important imbalance between the scientific production and the lack of clinically validated biomarkers.
Therefore, a number of improvements are required in further works developing reliable and costeffective diagnosis, as well as effective therapies: a multiomic approach to advance in the knowledge of the complex AD physiopathology, the identification of early and specific AD biomarkers in non-invasive biofluids using well-defined cohorts, the development and validation of low-cost analytical methods, and the clinical validation of potential biomarkers.

LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS



Fig. ( 1 ).
Fig. (1).
Diagram representing the multi-omic approach to identify early AD biomarkers in non-invasive samples, and to develop new therapeutic targets.
(The color version of the figure is available in the electronic copy of the article).



Fig. ( 2 ).
Fig. (2).
Flow diagram representing the search, screening and final selection of the studies included in this review.


levels did not differ by group.
↑ ceramides levels in AD. acids, biogenic amines, sphingolipids, glycerophospholipids, sum of hexoses.
plasma Lipid metabolites can differentiate HC from MCI and AD with relevant significance.
The ratio PCs/lysoPCS ↓ in AD.


↑ in MCI and LOAD.
Some PIsEs ↓ in both MCI and both LOAD cohorts.
[55] AD (n = 9), MCI (n = 8), HC (n = 12) Metabolomics Galactose, imidazole and acetone, creatine, 5-aminopentanoate, propionate, acetone.
saliva Significant concentration changes in these metabolites (galactose ↓, while imidazole, 5-aminopentanoate, propionate, and acetone ↑ in AD).


associated with the 10-year change in CANTAB-PAL in both the individual and twin difference context.


proteins.
Most of them are related with inflammatory reaction, complement and coagulation cascades, hemostasis, immune response, lipid metabolism, oxidative stress.
(SERPINA3 ↓, APOA1 ↓, apolipoprotein B-100 (APOB) ↓, AZGP1 ↓, complement factor B (CFB) ↓, CP ↓, ITIH1 ↓, interalpha-trypsin inhibitor heavy chain H2 (ITIH2) ↓, HP ↓, SERPINA1 ↓, Gelsolin ↑ in AD).


found, complex galactosylated and sialylated forms ↓ in AD.
Principal component analysis (PCA) confirmed the gender similarities and differences, and a close correlation between pro-inflammatory protein markers, AD, female pMCI, and truncated IgG-Fc glycans.
, and TARC.
serum TNFα ↑, IL10 ↑, and TARC ↑in aMCI.
The diagnostic accuracy of the biomarkers in detecting MCI was 96% (sensitivity = 0.82; specificity = 0.97).


and T-lymphocyte-secreted protein I-309.
serum IL-18 ↓ and T-lymphocyte-secreted protein I-309 ↑ in AD.
AD and MCI profiles had substantial overlap among the top markers, suggesting common functions in AD and MCI but differences in their relative importance. 2 microglobulin (β2M), PPY (pancreatic polypeptide), sTNFR1, CRP, VCAM-1, thrombopoietin, α2 macroglobulin, eotaxin3, TNF-α, tenascin C (TNC), IL-5, IL-6, IL-7, IL-10, IL-18, I309, FVII, TARC, amyloid A (SAA), and intercellular cell-adhesion molecule-1.


HBELGF ↑, IgM ↓, MIP-1a ↑, PAPPA, ANG-2, ApoA VI ↑, C3, FasL ↑, ILGFBP ↑, PYY ↑, SGOT, TTR ↓ in AD.


protein 1 (CFHR1), interleukin-6 receptor, chemokine CC-4, angiotensinconverting enzyme, and angiotensinogen.



:
Abbreviation: FABP: Fatty acid-binding protein.
LBD: Lewi Body Dementia.
miR: microRNA.
PDD: Parkinson's disease with dementia.
sTNFR1: soluble tumor necrosis factor receptor 1. TARC: Thymus and activation-regulated chemokine.
VaD: Vascular Dementia.



Table 1 . Standard criteria for Alzheimer Disease diagnosis. Classification of Patients Clinical Markers MCI not Due to AD MCI Due to AD [8] Mild-moderate Dementia Due to AD [9]



Table 2 . Early and non-invasive biomarkers obtained from omics techniques and found in AD studies in literature.


CFAB ↓, CFAI ↓, A1AG1, ceruloplasmin, CFAH, CFAH, fibronectin ↑, FIBG ↑, FIBB ↑, FIBA ↑, C1 inhibitor ↑, gelsolin in pMCI.
The best model demonstrated the accuracy of 79% in predicting progressive MCI.
A2M strongly correlates with female AD progression but not with males.