Considerations regarding a diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease before dementia: a systematic review
The NIA-AA research framework proposes a purely biological definition of Alzheimer's disease (AD).
This implies that AD can be diagnosed based on biomarker abnormalities, irrespective of clinical manifestation.
While this brings opportunities, it also raises challenges.
We aimed to provide an overview of considerations regarding the disclosure of AD pathology before the onset of dementia.
Methods: A systematic literature review was conducted and reported according to PRISMA guidelines.
We searched PubMed, Embase, APA PsycINFO, and Web of Science Core Collection (on 10 December 2020) for references on conveying AD biomarker results to individuals without dementia.
Our query combined variations on the terms Alzheimer's disease, disclosure, or diagnosis, preclinical or prodromal, and biomarkers.
Two reviewers independently screened the resulting 6860 titles and abstracts for eligibility and examined 162 full-text records for relevance.
We included theoretical articles in English, on communicating amyloid and/or tau results to individuals with mild cognitive impairment, subjective cognitive decline, or normal cognition.
MAXQDA-software was used for inductive data analysis.
We included 27 publications.
From these, we extracted 26 unique considerations, which we grouped according to their primary relevance to a clinical, personal, or societal context.
Clinical considerations included (lack of ) validity, utility, and disclosure protocols.
Personal considerations covered psychological and behavioral implications, as well as the right to (not) know.
Finally, societal considerations comprised the risk of misconception, stigmatization, and discrimination.
Overall, views were heterogeneous and often contradictory, with emphasis on harmful effects.
We found 26 diverse and opposing considerations, related to a clinical, personal, or societal context, which are relevant to diagnosing AD before dementia.
The theoretical literature tended to focus on adverse impact and rely on common morality, while the motivation for and implications of biomarker testing are deeply personal.
Our findings provide a starting point for clinicians to discuss biomarker-based diagnosis with their patients, which will become even more relevant in light of the conditional approval of a first disease-modifying drug for AD.

Introduction
The pathophysiological cascade of events in Alzheimer's disease (AD) starts 20 to 30 years before dementia
Nowadays, it is possible to detect this pathology in vivo, using biomarkers.
The National Institute on Aging and Alzheimer's Association research framework operationalized AD as a biological construct characterized by evidence of amyloid plaques, tau tangles, and neurodegeneration, irrespective of clinical expression
This implies that AD can be diagnosed before dementia, in individuals with mild cognitive impairment, subjective cognitive decline, or normal cognition.
This development has sparked a heated debate.
Should a specialist in a memory clinic tell individuals without dementia that they have AD?
This may lead to distress
Alternatively, can physicians withhold information on an underlying disease from patients, just because they do not fulfill clinical dementia criteria?
While perhaps avoiding anxiety, this would deprive patients of the opportunity to adopt a risk-reducing lifestyle, prepare for the future, or participate in dementiaprevention trials
The numbers of persons living with preclinical AD are large
A first estimation suggests the prevalence of AD may be three times higher when based on a biological rather than a clinical definition of the disease, illustrating the potential magnitude of consequences
With the conditional approval of a first disease-modifying therapy
We aim to provide an overview of ethical, psychosocial, and societal considerations regarding the disclosure of AD pathology before dementia.

Methods
A systematic literature search was conducted and reported according to PRISMA guidelines
Our broad query combined synonyms and spelling variations on the terms "Alzheimer's" AND "disclos*" OR "diagnos*" AND "predementia" AND "biomarkers, " using controlled standardized keywords as well as free text terms.
We searched PubMed, Embase, APA PsycINFO, and Web of Science Core Collection for references published before 10 December 2020 and scanned reference lists of identified articles.
All articles in English presenting theoretical data, i.e., ethical concerns, psychosocial consequences, and societal implications of disclosing amyloid and/or tau results to individuals in AT(N) stages 1-3
Publications on later stages and other types of dementia or neurodegenerative diseases were excluded, as well as those primarily focused on trial design or genetic risk.
Two authors independently screened all titles and abstracts.
Articles marked as potentially relevant were assessed for eligibility based on full text.
In case of discrepancy, arguments for inclusion and exclusion were discussed while re-examining the contents and criteria.
In each case, consensus was reached, without having to consult a third author.
We performed inductive content analysis
First, all sections addressing ethical, psychosocial, and societal considerations regarding the disclosure of AD pathology before dementia were identified.
Next, the data were processed in an iterative and incremental manner to highlight all aspects pertinent.
These were further grouped and aggregated in a hierarchy of categories.
This process was repeated and revised until the contents were precisely described and fully covered, by a structure of considerations, with underlying arguments and overarching contexts.
An additional classification was made according to the key ethical principles of medical ethics: beneficence, non-maleficence, justice, and autonomy

Results
Our initial search yielded 6860 records.
Two reviewers independently screened all titles and abstracts for eligibility and examined 162 full-text records for relevance.
After applying selection criteria (Fig.
From these, 26 unique considerations were extracted (Table
The final coding tree corresponds to the structure of Table

Clinical considerations (Lack of) clinical validity
Although most authors acknowledged that biomarker information enhances diagnostic accuracy
About half of the articles covered the difficulty to discern normal aging from latent AD
It was argued that procedures are not without burden or risk
Most authors concluded that biomarker criteria require final demonstration of validity in populations without dementia

(Lack of) clinical utility
Clinical utility was contested, mainly due to the absence of a disease-modifying therapy
However, several authors suggested lifestyle interventions could delay cognitive impairment
Lastly, it was argued that early detection can improve patient care, e.g., by offering an explanation for concerns, anticipating medical needs, and facilitating access to support
Nonetheless, others did not consider biomarker information medically meaningful

Protocols and training
A dozen papers addressed the need for guidance regarding who to test, what findings signify, whether to disclose, and how
Knowledge from the fields of oncology and genetic testing may offer a good starting point
The literature referred to the development of standardized processes and materials for disclosing biomarker levels in prevention trials
In addition, it was emphasized that the required skills cannot be assumed, so medical professionals would profit from training in risk communication

Disclosure
Conveying an AD diagnosis was considered daunting, especially to persons with full insight
Recommendations derived from research on genetic risk covered informed consent, pre-test screening, education and counseling, sufficient time for consultation and reflection, take-home materials, involving a relative, and tailoring to individuals

Personal considerations (Un)certainty
While an abnormal biomarker result provides certainty on the presence of brain lesions, it was also argued to   cause uncertainty about the eventuality of cognitive decline
While a few authors felt individuals might appreciate and understand such indefinite risk

(In)actionability
Proponents stated that awareness of having AD without dementia allowed individuals and relatives to prepare for the future by arranging private, professional, financial, and legal matters; obtaining long-term care insurance; writing advance directives or making end-of-life decisions
Opponents believed these things should be done anyway

Positive and negative psychological impact
Several publications observed the absence and even presence of AD lesions might offer relief, solace, or an explanation of symptoms
Knowing what is going on was thought to be of value in itself
Yet, nearly all papers mentioned adverse emotions, including fear, anxiety, and depression
Another worry was the risk of stereotype threat or nocebo reaction, where the knowledge of susceptibility leads to the associated behavior or a decrease in memory functioning

Right to (not) know
On moral and legal grounds, an individual's request to access one's personal data must be granted, be it in a research trial or clinical practice
Likewise, a refusal to be informed of such information must be respected as well
However, it was argued that this fundamental right can be in conflict with physicians' oath of primum non nocere (first, do no harm) and in some cases could or even should be overruled

Wish to (not) know
Authors reported that many individuals express a desire to receive risk information
It was recommended that extensive and "truly" informed consent

Societal considerations Sharing
As individuals have the right to privacy and confidentiality
It was also mentioned that fear of stigma could prevent patients from voicing their concerns and seeking help, while acting on their worries and needs may also yield support

Support services
Apart from pre-and post-diagnostic counseling

Stigma
According to the identified literature, public stigma ranges from patronizing attitudes to social distancing, exclusion, and isolation
This induces self-stigma, when pejorative views are internalized as feelings of shame, lowered selfesteem, and inferiority
In addition, spillover stigma is detrimental to family members
An increase of predementia patients was expected to expand stigma

Discrimination
Individuals with an AD diagnosis and risk of dementia were considered vulnerable to discrimination, affecting their professional position, insurance fees, legal status, civil rights (driving and voting), and financial capacity

Policy and law
Current legislation, such as the United States Genetic Information Non-Discrimination Act and the Americans with Disabilities Act, does not adequately protect individuals with predementia AD
Several authors advocated for regulation of confidentiality and privacy, preclinical screening, and obligatory disclosure for persons with high responsibility

Misconception
Authors observed that a symptomless condition with an uncertain prognosis is hard to grasp for lay persons and medical professionals alike

Education and engagement
Several publications stress that individuals' perceptions can change after intervention or experience
. Moreover, patients of all cultures should be involved in the development of protocols and policy, to represent their own views, improve research, and decrease stigma
.

Resources, opportunities, and costs
Authors worried that predementia testing may not be accessible and affordable for all
Thus, the emotional and financial burden could rise substantially

Medicalization
Expanding the criteria for AD raised concerns of tipping the scales from under-to overdiagnosis
Paradoxically, normalization was reasoned to result in marginalization, but also argued to increase the urgency to develop disease-modifying therapies

Advance research
The primary consideration behind the new criteria is to prevent individuals with AD from developing dementia, as early interventions are hypothesized to have better chances of success

Hope and fear
Finally, authors were wary of inflating unsubstantiated hope
Both were primarily regarded as vulnerabilities and impediments to rational decision-making

Key principles
In substantiating their arguments, the majority of authors invoked the key principles of medical ethics: beneficence, non-maleficence, justice, and autonomy
We therefore organized all 26 considerations not only by the context they relate to, but also by the key principle that was most applicable, as visualized in Fig.

Discussion
We found 26 considerations relevant to disclosing a diagnosis of AD to individuals without dementia.
These concerns, constraints, and implications relate to clinical, personal, and societal contexts.
Many constitute direct opposites, such as certainty versus uncertainty, reflecting the heated debate among stakeholders.
This duality is concordant with findings from a recent study on patients' views regarding early AD diagnosis, reporting not only great variety between individuals but also profound ambivalence within individuals
For example, while a diagnosis can provide certainty on what is going on, it can also bring uncertainty on what to expect.
Thus, it may not have to be either one way or the other, as both sides can be true to some extent, and perspectives may change over time.
This illustrates the ardent need of empirical evidence and clinical recommendations on a biomarker diagnosis of AD.
Since market access has been granted to a first disease-modifying therapy
Particularly with respect to clinical validity, the comparison of statements was hampered by a disparity of definitions.
In the absence of a gold standard, authors evaluated the accuracy of the biomarker framework
Findings were based on different criteria of clinical symptoms, pathological findings, and/or biological changes.
While all models have value, they are not interchangeable.
Moreover, studies suggest the scientific dissensus on nosology and the shifting meaning of AD create confusion
This emphasizes the need for a common concept and language of AD
An underlying and fundamentally contested conundrum is whether individuals with normal cognition, but abnormal biomarkers are ill.
Based on research criteria, they have AD but judging by clinical standards they are not sick
Two of the included papers evaluate the conceptual validity according to theories of health and disease
The authors reasoned that the signature of amyloid and tau does not represent a singular disease, nor a statistical deviation from normal aging in older people.
They concluded that people without symptoms should not be diagnosed as "patients-inwaiting, " but considered persons at-risk
Yet this is not about screening unsuspecting populations.
Neither is the phase before dementia entirely without symptoms; individuals present at memory clinics because they experience symptoms in their daily lives, albeit subtle or mild
They wish to learn what is wrong, and they have a right to know.
In the field of oncology, it is common to diagnose patients with cancer (in situ), regardless of signs or complaints.
The same goes for conditions like hypertension and diabetes mellitus
An apparent difference is the lack of disease-modifying interventions for AD.
Some ethicists apply a "pragmatic view" to AD, stating that without preventive medication early detecting may do more harm than good
This view might change with the recent conditional approval of a first disease-modifying treatment by the FDA.
Overall, the identified literature tended to concentrate on putative adverse implications.
Notably, repeatedly mentioned worries about conforming to stereotypes or nocebo reactions were substantiated by evidence from a single study on disclosure of genetic risk
Although inherited susceptibility is beyond the scope of our review, extensive research on the impact of revealing an increased probability
So far, evidence on disclosing biomarker information is limited, but the few available studies suggest it is safe and actionable [64-69].
However, stigmatization and discrimination are concerns that need further scrutiny
More importantly, it should be noted these findings are based on a selection of individuals, willing to participate and learn their disposition to develop dementia.
There is a lack of racial, ethnical, cultural, social, economic, and environmental diversity in study populations
More empirical research is required, evaluating both harms and benefits, taking perspectives of individuals from all groups into account.
The key principles of medical ethics, i.e., beneficence, non-maleficence, justice, and autonomy, were frequently invoked to decide whether a predementia diagnosis of AD is justified.
However, applying the "four principle approach" may unduly simplify a complicated matter
The framework relies on the notion of a common morality, while the interest, motivation, and implications of biomarker testing are inherently deeply personal
Yet patients' perspectives and circumstances are underrepresented in the theoretical discourse.
Rather than risking paternalism by imposing the moral right to know or not know on all, we need a tailored approach in clinical settings to respect the values of each individual.
Future research should illuminate which personal factors influence people's preferences for medical information, as well as the psychological and social implications of disclosing test results.
It is pivotal to engage and educate all stakeholders to enable informed (and shared) decision-making and empower individuals in choosing what is best for them.
This becomes especially relevant in light of the development of low-cost blood tests [76, 77], advances in risk-reducing lifestyle programs

Strengths and limitations
Our systematic review provides an in-depth overview of considerations regarding a diagnosis of AD before dementia.
Strengths are our broad query to include publications from various disciplines (including medical, ethical, psychological, social, and legal), strict adherence to PRISMA guidelines, and use of state-of-the art methodology to inductively analyze the literature.
Among the potential limitations is the restriction to articles in English presenting theoretical data.
A next step is an inventory of empirical evidence in the clinical, personal, and societal contexts to compare expectations to experiences and identify gaps in knowledge.
Immediate requirements include devising educational materials for the general public, protocols for clinical practice, supportive services for patients, and legislation to protect their rights
The identified considerations offer helpful starting points to prepare for a future with precision medicine and prevention of AD.

Conclusions
Diagnosing AD in individuals without dementia involves diverse and often opposing considerations, related to a clinical, personal, or societal context.
The theoretical literature tended to focus on adverse impact and rely on the notion of a common morality while the motivation for, and implications of, biomarker testing are deeply personal.
Our findings provide a starting point for memory clinic specialists, such as neurologists, geriatricians, and psychiatrists, to discuss a biomarker-based diagnosis with their patients, to enable shared and informed decision-making, which will become even more relevant in light of the conditional approval of a first disease-modifying drug for AD.



Fig. 1
Fig. 1 Flow diagram of study selection



Fig. 2
Fig.2Visual overview of considerations.
Visual overview of 26 considerations extracted from the included literature, categorized based on the clinical, personal, or societal context they relate to and the four basic principles of biomedical ethics: beneficence (doing good), non-maleficence (avoiding harm), justice (ensuring fair distribution of resources in accordance with the law), and autonomy (allowing free, informed, and deliberate decisions).
Contested issues, e.g., (in) actionability, are ranked under beneficence as well as non-maleficence to reflect the theoretical debate and their subjective nature.
Societal considerations are interrelated, e.g., sharing test results can lead to support but also stigma and discrimination.
The visual overview highlights the tension between clinicians' responsibility to weigh the benefits and risks and prevent unnecessary suffering, versus individuals' right to self-determination



Table 1
Clinical, personal, and societal considerations



Table 1
(continued)



Table 1
(continued)Considerations according to context.By inductively analyzing the literature presenting theoretical data on disclosing the presence of AD pathology to individuals without dementia, we extracted 26 unique considerations from 25 articles.We categorized these considerations according to the context they primarily related to, i.e., clinical, personal, and societal context, and collected the underlying arguments as stated by the authorsvander Schaar et al.
Alzheimer's Research & Therapy (2022) 14:31


der Schaar et al.
Alzheimer's Research & Therapy (2022) 14:31