Obesity as a Risk Factor for Alzheimer’s Disease: Implication of Leptin and Glutamate
Obesity is known to induce leptin and insulin resistance.
Leptin is a peptide hormone synthesized in adipose tissue that mainly regulates food intake.
It has been shown that insulin stimulates the production of leptin when adipocytes are exposed to glucose to encourage satiety; while leptin, via a negative feedback, decreases the insulin release and enhances tissue sensitivity to it, leading to glucose uptake for energy utilization or storage.
Therefore, resistance to insulin is closely related to leptin resistance.
Obesity in middle age has also been related to Alzheimer's disease (AD).
In recent years, the relation between impaired leptin signaling pathway and the onset of AD has been studied.
In all this context the role of the blood brain barrier (BBB) is crucial.
Slow excitotoxicity happens in AD due to an excess of the neurotransmitter glutamate.
Since leptin has been shown to regulate N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptors, we want to review the link between these pathological pathways, and how they are affected by other AD triggering factors and its role in the onset of AD.

INTRODUCTION
In the last years obesity has changed from a mere aesthetic problem to become into a serious health problem worldwide.
Nowadays it is considered by medical authorities as a genuine epidemic, consuming enormous technical, human, and economic resources.
Obesity and also overweight affect near than 300 million people from child to elderly, and it is not related with the development level of the country (World Health Organization
Moreover, research has shown that obese children are more likely to be overweight or obese as adults
The growing incidence caused by a change in eating habits, by an increased consumption of fat and also by a substantial reduction in physical activity.
This nutritional disorder implicates a number of conditions associated with excess weight, such as heart diseases, type 2 diabetes, high blood pressure, different types of cancer, and even neurodegeneration
All these chronic pathologies associated with obesity, englobe the main causes of death and also monopolize 80% of healthcare expense (The World Health Organization [WHO], 2019).
The body mass index (BMI) is the most widely used method to classify a person in relation to his/her weight.
In adults a BMI of 18.5 to 24.9 stands for a healthy, normal weight, while a value between 25 and 29.9 means is considered overweight.
From values from 30 to 39.9 implies you are obese and from 40 to above means you are severely obese.
A BMI lower than 18.5 is considered underweight and may indicate an eating disorder or malnutrition.
However, BMI is not representative of overweight in the case of people with high percentage of muscle mass.
In these population a high BMI would not indicate excess of fat.
Perhaps a more accurate method to assess excess fat is waist circumference, which can be used as an additional measure in people who are overweight or moderately obese.
Usually, men with a waist circumference of 94 cm (37 in) or more and women with a waist circumference of 80 cm (31.5 in) or more are in risk of obesity-related diseases.
In the last 15 years, obesity and dementia risk have been related
An increase in adipose tissue could promote a decrease in the blood flow to the brain, leading to vascular injury.
In fact, obesity is related to changes in cerebral vascularization, because perivascular adipose tissue is not found around the cerebral arteries
A decrease in blood flow to the brain causes ischemia in vulnerable brain areas.
The most sensitive areas, specifically vulnerable, are neurons located in the hippocampal regions CA1, CA3, and CA4, portions of the caudate nucleus, cerebellum, and layers III, V, VI of the neocortex
The hippocampal areas, due to its high baseline metabolic activity, are extremely susceptible to reduced oxygen and glucose intake and it is believed that it can be one of the causes of increased memory loss
Chronic peripheral inflammation caused by the release of adipokines as leptin and other cytokines, may spread to the brain and the neuroinflammation is linked to a decrease in the brain white matter, leading to impair neuronal connections
Moreover, neuroinflammation could be triggered by an imbalance in the gut microbiota due to the consumption of diets high in fats and sugars
In this review, we are going to discuss the role of the cytokine leptin in brain function and specially in the memory decline associated with Alzheimer's disease (AD).

LEPTIN AND ITS ROLE IN THE BRAIN
Leptin was discovered in
After cloning the ob gene in mice and its homolog in humans, the gene product was purified and called leptin
Leptin is a hormone mainly produced by adipose tissue which is released to the bloodstream and circulates throughout the body proportionally to the body fat mass
Moreover, leptin is expressed either in subcutaneous and visceral adipose tissue
Leptin can be found into the bloodstream either associated to binding proteins or in a free, bioactive form
Obese individuals show a higher proportion of the free circulating leptin form and in contrast, in lean subjects leptin circulates mainly bound to its soluble receptor
This is in line with the fact that one of the functions attributed to leptin is to regulate food intake and energy expenditure.
When adipose tissue decreases plasma leptin levels also decrease, and when adipose tissue increases leptin levels increase and suppresses appetite
But we know today that the functions of leptin are many others: it is a growth factor, a permissive factor for puberty, controls metabolism and immune system and is also implicated in memory
All these effects are mediated by binding to specific leptin receptors (LepR) expressed in the central nervous system (CNS) as well as in peripheral tissues.
The LepR has six different isoforms: five of them (LepRa, LepRc, LepRd, LepRf, and LepRb) show transmembrane domain, whereas LepRe only presents an extracellular domain and acts as a soluble receptor.
LepRb is the long form of the receptor while the others isoforms are shorter
LepRs are widely expressed all along the body, but focusing in the brain, both short and long isoforms are broadly expressed.
LepR is found in the hypothalamus (specifically, in the arcuate, ventromedial, paraventricular, and ventral premammillary nuclei) but LepRs are also present in other areas primarily non-associated with energy balance such as the neocortex, hippocampus, thalamus, leptomeninges, choroid plexus

LEPTIN AND OBESITY
To reach the CNS, leptin crosses the blood-brain barrier (BBB) through a saturable transport system
Brain microvessels express short leptin receptors which bind and internalize leptin
It has been proposed that leptin enters via cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) from plasma because the choroid plexus contains many leptin receptors
In the hypothalamus, a very specific type of cell, the tanycyte has a remarkable role conducting leptin.
Tanycytes are ependymal cells located in the third ventricle and also in the floor of the fourth ventricle.
They have cellular extensions that communicate deep into the hypothalamus, and thank to these cellular prolongations, the leptin is conducted to its target areas through transcytosis
When leptin binds to its receptor it activates several signaling cascades such as the Janus tyrosine kinase 2 (JAK2), the signal transducer activator of transcription 3 (STAT3), the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3 kinase), and the AKT pathways (Flak and
If the amount of NPY and AgRP, are increased, it leads to increased food intake but the activation of the POMC triggers factors (mainly the α-melanocyte-stimulating hormone) that inhibit food intake
The administration of leptin increases POMC mRNA expression, and inhibits NPY and AgRP mRNAs translation
Nevertheless, we have a hormone that is central in the regulation of food intake and glucose levels control, and of course, we are referring to insulin.
An increase in the level of circulating insulin produced by its prandial release from endogenous stores is associated with the state of satiety.
Given this fact, the relation of leptin and insulin is a point to discuss.
As,
This could happen because LepRs are present in pancreatic β-cells
On the contrary, insulin stimulates leptin secretion from adipose tissue closing the feedback loop.
In this line,
Making tissues more sensitive to insulin, leptin causes glucose uptake for energy utilization, or storage.
Given that insulin resistance happens in obesity, the role of leptin in obesity etiology and pathophysiology is worth to discuss.
In obese subjects, levels of leptin increase in plasma compared to lean subjects.
This is, probably, a physiological response to reduce food intake, and also aims to use all the energy derived from the lipid metabolism
However, what actually happens is that obese subjects show resistance to leptin actions over time.
In this line, leptin resistance is associated with both increased circulating levels of leptin and also with inability of exogenous leptin to decrease body fat or food intake
Actually, augmented circulating levels of leptin in obesity caused hypothalamic leptin resistance, reducing the anorexigenic and energy expenditure signals and aggravating obesity
The cause of leptin resistance is not well elucidated, but it seems to have its origin in a defect in the transport of leptin across the BBB, maybe in deficits involving intracellular signaling mechanisms downstream of leptin receptor or even in development alterations

OBESITY AND RISK OF ALZHEIMER'S DISEASE
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the most common form of dementia.
It is characterized by two main lesions in the brain: senile plaques, predominantly formed by amyloid-beta (Aβ) peptide and neurofibrillary tangles, mainly compound by hyperphosphorylated tau protein (p-tau).
Aβ is product of the processed of the amyloid precursor protein (APP) by βand γ-secretase enzymes
The first symptom of the disease is episodic memory loss associated with hippocampal affectation.
But some pathological modifications related to obesity, such as neuroinflammation, insulin resistance, or mitochondrial dysfunction, also occur in AD pathological progression
The number of studies relating an increase in fat body mass and the risk of suffer AD has increased in the last years.
However, the results are controversial and many times inconclusive.
It seems that it is important to differentiate between mid-life and late-life overweight
Specifically, obesity in midlife and a weight loss in the preclinical phase characterizes dementia
In fact, in a recent meta-analysis of 21 studies, the authors conclude that obesity below the age of 65 years (midlife obesity) correlates with the incident of dementia, but not the late-life obesity (over 65 years)
Very recently,
The authors find that 20 years before dementia diagnosis, higher BMI is associated with increased dementia risk in mid-life.
Moreover, they describe that this risk is reversed in late-life and a higher BMI could even be protective
Furthermore, a meta-analysis of 15 prospective studies including more than 72000 participants used BMI measures and the authors found that both underweight and obese are related to an increase risk of AD but only in mid-life; high BMI in late-life was not associated with any dementia
Moreover, the authors conclude that underweight could be a useful marker for identifying mild cognitive impairment (MCI) subjects at increased risk to convert to AD
Another very large retrospective cohort study with two million people analyzed, concludes that underweight in both middle and old age increases the risk of dementia over two decades
In spite of these publications, the hypothesis that being overweight in mid-life is linked to dementia in late-life seems to be widely accepted by scientific community.
A recent analysis explains that the duration of the preclinical weight loss phase could be a negative confounding parameter and a plausible explanation of this paradox

THE ROLE OF LEPTIN IN AD
Since obesity and dementia were related, many studies tried to find a link between brain leptin activity and AD development.
In this line,
On the other hand,
LepR decreased expression related to age, is also shown in an animal model of AD
Brain leptin resistance is proposed as part of the neurodegenerative process.
Leptin has both neurotrophic and neuroprotective properties therefore, leptin signaling deficits may lead to susceptibility to AD-related neurotoxic conditions.
In fact, leptin is able to modify the levels of Aβ peptide by limiting its production in neurons via reducing β-secretase activity
Likewise, leptin protects hippocampal neurons in primary cell culture from Aβ derived insults such as oxidative stress
Moreover, leptin enhances the removal of Aβ by promoting its clearance and degradation and activating the insulin degrading enzyme
Furthermore, in neurons treated with Aβ, leptin prevents glycogen synthase kinase 3β (GSK3β) activation
This is very significant for AD pathogenesis since GSK3β is a kinase of tau and is implicated in the formation of neurofibrillary tangles.
Besides, development of leptin resistance is linked with higher tau pathology in transgenic mouse models of AD suggesting that a defect in LepR-mediated signaling cascade could increase p-tau levels
An important target of leptin action is the hippocampus, where it has a role in synaptic plasticity process, in memory preservation, and has pro-cognitive effects
All these effects seem to be mediated by modulating glutamate receptors: the ionotropic α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4isoxazolepropionic acid (AMPA) and N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA).
These receptors are involved in long-term potentiation (LTP) and in long-term depression (LTD).
Leptin enhances LTP and decreases LTD, increasing the efficacy of excitatory synaptic transmission
Moreover, leptin resistance is determinant for hippocampal dysfunction
In AD models,  leptin prevents the anomalous effects of Aβ on hippocampal LTP and LTD, restoring normal hippocampal synaptic function
Taken together, the studies described above indicate that brain leptin resistance could be central in AD pathophysiology, including the regulation of glutamatergic connections involved in hippocampal LTP and LTD.
A schematic view is shown in Figure

GLUTAMATE, OBESITY AND AD ARE LINKED VIA LEPTIN-RESISTANCE
Mild cognitive impairment and AD patients show an increase in plasma glutamate and glutamine
This increment is also reflected in brain, since some studies identify an increase in glutamate and glutamine levels in CSF from AD
If this increase comes directly from the arise in the peripheral levels of glutamate and glutamine or if it is an indirect phenomenon is not yet known in AD.
Curiously, glutamine levels increase in hippocampus from mice fed with a high-fat diet during 6 months
Moreover, the BBB is disrupted in early phases of the disease and the consequences of this disruption in the amino acid transport are not yet studied in depth
In any case, a slow excitotoxicity is shown in AD and this consist of an overexcitation of NMDA receptors by glutamate
Glutamate overexcite the NMDA receptors in a tonic manner and a good evidence of this, is that memantine, an uncompetitive NMDA receptor antagonist, is a wellestablished treatment of AD
In fact, Aβ causes the increase of glutamate
A pathological signaling cascade is triggered, involving an increase of Cdk5-p35 levels, a decrease of Cdh1 and finally glutaminase increase, causing a positive feedback loop of excitotoxicity
Interestingly, Cdk5-p35 also modulates signaling induced by leptin
Cdk5-p35 causes SOCS3 activation, a negative feedback regulator which inhibits leptin-induced signal transduction and causes leptin resistance
So, the excess of glutamate levels can cause a cascade of events that also induce leptin-resistance.
Interestingly, in AD the aforementioned overactivation is produced in extrasynaptic NMDA receptors rather than in synaptic NMDA receptors
Overstimulation of synaptic NMDA receptors is considered neuroprotective and in contrast, the overstimulation of extrasynaptic NMDA receptors induces tau hyperphosphorylation
In fact, memantine blocks preferentially extrasynaptic over synaptic NMDA receptors
NR2-A is a subunit mainly present in synaptic NMDA receptors and it has shown that leptin mediates neuroprotection activating them
When leptin binds to its receptor, activates JAK2, which in turn promotes the activation of STAT3, and then, PI3K-Akt signaling pathways are induced.
Activation of synaptic NR2A-containing NMDARs by glutamate also induces the PI3K-dependent pathway
The signal cascade will induce AMPA exocytosis and LTP
In contrast, in AD extrasynaptic NMDA receptors are overstimulated and this leads to neuronal death.
Extrasynaptic NMDAR induces the pro-apoptotic transcription factor Foxo
The consequences are mitochondrial calcium sustained increase, compromised ATP production and mitochondrial dysregulation finally inducing cell death
A global scheme is shown in Figure

CONCLUSION
Leptin is a hormone secreted by adipose tissue that matters for the correct functioning of the brain, including the memory, and learning processes in the hippocampus.
Leptin is neuroprotective and increase LTP, potentiating the activity of synaptic NMDA receptors of glutamate.
We discussed how in AD both leptin resistance, LTP dysfunction, and also an increase in glutamate happen.
For all this, obesity in middle-age could be considered as a risk factor to develop AD in the elderly.



FIGURE 1 |
FIGURE 1 | Schematic overview of the relationship between leptin and increased risk of Alzheimer's Disease.
Leptin is neuroprotective in AD by inhibiting LTD, GSK3β, oxidative stress, and β-secretase activity and by inducing LTP and Aβ degradation.
When a leptin-resistance takes place due to middle-age obesity, AD risk is increased.



FIGURE 2 |
FIGURE 2 | Relationship between middle-age obesity, glutamate excitotoxicity and increased risk of Alzheimer's disease.
In normal conditions, NMDA signaling and leptin receptor signal merge, exerting neuroprotective effects on cells.
On the other hand, leptin resistance impairs this pathway.
Moreover, Aβ causes an increase of glutamate levels and this leads to a dysfunction in extrasynaptic NMDAR, a decrease in LTP and mitochondrial alterations.