Precision Repetitive Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation Over the Left Parietal Cortex Improves Memory in Alzheimer’s Disease: A Randomized, Double-Blind, Sham-Controlled Study
Objective: We aim to study the effect of precision repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS) over the left parietal cortex on the memory and cognitive function in Alzheimer's disease (AD).
Methods: Based on the resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging, the left parietal cortex site with the highest functional connectivity to the hippocampus was selected as the target of rTMS treatment.
Sixty-nine AD patients were randomized to either rTMS or sham treatment (five sessions/week for a total of 10 sessions).
The Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE), 12-Word Philadelphia Verbal Learning Test (PVLT), and Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR) were assessed at baseline and after the last session.
Results: After a 2-week treatment, compared to patients in the sham group, those in the rTMS group scored significantly higher on PVLT total score and its immediate recall subscale score.
Moreover, in the rTMS group, there were significant improvements after the 2-week treatment, which were manifested in MMSE total score and its time orientation and recall subscale scores, as well as PVLT total score and its immediate recall and short delay recall subscale scores.
In the sham group, the PVLT total score was significantly improved.
The target site of the left parietal cortex can improve AD patients' cognitive function, especially memory, providing a potential therapy.

INTRODUCTION
Alzheimer's disease (AD), the most common subtype of dementia among elderly adults
The global number of people with dementia was 4.38 million in 2016
Among them, individuals with AD accounted for 50-75% (Alzheimer's Disease
Therefore, the financial burden caused by AD would also continue to increase substantially
Up to now, AD is mainly treated by focusing on decelerating cognition decline using clinically approved medications, such as cholinesterase inhibitors, including donepezil, rivastigmine, and galantamine, for mild and moderate AD
However, these medications can only be used for symptomatic treatment, with limited efficacy, and cannot prevent disease course
In clinical trials, about 29% of patients in the active treatment group withdrew from the trial due to side effects, which was significantly higher than that in the placebo group
As a consequence, exploring some non-pharmacological therapeutic strategies is highly demanding.
Repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS) is an alternative therapeutic method that can non-invasively stimulate the brain in a rhythmic form through electromagnetic induction, thereby modulating cortical excitability and neural activity
Low-frequency rTMS decreases neural excitability in targeted cortical areas, whereas high frequency increases neural excitability
In healthy participants, rTMS could serve as possible modulators of cognitive function.
For instance, subthreshold TMS (50% and 60% motor thresholds) applied over the right dorsolateral prefrontal cortex effectively modulated cognitive function
Studies also showed that rTMS enhanced cognitive and motor functions of healthy old adults
In 2008, the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved rTMS for 4-6 weeks to clinically treat medication-resistant major depression (FDA approval K061053).
Currently, rTMS has achieved preliminary results in improving cognitive function in AD patients.
Metaanalysis studies revealed that high-frequency rTMS treatment positively affected cognitive function and global impression
Another recent meta-analysis also revealed that compared with sham brain stimulation, high-frequency rTMS had short-term and long-term (lasting to 1 month after treatment) positive effects on the general cognition of AD patients
More concretely, significant improvements were found on language, including the accuracy of action naming and auditory sentence comprehension
Regarding memory improvement, verbal working memory was significantly improved after 10 Hz rTMS with 100% resting motor threshold applied over the left prefrontal cortex in healthy participants
A randomized, double-blind, and sham-controlled trial indicated that after a 6-week 20 Hz rTMS treatment applied over brain areas of parietal P3/P4 and posterior temporal T5/T6 consistent to the electroencephalogram 10-20 system (one session per day and 5 days per week for a total of 30 sessions), AD patients' memory in Montreal Cognitive Assessment increased significantly compared with their baseline, especially in patients with mild AD
One case study using 10 Hz rTMS over the left prefrontal cortex (one session per day and 5 days per week for a total of 10 sessions) as an adjunct to AD treatment revealed that after 1 month of treatment, the patient performed better on episodic memory and speed processing tests
Nevertheless, the studies focusing on memory improvement in AD patients are underrepresented.
Moreover, most previous studies used comprehensive cognitive questionnaires to assess the efficacy, not specifically for memory, and reached inconsistent results
Meanwhile, as we all know, memory decline is related to the hippocampus buried deep in the brain.
However, the stimulus target is determined by the 5-cm rule, electroencephalogram 10-20 system, or magnetic resonance imaging navigation
It is difficult to directly stimulate the hippocampus or precisely stimulate it indirectly.
Therefore, it is necessary to select a location in the cerebral cortex as the target of rTMS based on functional connectivity between the hippocampus and the cortex.
Although the hippocampus played a vital role in the process of memory encoding and retrieval
The parietal cortex, as a component of the cortical-hippocampal network, was related to the memory function, such as episodic memory and working memory
In healthy participants, using rTMS to stimulate the lateral parietal target site, with the highest functional connectivity to the hippocampus, could modulate cortical-hippocampal networks and concomitantly manipulate associative memory
These findings could be reproduced.
Using similar rTMS settings,
Moreover, thetaburst TMS treatment applied over the posterior inferior parietal cortex might also serve as a potential therapy for specifically manipulating the encoding of new associative memory without influencing memory retrieval
In AD patients, the integrity of the parietal memory network including the inferior parietal lobule was disrupted
After a 2-week rTMS treatment (1,640 pulses, 20 Hz, 100 MT, one session per day and 5 days per week) applied over the left lateral parietal cortex, AD patients performed better on visual recognition memory and clock drawing test, indicating that high-frequency rTMS treatment could improve cognition and modulate functional connectivity of the brain network
Evidence also showed that in prodromal AD patients, a 2-week 20 Hz rTMS treatment applied over the precuneus enhanced their episodic memory and neural activity
Besides, the left hemisphere was selected due to the known role of the left lateral parietal cortex in memory retrieval
Based on these findings, we select the left parietal cortex as the target site, instead of the common dorsolateral prefrontal cortex used in most previous studies
Herein, we recruit patients for a 2-week 10 Hz rTMS or sham treatment and adapt some evaluation scales to assess their memory and cognition.
We have hypothesized that after a 2-week 10 Hz rTMS treatment based on the functional connectivity of cortical-hippocampal networks, AD patients' memory and cognition improved significantly compared to the baseline or sham group.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Study Design
The study involved a double-blind, randomized, and shamcontrolled trial, which was approved by the Ethics Committee of Sir Run Run Shaw Hospital, School of Medicine, Zhejiang University (number: 20170228-1), and was registered on the National Medical Research Platform of China (number: MR-33-20-004217) 1 .
The patients were randomly assigned to either rTMS or sham treatment.
The rTMS group patients received daily treatment sessions for 2 weeks (one session per day and 5 days per week for a total of 10 sessions), while the sham group patients received regular sham management.
Neuropsychological assessments were performed at baseline and immediately after a 2-week treatment.
The primary outcomes were the differences in the 12-Word Philadelphia Verbal Learning Test (PVLT) scores between the groups and between pre-and post-treatment.
The secondary outcomes were the differences in the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) scores.

Patients
A total of 103 patients with mild to moderate AD were recruited from outpatients and inpatients of the Sir Run Run Shaw Hospital, School of Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China, and underwent a standardized evaluation.
The patients 1
Patients were included if they (1) met the diagnostic criteria for probable AD according to the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, fifth edition (DSM-5), criteria (American Psychiatric Association, 2013); (2) had a Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR) score between 0.5 and 2; and (3) were from 55 to 85 years old and right-handed.
The exclusion criteria included: (1) severe liver, kidney, heart, and lung diseases; (2) history of head trauma, neurological disorders, psychiatric disorders, and/or substance abuse; (3) focal brain lesions on T1 or T2 images; (4) any rTMS contraindications (e.g., medical implants or devices, metal in the body, or epilepsies).
Besides, for patients who used medications stably for more than 3 months, we continued the same medication types and doses during the 2-week rTMS sessions.
All patients signed an informed consent form before the administration of the baseline assessment.
The patients were randomly assigned to groups with a single random number sequence that was used to produce a series of opaque and sealed envelopes.
The envelope for each patient was opened by the rTMS therapist before the first treatment session.

MRI Data Acquisition
T1-weighted and resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) data were acquired using a 3.0-T Siemens Prisma MRI scanner (GE Discovery MR750, GE Medical Systems, Milwaukee, WI, United States) equipped with an eight-channel head coil array.
During scanning, all patients were instructed to keep their head and body motionless with their eyes open and not think about anything specific.
The functional images were obtained axially using an echo-planar imaging (EPI) sequence with the following parameters: 240 volumes; repetition time (TR) = 2,000 ms; echo time (TE) = 30 ms; flip angle (FA) = 90 • ; field of view (FOV) = 220 mm × 220 mm; matrix = 64 × 64; and slice thickness = 3.2 mm with no gap.
High-resolution anatomic three-dimensional T1-weighted images were obtained with the following parameters: 176 axial slices; TR = 8.1 ms; TE = 3.1 ms; FA = 8 • ; FOV = 250 mm × 250 mm; matrix = 250 × 250; and slice thickness = 1.0 mm with no gap.

rTMS Procedures
Each patient's stimulus target was precisely identified using personal maps of hippocampal resting-state functional connectivity obtained at baseline.
According to the method developed by
This is the local highest connectivity within a 15-mm radius of MNI coordinates x = -47, y = -68, z = + 36 [an area including the inferior parietal lobule (supramarginal and angular gyrus) and Brodmann areas 39 and 40], and this site was designated as the target of rTMS treatment.
We applied rTMS treatment over the left lateral parietal site, guided by an online neuronavigation system (Brainsight 2, Rogue Research, Montreal, QC, Canada).
The patients received 10 Hz rTMS treatments for 2 weeks (one session per day and 5 days per week for a total of 10 sessions).
In every rTMS session, the patient was seated in a reclining armchair and was asked to keep the head still.
The figure-of-eight coil (70-mm diameter) connected to a Magstim Rapid2 stimulator (Magstim Company, Whitland, Wales, United Kingdom) was held tangential to the target site with reference to a frameless infrared stereotactic system.
The motor threshold was defined as the minimum TMS intensity that produced a motor evoked potential of at least 50 µV for at least 5 of 10 consecutive pulses at baseline.
We determined the resting motor threshold by stimulating the left motor cortex, which required at least 5 of 10 consecutive pulses that must evoke contraction in the first dorsal interosseous muscle of the right hand when the patients kept the first dorsal interosseous muscles relaxed in both hands
Each treatment included 800 pulses at 10 Hz and 100-110% motor threshold, and the stimulation lasted for 2 s, followed by a 28-s stimulation interval.
The sham group received regular sham management such that the same coil was rotated 45 • away from the brain scalp, with one wing of the coil being in contact with the scalp and the distance between the coil center and the target site being larger than 5 cm, and the patients would also perceive the same noise and sensation caused by the stimulation.

Blinding
Sham treatment produces the same noise and sensation, and patients were told that scalp discomfort and transient fatigability might occur during rTMS or sham sessions.
All patients and neuropsychologists administering clinical assessments did not know whether the patients received rTMS or sham treatment; only the rTMS therapist knew the randomized treatment.
After every treatment session, patients were asked how they felt about the treatment to confirm that they did not know which treatment they received.

Neuropsychological Assessments
All patients underwent several clinical assessments administered by a trained neuropsychologist at baseline and after the last (10th) session, including the following evaluation scales: the MMSE
The primary outcome measure was the difference of the PVLT scores between the rTMS group and sham group and that between the baseline and post-treatment in both groups.
The secondary outcome measure was the difference of the MMSE scores between the rTMS group and sham group and that between the baseline and post-treatment in both groups.

Sample Size and Power Analysis
In our pre-experiment, the mean increment in PVLT score from baseline to 2 weeks was 6.10 points (SD = 4.80) in the rTMS group and 1.80 points (SD = 3.58) in the sham group.
A relatively conservative difference of 4.00 points (SD = 5.00) between the two groups was used to estimate the sample size.
The statistical analysis showed that a total of 68 patients (34 per group) were sufficient to provide a power of approximately 90% at a 5% significance level.
Considering the potential study dropout, the sample size was increased by 25%, to 43 patients per group.

Statistical Analyses
The statistics program SPSS version 22.0 (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, United States) was employed in this study, and all data were checked for normal distribution p > 0.05 in the Shapiro-Wilk test.
Descriptive statistics for demographics and baseline measures in the two groups of participants were compared using Student's t-test or a non-parametric Mann-Whitney test for continuous data or a χ 2 test for categorical data.
Within each group, a paired-sample two-tailed t-test was used to compare the mean scores at baseline and after the last (10th) session, and a Wilcoxon signed-rank test was utilized for non-parametric scores.
Two-way ANOVA (group × scale) was applied to the mean scores after 2 weeks of 10 sessions between the two groups.
Whenever a significant main effect was found, post hoc Student's t-test was employed for comparison.
Meanwhile, repeatedmeasures ANOVA, using group as the between-group factor and time as the within-group factor, was performed to assess the effect of rTMS intervention.
Two-sided p-values less than 0.05 were considered significant.

RESULTS
Screening, enrollment, and participation information are shown in Figure
Before randomization, 10 patients were excluded due to brain lesions and psychiatric disorders, five patients withdrew due to personal reasons, and two patients were not contactable.
After randomization, eight patients in the rTMS group and nine patients in the sham group did not complete neuropsychological assessments at baseline or did not tolerate the rTMS/sham treatment due to adverse effects, i.e., scalp discomfort and transient fatigability.

Patients' Baseline Characteristics
A total of 69 patients completed the 2-week treatment, and 35 of them were assigned to the rTMS group, and others were assigned to the sham group.
No significant differences were found between the two groups as to gender (χ 2 = 0.12, p = 0.733), age (t = -0.99,
p = 0.325), education level (t = 0.15, p = 0.878), medication using (χ 2 = 0.12, p = 0.726), and neuropsychological assessments (MMSE, PVLT, and CDR scores, see Table

Primary Outcomes
The mean PVLT scale scores after the 2-week treatment were significantly different between the two groups [group effect, F = 4.43, p = 0.039, mean square error (MSE) = 291.51;
scale effect, F = 234.94,
p < 0.001, MSE = 3,888.96;
group × scale interaction effect, F = 5.38, p = 0.006, MSE = 89.09].
Subsequent post hoc Student's t-test analysis demonstrated that patients in the rTMS group scored significantly higher than those in the sham group on the PVLT total score (t = 2.10, p = 0.039) and its immediate recall subscale score (t = 2.38, p = 0.020; see Table
Within the rTMS group, we found some significant improvements after the 2-week treatment, which was manifested in the PVLT total score (t = -6.99,
p < 0.001) and its immediate recall (t = -7.19,
p < 0.001) and short delay recall (t = -3.26,
p = 0.003) subscale scores.
Within the sham group, the PVLT total score (t = -2.57,
p = 0.015) was significantly improved (also see Table
Meanwhile, the statistical results of repeated-measures ANOVA were also consistent with the above results.
Repeatedmeasures ANOVA also showed a significant group effect (F = 4.54, p = 0.041, MSE = 1,045.07),
time effect (F = 53.24,
p < 0.001, MSE = 556.07),
and group × time effect (F = 10.33,
p = 0.003, MSE = 142.07) on the PVLT total score, and post hoc analysis revealed significant improvement in the rTMS group (F = 48.79,
p < 0.001), in the sham (F = 6.60, p = 0.015), and between the two groups after treatment (F = 6.69, p = 0.014).
A significant group effect (F = 4.47, p = 0.042, MSE = 466.94),
time effect (F = 39.52,
p < 0.001, MSE = 232.97),
and group × time effect (F = 12.31, p = 0.001, MSE = 88.97) were also found on its immediate recall subscale score, and post hoc analysis revealed significant improvement in the rTMS group (F = 51.65,
p < 0.001) and between the two groups after treatment (F = 7.43, p = 0.010).
A significant time effect was found on its short delay recall subscale score (F = 7.88, p = 0.008, MSE = 25.60), and post hoc analysis revealed a significant improvement in the rTMS group (F = 10.63,
p = 0.003).
Although there was a significant time effect on the long delay recall subscale score (F = 7.06, p = 0.010, MSE = 10.48),
post hoc analysis revealed no significant improvement in either the rTMS group (F = 3.19, p = 0.083) or sham group (F = 3.87, p = 0.058).
No significant

Secondary Outcomes
Within the rTMS group, we found some significant improvements after the 2-week treatment, which was manifested in the MMSE total score (t = -3.43,
p = 0.002) and its time orientation (t = -2.33,
p = 0.026) and recall (z = -2.29,
p = 0.026) subscale scores (also see Table
Meanwhile, a significant time effect was found on MMSE total score (F = 10.08,
p = 0.003, MSE = 36.03),
and post hoc analysis revealed a significant improvement in the rTMS group (F = 11.77,
p = 0.002).
A significant group × time effect was found on its time orientation subscale scores (F = 4.25, p = 0.047, MSE = 2.65), and post hoc analysis revealed a significant improvement in the rTMS group (F = 5.44, p = 0.026).
Although there was a significant time effect on attention and calculation subscale score (F = 4.17, p = 0.045, MSE = 2.34), post hoc analysis revealed no significant improvement in either the rTMS group (F = 2.36, p = 0.134) or sham group (F = 1.82, p = 0.186).
No significant group effect (F = 0.00-2.49,
p = 0.119-0.984,
MSE = 0.00-3.37),
time effect (F = 0.00-2.50,
p = 0.119-1.000,
MSE = 0.00-1.63),
or group × time effect (F = 0.00-3.09,
p = 0.083-1.000,
MSE = 0.00-0.18)
was found on other subscale scores.

Adverse Effects
Two patients in the rTMS group and one patient in the sham group did not tolerate the rTMS/sham treatment due to adverse effects.
One patient in the rTMS group reported local scalp discomfort persisting for longer than 15 min after the first treatment session.
The other two patients (one in the rTMS group and one in the sham group) reported feeling transient fatigue, but they could not tolerate it and asked to withdraw.
There were no serious adverse effects, i.e., seizures or manic episodes.

DISCUSSION
After the 2-week treatment, patients in the rTMS group performed better on MMSE and PVLT scales, and these improvements were significantly greater than those in the sham group, confirming most of our two hypotheses.
This study is dedicated to selecting a precision target in the left parietal cortex with the highest functional connectivity to the hippocampus as the stimulation site and has demonstrated that this novel site is remarkably effective in improving the memory of AD patients.
Given the situation that there is no effective way to cure AD, preliminary but promising findings of our study have brought hope to the clinical treatment in the future.
The result that some cognition improvements were accomplished after a 2-week rTMS treatment could be supported by the finding that a 2-week rTMS treatment applied over the left lateral parietal cortex could improve cognition and modulate the functional connectivity of the brain network in AD patients
AD patients' cognition decline might be related to disrupted integration and segregation in their largescale brain networks
Evidence showed that the functional connectivity value between the parietal cortex and hippocampus was positively correlated with associative memory improvement in healthy adults
Our patients in the rTMS group scored significantly higher on the PVLT total score and its immediate recall subscale score.
This is in line with findings that AD patients performed better on visual recognition memory after a 2-week 20 Hz rTMS treatment applied over the left lateral parietal cortex
In healthy people, transcranial direct current stimulation applied over the parietal cortex improves verbal episodic memory during the retrieval phase
rTMS applied over the left lateral parietal cortex successfully increased the cortical-hippocampal connectivity and enhanced associative memory, inducing localized long-term potentiation of cortical-hippocampal networks
Long-term potentiation, the main form of synaptic plasticity, was considered an essential central cellular mechanism of memory and learning, and synaptic plasticity enhancement might explain rTMS efficacy in the cerebral cortex
A study showing that synaptic plasticity induction was linked to rTMS aftereffect also supported this explanation
In the sham group, AD patients' PVLT total score improved significantly compared with their baseline, which was beyond our expectation.
There were some possible reasons to explain this result.
One was that patients continued to take medication, including cognitive enhancers, during rTMS sessions, enhancing patients' memory.
Another could be explained by placebo response, an improvement of clinical symptoms caused by placebo treatment, or the environment in which patients received treatment.
Patients' improvements might be linked to their optimistic attitudes, goal seeking, and expected treatment outcomes
Furthermore, the special attention of patients' caregivers and medical staff might also be a possible reason.
Nonetheless, in the two groups, the proportions of patients who used medications were similar, reaching about 50%, and within the sham group, patients' immediate recall, short delay recall, and long delay recall were not statistically significant after the 2-week sham treatment.
Meanwhile, improved patients' memory in the rTMS group was significantly better than that in the sham group.
Therefore, we could exclude a medication effect and reasonably believe that the rTMS treatment is effective.
The rTMS treatment has the advantage of short treatment time and quick therapeutic response.
Taking AD as an example, a systematic review showed that the duration of rTMS treatment varied from 1 to 18 weeks
After a single session of rTMS, action naming was improved immediately
And after 2-4 weeks of high-frequency rTMS, cognitive function was significantly strengthened, and this curative effect could be sustained for 2 months after treatment
Moreover, a 2-week rTMS treatment was as sufficient as longer-term treatment regarding the contribution on cognitive improvements in AD patients
The lasting time of rTMS efficacy in our study is not yet known and needs to be determined by follow-up studies.
However, there are several limitations in the current study.
Firstly, there was no follow-up study on how long the effect of cognition and memory improvement could last.
Secondly, we only used several neuropsychological scales to evaluate AD patients' memory and cognition, which might not provide a comprehensive understanding.
Next, we would conduct follow-up studies using neuropsychological assessments and functional magnetic resonance imaging to determine rTMS efficacy duration.
Thirdly, considering AD patients' benefits, more than half of them continued dementiarelated medication at the same dosage, despite the fact that used medication presented no significant difference between the two groups.

CONCLUSION
This study is a pilot study to demonstrate the precision rTMS effect over the left parietal cortex on memory and cognition improvement in AD patients, presenting a novel and promising therapy for treating memory impairment in AD patients; provides an add-on treatment for AD patients who are taking medication; and lays the foundation for our future studies on functional connectivity of brain regions and efficacy lasting time.
Moreover, efforts will also be made to identify the therapeutic mechanism of AD, explore rTMS frequency and number of sessions, and further establish an optimal protocol.



FIGURE 1 |
FIGURE 1 | CONSORT diagram of patients with Alzheimer's disease in a double-blind, sham-controlled study of rTMS.



TABLE 1 |
Baseline characteristics of AD patients.



TABLE 2 |
Scores (means ± SD) of MMSE, CDR, and PVLT at baseline and after rTMS/sham treatment in the rTMS group (n = 35) and sham group (n = 34).