Cerebrospinal Fluid Changes in the Renin-Angiotensin System in Alzheimer’s Disease
Observations in autopsied brain tissue indicate that overactivation of the classical reninangiotensin system (cRAS) and underactivity within regulatory RAS pathways (rRAS) are associated with pathology in Alzheimer's disease (AD).
The primary aim of this study was to investigate whether cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) markers of RAS are altered in AD in relation to established CSF markers of disease pathology (lower Aβ42 and elevated tau) and CSF markers of capillary dysfunction.
We studied 40 controls and 40 AD cases grouped according to a biomarker profile (i.e.
AD cases t-tau >400 pg/mL, pTau >60 pg/mL and Aβ42 <550 pg/mL).
ACE1 and ACE2 enzyme activity was measured using fluorogenic peptide substrates; sPDGFRβ and albumin level by sandwich ELISA and Angiotensin-I, -II, and 1-7 by direct ELISA.
CSF Aβ42, total and phosphorylated tau level was previously measured by INNOTEST sandwich ELISA.
CSF ACE1 activity was significantly elevated in AD (p = 0.008) and positively correlated with ACE2 in AD (r = 0.420, p = 0.007).
CSF ACE1 weakly correlated with t-tau (r = 0.294, p = 0.066) and p-tau (r = 0.329, p = 0.038) but not with Aβ42 in the controls but not in AD.
ACE1 correlated positively with sPDGFRβ (r = 0.426, p = 0.007), a marker of pericyte injury, and ACE2 correlated positively with albumin (r = 0.422, p = 0.008), a marker of blood-brain barrier integrity.
CSF angiotensin -I, -II and -(1-7) level was unchanged in AD.
This cross-sectional CSF study indicates RAS dysfunction in relation to capillary damage in AD.

Introduction
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is characterised neuropathologically by the deposition of extracellular Aβ within senile plaques and the accumulation of intracellular tau within neurofibrillary tangles
Recent imaging, CSF biomarker studies and disease modelling indicate that cerebrovascular dysfunction, including reduced cerebral blood flow, neurovascular uncoupling and blood-brain barrier (BBB) breakdown, are major contributors to cognitive decline and disease pathology in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease (AD)
A recent study reported that BBB leakiness and a marker of pericyte injury, indicated by increased CSF levels of soluble platelet-derived growth factor receptor β (sPDGFRβ), are sensitive markers of cognitive decline in the very early stages of AD independently of CSF Aβ and tau
Together, these data support a growing hypothesis that cerebrovascular dysfunction is a major and underestimated contributor to cognitive decline and disease pathology particularly in the early stages of AD
The renin-angiotensin-system (RAS) is a hormonal system that regulates systemic blood pressure.
The RAS is expressed and functions independently within the brain and is dysfunctional in Alzheimer's disease (AD) (reviewed in
Studies in human postmortem brain tissue indicate that overactivation of the classical RAS (cRAS) pathway is associated with elevated Aβ and tau pathology in AD
Angiotensin-converting enzyme-1 (ACE1) activity, the level of angiotensin-II (Ang-II), and the expression of angiotensin-II type 1 receptor (AT1R) are all increased in AD
Cerebroventricular infusion of Ang-II, the main effector peptide of the RAS, accelerates Aβ production (via proteolytic cleavage of APP) and promotes the accumulation of disease-modified tau in Sprague Dawley rats in association with cognitive decline
Alternative regulatory RAS pathways exist within the brain that counteract the classical RAS axis
We recently reported that ACE2 activity, which is primarily responsible for converting Ang-II to Ang(1-7)
Classical RAS-targeting agents, such as ACE1 inhibitors (ACE-Is) and angiotensin-II type 1 receptor (At1R) blockers (ARBs) have been shown to reduce the incidence
The protective effects of RASblockers in AD are associated with lower CSF-tau
Together, these data highlight an imbalance in brain RAS in AD comprising classical RAS overactivation that is related to disease pathology that is, in part, associated with reduced regulatory RAS activity.
ACE1 and ACE2 are central effectors of the cRAS and rRAS pathways and are responsible for the production and catabolism of Ang-II respectively.
ACE1 and ACE2 are single-span membrane-bound ectoenzymes
Shedding and solubilisation of ACE1
ACE1 has previously been measured in CSF in AD but previous studies have provided inconsistent findings with some studies reporting increased CSF ACE1
In contrast, ACE2 activity in CSF remains relatively uncharacterised with only a single study to-date showing unaltered CSF ACE2 in AD
The major aim of this study was to investigate if CSF ACE1 and ACE2 activity are altered in AD, and if so, whether RAS CSF changes were associated with established CSF markers of disease pathology (i.e increased t-tau and p-tau and reduced Aβ42) and novel CSF markers of capillary damage including BBB breakdown (CSF albumin level) and pericyte injury (sPDGFRβ).

Methods

Study cohorts
We studied CSF from 40 control and 40 AD cases that were approximately matched for age (69.1 y ± 12.1 in controls and 76.3 y ± 6.1 in AD) and distribution of sex across cohorts (23M:15F in controls and 25:15F in AD) (Table
Measurements of CSF-Aβ42, t-tau and p-tau using commercially available sandwich enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISAs) (INNOTEST, Fujirebio, Ghent, Belgium) had previously been determined.
All AD patients had abnormal CSF levels of the core AD biomarkers (t-tau >400 ng/L, p-tau >60 ng/L and Aβ42 <550 ng/L), while controls had normal levels.
The cut-off values used in this study are in-line with current clinical practice and closely resemble those outlined by
The present assays were performed on de-identified left-over aliquots from clinical diagnostic CSF samples and complied with the Swedish Biobank law (Biobanks in Medical Care Act).
All procedures were previously approved by the Ethical Committee at the University of Gothenburg (Sweden).
Information on cognitive assessment and medical histories, including potential use of RAS-targeting or other classes of anti-hypertensives, were not collected for participants.

CSF ACE1 fluorogenic activity assay
ACE1 activity was measured in CSF using an ACE1 specific FRET peptide substrate (Abz-FRK(Dnp)-P) (Biomol International, Exeter, UK) as previously described
Recombinant ACE1 (1000-31.1 ng/ml) or CSF (5μl CSF diluted in 45ul assay buffer) was incubated with ACE1 substrate (10 μM diluted in assay buffer) for 2.5 h at 26°C.
Fluorescence was measured with excitation at 320nm and emission at 405nm in a plate reader (FLUOstar, BMG Labtech, Aylesbury, UK).
All cases were run in duplicate in the presence and absence of captopril for 10 minutes at 26°C prior to the addition of the FRET substrate -we previously showed that pre-incubation with captopril blocked ACE1 activity by over 90%
ACE1 activity was determined by subtracting the fluorescence in the captopril-inhibited from the untreated wells.
A serial dilution of recombinant human ACE1 and measurements on carry-over samples across all plates was used to minimise variation between plates.
ACE1 activity was expressed as relative fluorescence units (r.f.u).

CSF ACE2 fluorogenic activity assay
ACE2 activity was measured using the ACE2 specific FRET substrate (Mca-APK(Dnp) (Enzo Life Sciences, Exeter, UK) as previously described
Recombinant ACE2 (440 -6 ng/ml) (R&D systems, Cambridge, UK) or CSF (50 μl undiluted) was incubated with the FRET substrate (10 μM) diluted in assay buffer (75 mM Tris, 1M NaCl, pH7.5) for 3 h at 37 C. Recombinant ACE2 and CSF samples were assayed in duplicate in the presence or absence of an ACE2 specific inhibitor (MLN4760) (10 μM) (Merck, Nottingham, UK) diluted in distilled water for 10 mins at 37°C prior to the addition of the fluorogenic substrate.
ACE2 activity was determined by subtracting the fluorescence in the inhibited from the untreated wells.
Cleavage of the ACE2 FRET peptide was measured using a microplate reader (BMG Labtech, Aylesbury, UK) at excitation/emission wavelength 330/390nm.
A serial dilution of recombinant human ACE2 and measurements on carry-over samples across all plates was used to minimise variation between plates.
ACE2 activity was expressed in relative fluorescence units (r.f.u).

CSF Angiotensin-I, -II and -(1-7) measurement by direct ELISA
Ang-I, -II and Ang-(1-7) concentrations were measured by direct ELISA as previously described
Serial dilutions of recombinant human Ang-I, Ang-II and Ang-(1-7) (5000-78.125
pg/ml) (Abcam, Cambridge, UK) or CSF samples (100ul undiluted) were incubated for 2 hours in clear high-binding capacity NUNC maxisorp plates (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) at 26°C with shaking.
The wells were washed five-times in PBS with 0.05% tween-20 and blocked for 1 hour in 1 % PBS: BSA (Sigma Aldrich, Dorset, UK).
After another five washes, the wells were incubated with either biotinylated anti-human Ang-I (diluted 1 in 100 in PBS), biotinylated anti-human Ang-II (diluted 1 in 500 in PBS), or biotinylated anti-human Ang-(1-7) (diluted 1 in 100 in PBS) (all from Cloud-Clone, Wuhan, China), for 2 hours at 26°C with shaking, followed by a further wash step.
Plates were incubated with streptavadin:HRP (1:200) in PBS:0.01%
Tween-20 for 20 minutes at room temperature in the dark and TMB substrate (R&D systems) was added after a further wash and left to develop in the dark for 20 minutes.
The reaction was stopped following the addition of 2N sulphuric acid and the absorbance was read at 450nm using a FLUOstar OPTIMA plate reader (BMG labtech, Aylesbury, BUCKS, UK).
Concentrations were interpolated for each sample measured in duplicate following interpolation from respective standard curves generated by serially diluting recombinant standards.
We previously demonstrated specificity of each assay which showed specificity for the respective target with minimal cross reactivity with other closely-related angiotensin peptides

ELISA measurement of CSF sPDGFRβ
CSF soluble PDGFRβ (sPDGFRβ) level was measured using a commercially available sandwich ELISA (Invitrogen Cat no EHPDGFRB) (ThermoFisher Scientific, Loughborough, UK) following the manufacturer's protocol.
CSF samples (100μl) were loaded without dilution.
Standards, samples and blanks were added in duplicate.
Absorbance was read at 450 nM following the addition of 2N sulfuric acid in a FLUOstar OPTIMA plate reader (BMG labtech, Aylesbury, UK).
sPDGFRβ concentration in samples was interpolated from the standard curve for each case, derived from the serial dilution of recombinant PDGFRβ (18000-24 pg/ml).
The average of duplicate measurements for each sample is presented.

ELISA measurement of CSF albumin
CSF albumin level was measured using a commercially available sandwich ELISA (Cat no 108788) (Abcam, Cambridge, UK) following the manufacturer's protocol.
CSF samples were diluted 1 in 2000 in proprietary dilution buffer supplied with the kit.
Standards, samples and blanks were added in duplicate.
Absorbance was read at 450nM in a FLUOstar OPTIMA plate reader (BMG labtech, Aylesbury, UK).
Albumin concentration in each sample was interpolated from the standard curve for each case, derived from the serial dilution of recombinant human albumin (200-3.125ng/ml).

Statistical analysis
Unpaired two-tailed t-tests or ANOVA with Bonferroni post-hoc analysis was used for comparisons between groups, and Pearson's test was used to assess linear correlation with the help of SPSS version 24 (SPSS, Chicago) and GraphPad Prism version 6 (GraphPad Software, La Jolla, CA).
P-values < 0.05 were considered statistically significant.

Results

ACE1 enzyme activity is elevated in CSF from Alzheimer's disease patients and correlates
positively with ACE2 activity CSF ACE1 activity was significantly higher in AD (2148 rfu ± 153.8) compared to controls (1635 rfu ± 110.9) (p = 0.008) (Figure
CSF ACE2 activity was unchanged in AD (360.1 rfu ± 24.8) compared to controls (318.1 rfu ± 16.3) (p = 0.169) (Figure
We previously reported an inverse relationship between ACE1 and ACE2 in the mid-frontal cortex in AD
We examined the relationship between ACE1 and ACE2 in CSF and found a positive correlation in AD (r = 0.420, p = 0.007) but not in controls (r = 0.190, p = 0.239) (Figure
CSF ACE1 activity did not vary according to age in either controls (r = 0.056, p = 0.732) or AD (r = 0.114, p = 0.489) (Figure
ACE1 and ACE2 activity did not vary according to sex (Figure

CSF ACE1 and ACE2 enzyme activity are not strongly associated with established CSF markers of disease pathology in AD
We previously reported that increased ACE1 and reduced ACE2 activity are associated with parenchymal Aβ and tau load in mid-frontal cortex in AD
We examined the relationship between CSF ACE1 and ACE2 activity with established CSF markers of disease pathology (t-tau, p-tau and Aβ42).
CSF ACE1 activity did not correlate with CSF t-tau in either control (r = 0.294, p = 0.066) or AD group (r = -0.01,
p = 0.945) (Figure
CSF ACE1 did not correlate with Aβ42 in either control (r = 0.216, p = 0.179) or AD groups (r = -0.05,
p = 0.761) (Figure
CSF ACE2 did not correlate with CSF-p-tau, CSF-t-tau or CSF-Aβ42 in either the AD or control groups (Table

CSF ACE1 and ACE2 activity correlates with markers of capillary damage
ACE1 is enriched in cerebral vessels
Here we examined the relationship between CSF ACE1 and ACE2 with albumin, an established CSF marker of BBB leakiness, and with soluble PDGFRβ, a marker of pericyte injury that is elevated in AD
A positive correlation was observed between CSF ACE1 enzyme activity and CSF sPDGFRβ level in AD cases alone (r = 0.426, p = 0.007) but not in controls (r = 0.112, p = 0.482) (Figure
CSF ACE2 in contrast did not correlate with CSF sPDGRβ in either control (r = 0.047, p = 0.778) or AD (r = 0.121, p = 0.483) (Figure
CSF ACE1 activity did not correlate with CSF albumin in either controls (p = 0.038, p = 0.820) or AD (r = 0.129; p = 0.439) (Figure

CSF angiotensin -I, -II, and -(1-7) level was unaltered in AD
Angiotensin-I, II and (1-7) levels were unchanged between AD and controls in CSF (Figure

Discussion
In this study, we explored disease-related changes in CSF markers of RAS in relation to established CSF markers of disease pathology (lower Aβ42 and elevated t-tau and p-tau) and markers of capillary damage (sPDGFRβ and albumin) in clinical diagnostic CSF samples in AD.
Our observational study indicates that CSF ACE1 activity is elevated in AD.
CSF ACE1 was positively correlated with CSF ACE2 in AD.
We also observed that CSF ACE2 activity was positively associated with age in the control cohort suggesting it is elevated as a result of normal ageing.
In contrast to our recent findings in human autopsy brain tissue, there was little evidence of a relationship between CSF ACE1 and ACE2 with CSF t-tau,p-tau or Aβ42.
We did, however, find moderately strong associations between CSF ACE1 activity and sPDGFRβ, a marker of pericyte damage, and between CSF ACE2 activity and CSF albumin level, a marker of BBB leakiness, within the AD cohort only.
Angiotensin peptide concentrations were expressed at low levels in CSF and were unaltered in AD.
These novel findings indicate that disease-related changes in RAS are associated with markers of capillary dysfunction in AD.
Together, this study provides further mechanistic insights and improves our current understanding of the role of RAS in AD.
An imbalance in RAS resulting in overactivation of the classical RAS (diseaseassociated) pathway and reduced activity in regulatory RAS, is observed in human brain tissue in association with disease pathology in AD
In this study, CSF ACE1 activity was increased in AD supporting findings from previous studies in post-mortem tissue
CSF ACE2 activity was unchanged in AD supporting a recent study
Interestingly, ACE2 was increased in association with ageing in the controls but not in AD, potentially indicating that ACE2 changes precede changes associated with disease pathology.
CSF ACE1 activity correlated positively with CSF ACE2 activity in CSF whereas we previously reported the opposite in brain tissue i.e. elevated ACE1 and reduced ACE2
ACE1 and ACE2 are predominantly membrane bound but both can be cleaved at their respective transmembrane domains and are released extracellularly (solubilised) in an active form
ACE1 in contrast is elevated in both brain tissue and CSF, it is currently unclear whether over-production of ACE2 or post-translational modifications are responsible for elevated ACE1 in AD.
We previously reported that ACE1 correlated positively with Aβ in AD, and reduced ACE2 activity correlated inversely with Aβ and tau in human brain tissue
An association between CSF ACE1 and the ratio of p-tau181:Aβ42 has previously been reported in two separate cohorts: the Knight Alzheimer's Disease Research Center (N = 311) and the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (N = 293)
In contrast, we did not find strong evidence to support similar changes between CSF RAS and markers of disease pathology in CSF.
This could be due to many factors and potential limitations in the current study including the small cohort size and/or the fact the groups were based on CSF biomarkers levels, rather than clinical or pathological diagnosis.
We also have no information on hypertension status or use of RAS-targeting anti-hypertensives that may conceal a potential relationship.
It is also unclear and difficult to interpret why we observed a positive correlation between CSF ACE1 and p-tau in controls but not AD.
It should, however, also be noted that changes in CSF reflect global changes throughout the brain and do not necessarily reflect specific regional changes previously reported within the brain.
This is also an observational cross-sectional study and does not provide any clues as to the temporal sequence of RAS activation in relation to disease pathology.
Further studies are required to address these current limitations and confirm or refute our current findings.
In contrast, we have found stronger evidence of a relationship between RAS overactivation and capillary breakdown indicated by moderate associations between CSF ACE1 and ACE2 enzyme activities with CSF markers of capillary damage in AD, namely pericyte damage (elevated CSF sPDGFRβ) and BBB breakdown (elevated CSF albumin) respectively.
The microvasculature has been shown to degenerate in AD
Recent studies also indicate that vascular dysfunction, including BBB breakdown and pericyte loss, are major contributors to cognitive decline and disease pathology in AD
Increased solubilisation of PDGFRβ, a marker of pericyte injury (although PDGFRβ is also expressed by sub-populations of reactive glia), has recently been reported in CSF and is associated with BBB leakiness in the ageing and diseased hippocampus
Our data indicate a relationship between RAS activation and both pericyte loss and BBB function.
This potential link is supported by indirect evidence of a relationship between RAS and BBB permeability in vitro
Ang-II is a potent vasoconstrictor and mediates pericyte contraction and vessel constriction in vessel extracts from rat retina via AT1R activation
Pericyte contraction and subsequent vessel constriction may be a major contributor to cerebral hypoperfusion in AD
Collectively our findings indicate a potential relationship between RAS activation and vascular dysfunction in AD that warrants further investigation.
Much less is known regarding changes in angiotensin peptides in AD.
We recently reported that Ang-II and Ang-III, despite short half-lives, were detectable in post mortem brain tissue, and were elevated in AD in relation to markers of disease pathology
Despite changes in brain tissue, the levels of Ang-I, Ang-II and Ang-(1-7) were unchanged in CSF and did not correlate with CSF markers of disease or vascular function.
The differences between brain tissue and CSF measures may reflect the relative instability and shorter halflife of angiotensin peptides in CSF compared to brain.
Another possibility that cannot be addressed in this study is that CSF changes in angiotensin peptide level may first require acute or chronic and sustained changes in the activity of brain ACE1 and ACE2.
This study has several limitations which we have already been mentioned, including the criteria used to group AD cases, the small cohort sizes, and the lack of clinical details relating to the de-identified AD cases, including cognitive assessment and disease status markers.
This is also an observational cross-sectional study and does not provide clues as to the timing and regional changes in RAS in relation to disease and vascular markers and it is also unclear what percentage of the participants were prescribed RAS-targeting antihypertensives.
Despite these limitations, which will need to be carefully addressed in future studies, this study still provides novel insights into the potential relationship between RAS activation and capillary damage in AD and provides further evidence of a link between RAS and the pathogenesis of AD.
Ventures-based platform company at the University of Gothenburg, all unrelated to the work presented in this paper.



Figure 1 .
Figure 1.
ACE1 and ACE2 activity in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) in Alzheimer's disease (AD).
A-



Figure 2 :
Figure 2: Relationship between CSF ACE1 and ACE2 enzyme activity in relation to age and



Figure 3 :
Figure 3: Relationship between CSF ACE1 and established CSF markers of disease



Figure 4 .
Figure 4. Relationship between CSF ACE1 and ACE2 with CSF markers of vascular



Figure 5 .
Figure 5. Angiotensin peptides are unchanged in CSF in Alzheimer's disease.
Bar charts