Extracellular protein components of amyloid plaques and their roles in Alzheimer’s disease pathology
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is pathologically defined by the presence of fibrillar amyloid β (Aβ) peptide in extracellular senile plaques and tau filaments in intracellular neurofibrillary tangles.
Extensive research has focused on understanding the assembly mechanisms and neurotoxic effects of Aβ during the last decades but still we only have a brief understanding of the disease associated biological processes.
This review highlights the many other constituents that, beside Aβ, are accumulated in the plaques, with the focus on extracellular proteins.
All living organisms rely on a delicate network of protein functionality.
Deposition of significant amounts of certain proteins in insoluble inclusions will unquestionably lead to disturbances in the network, which may contribute to AD and copathology.
This paper provide a comprehensive overview of extracellular proteins that have been shown to interact with Aβ and a discussion of their potential roles in AD pathology.
Methods that can expand the knowledge about how the proteins are incorporated in plaques are described.
Top-down methods to analyze post-mortem tissue and bottom-up approaches with the potential to provide molecular insights on the organization of plaquelike particles are compared.
Finally, a network analysis of Aβ-interacting partners with enriched functional and structural key words is presented.

Background
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the most prevalent cause of dementia today, affecting close to 50 million people worldwide
Considering the fact that we still lack curative treatment, AD is likely to become a serious burden on our future healthcare systems, especially with the increased life span we have experienced during the last century.
The clinical symptoms include progressive memory loss, language disturbance, and moodbehavioral changes, but they are not by themselves enough to define the disease.
Instead the definition relies on pathological protein inclusions, extracellular senile plaques (Fig.
Hence, for long time the diagnosis could only be decided post-mortem.
More recently, biomarkers in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF; and potentially also blood serum)
The majority of AD patients also display co-pathologies, that are not necessarily identified by biomarkers or imaging
It has also been shown that similar protein inclusions are often found in people without any symptoms of dementia
Along with pathological hallmarks of plaques and tangles, the AD pathology may be associated with cerebral amyloid angiopathy (CAA), synaptic failure, oxidative damage, neuroinflammation and mitochondrial dysfunction
The connection between dementia and the pathological protein inclusions that signify AD was first reported by Alois Alzheimer in 1906
However, it would take almost 80 years from the first report by Alzheimer before the core components of the amyloid deposits were identified; Glenner and Wong identified amyloid β (Aβ) in vascular amyloid in 1984
Tau was found to be the main components of neurofibrillary tangles in 1985 by Brion et al.
The observation of a link between mutations in the gene coding for the Aβ precursor protein (APP) and early onset familial forms of AD
This hypothesis states that the pathology is initiated by aggregation of Aβ due to mutations making the peptide more aggregation prone or, in the expanded version, also covering sporadic AD due to imbalance in the Aβ production and degradation.
Based on the pathological and genetic findings, research around Aβ turned into a very popular field with thousands of papers published every year.
Among the more important progress made within the biochemistry of AD are the determination of high-resolution structures of Aβ amyloid
The roles and interplay between various cell types in the central nervous system has also become evident
With all this knowledge one would expect that we would also have effective therapy available, but that is not the case.
The biological processes by which Aβ accumulation causes neurodegeneration are far from understood and widely debated.
This calls for generation of even more knowledge and exploration of new hypotheses.
With this article we want to shift the focus from the Aβ core component of the plaques to the many other proteins that co-aggregate with Aβ amyloid.
We first describe methods to investigate the composition of plaques from top-down and bottom-up perspectives.
Then we present an overview of extracellular proteins that have been found to interact with aggregated Aβ in vitro and highlight potential connections to AD pathology reported in the literature.

Top-down approaches to identify protein components of plaques
The identification of Aβ in senile plaques from postmortem tissue was indeed a breakthrough in the molecular description of AD.
However, Aβ was not the first protein to be associated with plaques.
Immunoglobulins and complement proteins had already been detected
In 1994, at least 35 protein components had been found to be associated with senile plaques
Hence, apoE was indeed identified as a senile plaque component
For the early identification studies, analysis of samples from dedicated purification protocols or immunohistochemical investigation of tissues were used (Fig.
Although these can give clear and reliable results, they are limited to availability and the quality of antibodies and one need to know what to look for in order to find it.
The emergence of effective proteomics techniques and in particular mass spectrometry (MS), allowed broader, unbiased investigations of the plaque components.
On the other hand, the sample preparation methods become increasingly important and the question what is "in the plaque" and what originates from the surrounding tissue stands out as very critical.
Chemical purification methods using harsh conditions may remove too much of the plaque associated components while common methods such as laser capture microdissection (LCM) would include everything within the specified area.
The problems can, to some extent, be overcome by appropriate controls, e.g.
comparison with LCM of tissue just outside the plaques
The plaques are proteinaceous deposits with Aβ as main constituent but also containing a range of other components different purification protocols, but still the methods report on spatial proximity rather than structural or molecular connections.
Increased sensitivity of MS instrument has also lead to an increasing number of identified proteins.
The pioneering study by
Notably, a study published 2 years after Liao et al., and employing a different sample preparation protocol, only found Aβ in the plaque cores
Hence, the employed methodology can have substantial effect on which plaque components that are identified.
Investigations of post-mortem tissues are extremely important since they are authentic samples.
There are endless opportunities to compare different tissues, different classes of plaques, different individuals etc.
This is important since the molecular assembly of all plaque types is not the same
The neuritic or dense core plaques are formed around a core of fibrillar Aβ structure and have neighboring reactive astrocytes and activated microglial cells.
Diffuse plaques are poorly marginated assemblies of filamentous Aβ, which is weakly stained by amyloid-specific dyes, and do not have associated toxicities as the neuritic plaque.
The diffuse plaques often lack of neuritic elements, nevertheless, diffuse neuritic plaques can be observed in advanced AD.
Yet another class are the cerebrovascular Aβ deposits, in the course of CAA.
There are, however, limitations in the possibilities to acquire a detailed molecular understanding of the plaque structures.
For examples, which components are directly sequestered by Aβ amyloid fibrils, which components may be more loosely bound or bound to some of the already sequestered proteins and which components just happened to be localized in vicinity of the plaques?
Crosslinking protocols could potentially resolve some of these question
Such studies have been carried out to identify binders of tau and APP in murine models
Microscopy offers many opportunities to analyze the presence of different components and their structural properties with spatial resolution.
Combining specific antibodies and various amyloid probes with conformation-dependent optical properties allows for imaging of heterogeneities within single plaques (see e.g.
Ref.
Confocal imaging allows for 3D reconstruction of the plaque structures.
However, these studies are, as all microscopy techniques, limited by the diffraction laws that set a size limit in the micrometer range.
Even though new super-resolution techniques have pushed this limit towards the nanometer range, it is still not possible to derive molecular information about the deposits.
Cryo-electron microscopy has become an increasingly important method for the structural characterization of amyloid fibrils
Moreover, cryo-electron tomography has recently provided impressive 3D images of in situ deposits of fibrillar proteins that also include organelle structures such as endoplasmic reticulum, ribosomes and proteasomes
Proteinspecific information, e.g. for investigating co-localization, can also be achieved in electron microscopy through immunolabeling with colloidal gold.
Hence, imaging of senile plaques with molecular resolution may soon give us the first glimpses of the arrangement of the different molecular components.
Proper knowledge of the structural and functional connections within the plaques is likely as important (or even more) for the understanding of the pathology as a detailed understanding of the Aβ amyloid formation process.
Any pathological process triggered by Aβ (as monomer, oligomer or amyloid fibrils) must proceed via interactions with other biomolecules.
Hence, it is not enough to know which proteins are found in the plaques (or close to them) we must also decipher how they are organized and what functional consequences the deposition has for each protein, process and biological pathway.
Therefore, biochemical model systems that can capture these effects are, and will continue to be, important for the progress of AD research.

Bottom-up approaches to identify interaction partners of amyloid
There are many methods that enable in vitro studies of interactions between biomolecules and with the opportunity to derive structural as well as functional parameters.
One of the challenges when approaching systems, such as senile plaques, is the complexity in terms of the number of different components.
There is always a balance between the simplicity of an in vitro model and its ability to capture biologically relevant features.
If we accept that Aβ fibril formation is a central process in the pathology, that should also be the starting point for building in vitro models.
Studies of Aβ fibrillation have been a popular field for quite some time.
The progress in these studies has provided in-depth understanding of how Aβ, and proteins in general, assemble into amyloid fibrils.
Although the experiments are typically carried out in pure systems with the addition of only a few additional components, the mechanism rapidly become very complex.
Fibrillation of Aβ in in vivo-like environments, e.g.
CSF
However, it remains to be described which roles the different components play and potential synergistic effects.
We therefore need ways to map out which components are involved (Fig.
In a pioneering study from 2012, Olzscha et al. studied intracellular protein aggregation in a cell model and found a correlation between the toxicity of artificial βsheet proteins and their ability to sequester cellular proteins
Experiments with Aβ in the same model system confirmed that also these aggregates attracted a range of protein binding partners.
Many of the sequestered proteins were hubs in functional cellular networks indicating the ability of amyloids to trigger multifactorial toxic responses.
The question of which proteins from a physiological environment that are sequestered to amyloid aggregates and how that affect the biological response (toxicity) of the aggregates has some similarities with a central question in another field of research: the biological effects of synthetic nanoparticles.
A nanoparticle that enters a biological system will be covered with proteins, creating a "corona", and it is the structural and functional properties of these proteins that to a large extent determine the biological effects of the nanoparticle
Recent studies have highlighted the fact that these features are not unique for synthetic nanoparticles.
Viruses were shown to attract protein coronae when introduced into various biological fluids, such as human plasma or human bronchoalveolar lavage fluid
Interestingly, the viruses also seemed to accelerate the aggregation of Aβ into amyloid, which suggest a potential role of heterogenous nucleation in amyloid diseases
In another study, we demonstrated that pre-fibrillar Aβ aggregates (protofibrils) attract a range of different proteins when exposed to human serum or CSF
In a follow-up study, proteins binding to Aβ amyloid fibrils were investigated and fibrils were found to sequester more proteins than the protofibrils and with distinct functional characteristics
Other studies have confirmed the formation of protein coronae around Aβ fibrils and for amyloid fibrils of IAPP, α-synuclein, a Cterminal fragment of α 1 -antitrypsin, the FAS4 domain from human cornea and the human hormone glucagon
The amyloid corona concept offers a new and interesting perspective on the assembly of plaque-like multiprotein aggregates and could potentially be the starting point for studying plaque formation with molecular resolution.
However, the methods to identify, analyze and quantify the components need to be developed and advantages and drawbacks of each approach evaluated.
Common separation methods are filtration
New applications of old techniques could also offer opportunities in this field.
Madasamy et al. demonstrated that flow-cytometry could be used to isolate "plaque particles" formed around Aβ, α-synuclein, tau or cholesterol added to serum samples
In addition to the added "seeds", almost 200 serum proteins were identified in the particles.
We recently developed this approach further and showed that it may have advantages over pulldown methods or at least provide complementary perspectives on the composition of Aβ amyloid coronae
A central finding in that study is that not all protein bind directly to Aβ.
This illustrate that the assembly is more complex than just sequestration of the proteins by the amyloid structure.
Moreover, the recent study from Nandakumar et al.
Taken together, it is clear that there is an emerging interest to explore the composition and organization of amyloid protein coronae, which opens opportunities to acquire new knowledge about the multicomponent structures of senile plaques and new insights about AD pathology.

Survey of extracellular proteins that associate with Aβ
As already stated, thousands of proteins have been identified in post-mortem plaque tissue.
A comprehensive review of these proteins is not feasible.
Instead we chose to apply a bottom-up perspective and investigate the set of proteins found by recent in vitro studies as Aβ-interacting proteins in human biofluids, including plasma, serum, and CSF.
These studies have reported more than a hundred different proteins with the ability to interact with different conformations of Aβ.
The majority of these proteins are also known to be present in senile plaques.
As the survey is limited to proteins from biofluids, cell-surface receptors and intracellular proteins are naturally excluded unless they are also secreted to the fluid.
Nevertheless, a brief discussion of these proteins is included in a separate section.
The plaques also contain many non-protein components, including proteoglycans, nucleic acids, lipids and metal ions.
For more details about these classes of molecules we refer to recent reviews:
In this section, we will discuss the implications of the interactions between Aβ and other proteins for AD pathology as well as the potential role of these binding partners as modulators of Aβ fibrillogenesis.
The proteins are categorized and presented according to their main biological functions.
We have listed the proteins that are found in the literature to interact with Aβ in at least two separate studies in Table
Furthermore, confirmed existence in senile plaque as well as the reported potential as AD biomarker are indicated.

Immunoglobulins
Immunoglobulins were among the first proteins to be identified in senile plaques
Immunoglobulins constitute a special case among the binding proteins as their natural function is to recognize foreign structures.
Hence, it is not clear if their occurrence in the plaque is due to antigen recognition (from the amyloid or some other component) or binding to their constant parts.
The fact that the constant part is identified by MS does not exclude that the variable domain is also present but not found the MS analysis.
Auto-antibodies against Aβ were first reported in 1993
The origin and functional roles of these antibodies are not yet fully understood but they have been heavily investigated with immunotherapy approaches in mind.
Interestingly, IgM antibodies purified from AD patients have been found to have catalytic abilities to hydrolyze Aβ and would thereby actively counteract the accumulation of Aβ
The antibodies were demonstrated to inhibit Aβ aggregation as well as toxicity in cell culture.
Moreover, Aβ is not the only antigen for AD-related autoantibodies.
Immunoglobulin response against several other proteins/structures, e.g.
oxidized low-density lipoprotein, RAGE, and S100b, have also been found
Recognition of plaque structures by immunoglobulins, either it is the amyloid itself or any other molecular component acting as antigen, can activate inflammatory response and the complement cascade and lead to the effects described below.

Complement and inflammatory response proteins
Complement activation is critical in normal inflammatory responses to injury and in removing apoptotic cells, tissue debris, and other macromolecular aggregates.
Likewise, complement proteins have fundamental roles in the development and protection of the central nervous system.
Inappropriate activation of the complement system in the brain may cause neuroinflammation, or even neuronal cell death.
Activation of the neuronal complement in AD brain is supported by the identification of several initial and terminal proteins of complement cascade, including complement 1q (C1q)
It is likely that the complement system could be activated by Aβ deposition.
Indeed, studies demonstrated that Aβ can bind C1q
C1q has been found highly increased in human and mouse brains with age
An adult mouse model lacking C1q (C1qKO) exhibited better synaptic plasticity and significantly less cognitive and memory decline compared to wild-type

Neural proteins
Amyloid-like protein 1

Other proteins
Actin, cytoplasmic 1
Dickkopf-related protein 3
FCtx and TCtx r , HC f , FCtx j † , HC g , CCtx and Cve h , PreFCtx s
[89]:↑S Hepatocyte growth factor activator
Latent-transforming growth factor beta-binding protein 4
[50] a
Secreted frizzled-related protein 3
y Aβ42F; incubation with serum, WB. z Aβ40M; SDS-stable complex, immune-and affinityprecipitation.
a † Aβ40M; incubation with plasma, SEC, immunostaining.
b † Aβ40M; affinity isolation from serum.
d † Aβ40M; ELISA.
e † Aβ; centrifugal isolation from serum, MS, WB. f † Immune-based detection.
g † Aβ40M; pull-down from plasma, LC-MS/MS.
h †-i † Immune-based detection.
j † Tandem mass tag labeling, LC/LC-MS/ MS. k † Aβ40M; ELISA.
l † AβM; binding assay.
n † Immune-based detection.
r † Aβ40M; liquid phase interaction.
s † Aβ42M; binding assay.
t † Immune-based detection.
u † Aβ42; SPR (K D not reported).
v † Aβ42M; pull-down from plasma, WB. w † Aβ40F; dot blots.
x † Aβ42M; pull-down, fluorescence polarization.
y † Immune-based detection.
z † Plaque material spatially targeted optical microproteomics.
a ‡ Aβ42F; immunolabeling, TEM.
b ‡ Aβ40O; NMR.
c ‡ Aβ42M; SPR.
d ‡ Aβ40M; CD titration.
e ‡ Aβ40M; NMR.
f ‡ Aβ42M, Aβ42O; binding assay.
h ‡ Aβ40F, Aβ42F; SPR (K D not reported).
i ‡ Aβ40F; ELISA.
j ‡ Immune-based detection.
k ‡ No significant changes, CSF.
l ‡ Aβ28M, Aβ40M; affinity chromatography.
n ‡ Immune-based detection.
q ‡ Aβ40; dot blots.
r ‡-s ‡ Immune-based detection.
t ‡ Aβ40M; incubation, SEC.
u ‡ Aβ40M, Aβ42M; ELISA.
v ‡ No changes, serum and CSF.
w ‡ Aβ40M; ELISA.
x ‡-y ‡ Gelsolin used as probe to capture Aβ40/42M/O from rat brain and CSF.
z ‡ Aβ40M; ELISA hippocampal cells against Aβ induced complement dysfunction
In addition to C1q, Aβ can bind several other complement proteins in vitro
Aβ42 aggregates has been found to bind complement proteins such as C1q, C3, C4, C5, and C6 with higher affinity compared to aggregates formed by other Aβ isoforms
Hence, changes in the relative concentrations of Aβ isoforms could play a part in complement activation.
Nonfibrillar Aβ has also been found to bind and activate complement components, e.g., C1s and C4, in human plasma in a dose-dependent manner
Aβ-mediated neuronal complement activation may bring toxicity to the neuron cell
Like C1q, C3 may also damage synapses during the aging process since the protein is found to be increased in the brain and CSF of AD patients as well as mouse models of AD
Indeed, C3 deficient (C3KO) mice did not show age-related synapse loss whereas age-matched C57BL/6J wild type did
Likewise, C3 is also required in AD-related synapse loss as demonstrated using a C3 deleted PS2APP×C3KO mouse model
Interestingly, it has been shown that neuronal Aβ can modulate amyloid pathology through a complement-dependent pathway, in which C3 is a central molecule.
Overproduction of neuronal Aβ may activate astrocytic complement pathway, via astroglial nuclear factor kappa B, which subsequently releases C3, this C3 interacts with microglial C3a receptor, thereby impair Aβ phagocytosis
Beneficial roles of C3 in AD pathology are also reported.
For instance, aged C3 deficient AD mice (APP; C3(-/-)) showed twofold increased total Aβ and fibrillar plaque burden in cortex and hippocampus compared to aged-match APP transgenic mice with C3
C3 knockout mice (APP/PS1; C3/KO) also exhibited better performance on a learning and memory task
Alpha 1-antichymotrypsin (ACT) is an inflammatory protein and belongs to the serine protease inhibitor family.
Like the complement-related inflammatory proteins, ACT is often found in AD plaques
Moreover, ACT is overexpressed in the AD brain
Likewise, the AD risk allele apoE4 is linked to elevated ACT expression.
Mice carrying apoE4 showed an increased expression of serpina3 family gene (which coding ACT) compared to apoE2 or apoE3 genotype carriers mouse
Furthermore, the protein has been shown to bind Aβ in vitro
Mouse model studies also support the in vitro findings.
ACT was found to promote Aβ deposition, particularly in hippocampus, in a double ACT/APP transgenic mouse model compared to the mouse that only express APP
In summary, Aβ interacts with several proteins associated with innate immune response and inflammation and could thereby trigger and modulate neuroinflammation, which is a critical part of AD pathogenesis.

Proteins related to lipid transport and metabolism
Lipids have central roles in cell signaling as well as many physiological processes related to normal brain development and functions
Binding of amyloid aggregates to lipid membranes can affect their integrity [162] and a variety of lipids are found associated with the senile plaques
Brain uptake, metabolism, and utilization of lipids and lipoprotein particles are intimately associated with AD pathology.
Two of the apolipoproteins, apoE and apoJ (a.k.a, clusterin; CLU), are associated with AD as major risk genes.
The ε4 allele of apoE was early identified as susceptible for late-onset AD
Curiously, apoE has recently been shown to affect AD pathology through its immunomodulatory function which is thought to be associated with its binding to microglial triggering receptor expressed on myeloid cells 2 (TREM2; reviewed in Ref.
[167]).
Both of these apolipoproteins and many more can directly bind Aβ as discussed below.
ApoE exists in three isoforms-apoE2, apoE3, and apoE4.
The protein plays a role in Aβ metabolism and clearance, in which apoE4 is the least efficient variant and thereby represents an increased risk of developing AD
The binding affinity of apoE to Aβ was found to be in the order of apoE2 > apoE3 ≫ apoE4, which inversely correlated with the risk of developing AD
However, the binding efficiency of different isoforms of apoE to Aβ can vary substantially depending on the preparation condition of apoE as well as the species and isoforms of Aβ being used
It has also been shown that apoE can modulate Aβ aggregation in vitro, though the actual effect of apoE on Aβ aggregation is contentious.
Some of the studies suggest that the binding of apoE to Aβ increases Aβ oligomerization
In this aspect, apoE4 has been found to be more efficient compared to other isoforms
Mouse model studies also revealed that apoE4 differentially affect Aβ aggregation than other isoforms in vivo.
A transgenic mouse model expressing apoE4 (E4FAD) showed compact and greater Aβ deposits while apoE2 (E2FAD) and apoE3 (E3FAD) expressing mice exhibited diffuse plaque type
The astrocytic overexpression of apoE4, but not apoE3, suppressed Aβ clearance and also promoted amyloid deposition in cell-type-specific and apoE inducible mouse model
However, the greater effects of apoE4 on Aβ aggregation in vivo likely take place during the early stage (seeding stage) of amyloid development
Besides Aβ-associated AD pathology, apoE4 is also found to aggravate tau-mediated AD pathogenesis
Contrary to the aggregation promoting effect, apoE has also been found to have an inhibitory effect on Aβ fibrillation in some studies
This inhibitory effect is thought to be directed by the binding of apoE to monomeric Aβ, which results in reduced nucleation and a slower fibrillation process
Furthermore, apoE has been reported to stabilize Aβ oligomers
Nevertheless, it is evident that the apoE-Aβ interaction has direct effects on modulation and clearance of Aβ and hence a key role in the pathogenesis of AD.
Therefore, many therapeutic strategies targeting apoE-Aβ interaction have been investigated and some are under way (reviewed in Ref.
Like apoE, CLU is also a key player in AD pathology and capable of modifying Aβ aggregation.
However, CLU may have beneficial roles in AD.
The protein has a chaperone function that can specifically inhibit the elongation of Aβ fibrils
CLU has been found to be upregulated in the brain of AD patients
Hence, it may be part of the biological defenses against local damage to neurons, for instance as a consequence of Aβ deposition
In vitro studies support this protective mechanism since many studies have shown that CLU can bind Aβ and protect against Aβ aggregation
Transgenic mouse model studies also evident that CLU can suppress amyloid formation and reduce amyloid toxicity in vivo.
The astrocytic overexpression of CLU in APP/PS1 transgenic mouse (APP/PS1 AAV-CLU ) showed a significant reduction of total and fibrillar Aβ in cortex and hippocampus compared to APP/PS1 AAV-GFP control [190].
Moreover, CLU overexpression resulted in reduced amyloid-associated neurotoxicity
In support of these findings, the reduction of CLU showed opposite results i.e., substantial increase of amyloid plaque load in both cortex and hippocampus of APP/PS1; Clu +/-mice
Furthermore, clusterin has been shown to enhance Aβ clearance across the blood-brain-barrier via low density lipoprotein-related protein 2 (LRP2) in C57B16 mice
The evidence clearly illustrate the importance of clusterin in AD.
In addition to apoE and CLU, several other apolipoproteins including apoA-I, apoA-II, apoA-IV, apoB-100, apoC-I, apoC-II, apoC-III, apoC-IV, and apoD are in the center of interest in the field of AD research.
Accumulation of these proteins in amyloid deposits may disturb the brain lipid metabolism and thereby cause cognitive dysfunction.
These proteins can also bind Aβ and modulate its aggregation and toxicity.
For example, apoA-I, an abundant plasma protein, can bind Aβ and inhibit its fibrillation
The morphology of pre-formed Aβ aggregates can change when exposed to apoA-I
Not only as individual lipoprotein, but also the high-density lipoproteins (HDL) particles may have inhibitory effects against Aβ fibrillation, as the HDL-complex (containing apoA-I, apoE, and CLU) isolated from CSF of AD patients effectively inhibits Aβ fibrillation in vitro
The internalization of Aβ is considered as one of the contributing factors to the toxicity and cell damage in AD.
Hence, inhibition of such events may be beneficial against AD.
ApoA-II, while forming complex with apoE, appears to have inhibitory effects on Aβ internalization in cell culture
Likewise, apoA-IV may also diminish AD pathogenesis.
The genetic reduction of apoA-IV in 5×FAD APP/PS1 transgenic AD mice (5×FAD APP/PS1; apo-IV -/-) augments the Aβ burden and aggravates neuronal loss in the brain compared to 5×FAD APP/PS1 transgenic mice with apoA-IV
This mouse model study also illustrated that apoA-IV facilitates Aβ uptake by astrocytes
Besides the direct binding to Aβ, the level of many apolipoproteins in circulation correlates with AD pathogenesis.
For instance, the level of apoA-I
Taken together, the close links between the apolipoproteins apoE and CLU, and various aspects of Aβ biochemistry may explain their special recognition as genetic risk factors.
Accumulation of these, and other apolipoproteins, in plaques may affect the lipid metabolism and thereby also neuronal function and plasticity.

Proteins involved in blood coagulation and hemostasis
Vascular dysfunction is commonly observed in AD and may precede onset of the disease
Aβ can deposit and interfere with the vascular cellar milieu, exert toxic effect, induce vascular inflammation, and contribute to vascular pathology.
Indeed, Aβ has been shown to bind several key components of the coagulation cascade, including coagulation factor V
It has been reported that Aβ can bind and activate blood coagulation factor XII that subsequently activates factor XI
This may contribute to neuronal dysfunction in AD by inducing inflammation or by affecting cerebral blood flow
Knockdown of plasma coagulation factor XII in TgCRND8 transgenic mouse (FXII-ASO) showed reduced brain amyloid pathology and improved cognitive function compared to the control group (CTL-ASO) and wild-type mice
Fibrinogen has a central role in the hemostasis process and is also implicated in AD pathogenesis.
In a recent study, fibrinogen was shown to induce spine elimination and to promote synapse loss in a 5×FAD transgenic mouse model via CD11b-CD18 microglia activation.
In contrast, the inhibition of fibrinogen-CD11b binding led to improved cognition in the animals
Fibrinogen induced spine elimination was also noted around Aβ deposits with fibrinogen
In vitro, binding of Aβ to fibrinogen results in the fibrillation of fibrinogen and Aβ itself
Biochemical and structural investigations have revealed the central region of Aβ as crucial for the Aβ-fibrinogen interaction
It is likely that Aβ encounters and binds fibrinogen in the vessel wall, which may lead to CAA and cognitive dysfunctions
Hence, it is evident that Aβ-fibrinogen interactions can lead to neuronal damage and cognitive impairment and may thereby contribute to AD
Plasminogen and antithrombin are parts of negative feedback loops in the coagulation cascade.
Both of these proteins can bind Aβ
Mostly antithrombin acts on thrombin and reduces the amount of thrombin to avoid continuous or excess fibrin production.
Antithrombin-III has shown sub-micromolar affinity to Aβ
Indeed, excess thrombin production is reported in the AD brain
However, high CSF levels of antithrombin-III have been reported in the early stage AD
Alpha-1-antitrypsin (A1AT) and alpha-2-macroglobulin (α2M) can modulate inflammation, proteostasis, and apoptosis.
Both proteins show potential as AD biomarkers
For instance, A1AT has been shown to protect primary microglial cells isolated from Swiss Webster mouse embryos from Aβ induced toxicity
Moreover, α2M has been suggested to facilitate brain Aβ clearance
Hence, co-aggregation of Aβ and blood coagulations proteins may contribute to CAA development and thereby enhance the cognitive deficiencies.
However, disturbances of the hemostasis machinery could also impede the coagulation cascade and lead to an increased risk of micro hemorrhage, which is also reported for AD patients

Proteins involved in metabolism
Although the proteins in this category have their main roles intracellularly, they can also be secreated or located to the cell surface.
Their extracellular concentrations may also increase as result of neuronal death and lysis
Dysfunctional glucose metabolism is thought to play a critical role in the pathogenesis of AD.
Factors that contribute to the impaired glycolysis include overuse (to compensate for increased demand in AD condition), inhibition and damage (due to oxidative stress or unwanted binding to other proteins such as Aβ) of glycolytic enzymes.
Among the glycolytic enzymes, glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) and enolase are frequently found in senile plaques.
GAPDH is an enzyme, which in its modified forms (e.g., oxidation and glycation) can interact with several molecular partners that are associated with normal cellular as well as pathogenic functions
GAPDH can interact with monomeric
Such interactions may contribute to reduced activity or even inactivation of GAPDH.
Indeed, it has been found that the GAPDH activity in AD brain is low and triggered by oxidative stress
The fact that GAPDH was found to bind Aβ fibrils in biological fluids shows that the plaque-associated GAPDH can originate from secreted GAPDH.
Although the main functional roles of this protein are found in the intracellular environment it can also be secreted
Moreover, upon exposure to oxidative stress, GAPDH can form amyloid-like fibrils that contribute to neuronal cell death
Aggregated GAPDH has also been shown to accelerate Aβ fibrillation in vitro and GAPDH, when coadministered with Aβ into C57BL/6J mice, showed increased Aβ induced neurotoxicity compared to the mice that were treated with either Aβ or GAPDH alone
Alpha-enolase (ENO1) is expressed on the surface of several cell types, including neurons, and acts as a receptor and activator of plasminogen
It has been identified in senile plaques in several studies
ENO1 is also oxidatively modified in the progression from mild cognitive impairment to AD
Indeed, a mouse model study showed that ENO1 is a target of oxidation in the brain of 3×Tg AD mouse when compared to non-transgenic mouse
This suggests that beside the glucose metabolism, ENO1 may play critical roles in pathological brain functions.
The physiological impact of the Aβ-ENO1 interactions is unknown.
However, binding of Aβ to ENO1 may inactivate the enzyme resulting in loss-of-function effects and thereby contribute to glucose hypometabolism in the AD brain
Procollagen C-endopeptidase enhancer 1 (PCPE1) is a glycoprotein involved in procollagen processing.
In addition to its role in procollagens maturation, PCPE1 is thought to have additional functions
PCPE1 is found to form a complex with Aβ [219], but the consequences are not known.
Curiously, PCPE1 is reported to initiate amyloid fibril formation of β2-microglobulin
Phosphoglycerate kinase 1 (PGK1) is another glycolytic enzyme, which also binds Aβ in vitro
Nevertheless, the role of these proteins in AD has not been investigated.
Binding of metabolic enzymes to amyloid plaques could certainly disturbed their functions and reduce neuron viability.
It is, however, not clear how sequestration of extracellular enzymes would affect intracellular processes.
The GAPDH and ENO1 examples illustrate that these proteins may have other biological functions that are yet not fully understood.

Molecular transport proteins
Alteration or interruption of the transport pathways for nutrition and essential biomolecules can have adverse effects on cell viability.
Several proteins with transport as main functions have been found in post-mortem plaques and their binding to Aβ have been confirmed by in vitro studies.
Hemoglobin (Hb) is the major transporter of oxygen to the body tissues, including brain tissue.
In brain, Hb is expressed in specific cells, such as neurons
Likewise, endogenous Hb is elevated in the brain in response to hypoxia
Hb from the circulation may also contribute to the higher Hb level in the brain due to the changes in the blood-brain-barrier structure, which is manifested in aging as well as in AD.
Hb has been found to be upregulated in the brain of APP/PS1 transgenic mice compared to wild-type littermates
The protein colocalizes with Aβ in plaques and vascular amyloid deposits
Hb can bind Aβ in vitro and promote its aggregation
Hence, in aging or AD, the oxygen deficiency in brain may lead to an increased Hb production, which in turns may modulate Aβ aggregation or clearance in the brain.
Hb degradation can lead to release of heme and redox-active iron that can trigger the formation of reactive oxygen species and oxidative stress.
Indeed, dysfunctional iron homeostasis is part of the AD pathology
Heme can also bind directly to
This process could further enhance the oxidative stress and potentially also affect Aβ assembly by catalyzing tyrosine crosslinking of Aβ molecules
Protection against the release of heme is achieved through the proteins haptoglobin (Hpt) and hemopexin (Hpx), that are both found to be binding partners of Aβ fibrils.
Hpt is well known for binding free hemoglobin after the intravascular hemolysis thereby preventing iron loss
Hpx-null (Hpx -/-) mice showed a twofold increase in iron-loaded oligodendrocytes in the basal ganglia and thalamus compared to wild-type mice, which verified that Hpx is involved in heme scavenging in brain
Hpt appears to act as an extracellular chaperon and counteract protein aggregation
The Aβ-Hpt complex is found in brain tissue and CSF of AD patients and the interaction is confirmed by in vitro data
The binding affinity (K D ) is 0.30 μM [237].
Moreover, Hpt can potently inhibit in vitro Aβ fibrillation
Hpt as well as Hpx are acute phase proteins that associate with lipoparticles
Serum albumin is abundant in both plasma and CSF where it binds and transports a range of different molecules, including Aβ
The protein is thought to bind ca.
90% of plasma and 50% of CSF
In vitro studies showed that albumin inhibits Aβ fibrillation by binding to the monomer [239], or by binding to Aβ oligomers and compete for further monomer association to the Aβ assemblies
In vivo studies corroborates in vitro finding as a 3×Tg mouse model treated with human serum albumin exhibit reduced Aβ deposition and ameliorated cognitive impairment.
Moreover, SHSY5Y cell line treated with human serum albumin resulted in a reduction in Aβ toxicity
Notably, low levels of blood albumin in elderly persons is implicated in cognitive impairment
In addition, albumin is an attractive target for enhanced brain Aβ clearance through the exchange of plasma albumin with therapeutic albumin molecules, which may also facilitate the efflux of Aβ from brain to plasma
A pilot plasma exchange (PE) study for mild to moderate AD patients reported stable cognitive scores, and in phase II clinical trial, the patients were found to perform better in the cognitive test
More recently, results from phase IIb/III clinical trials have been published
Transthyretin (TTR) is a tetrameric protein predominantly produced in the liver and functions as a carrier of thyroxine and retinol in plasma and CSF
TTR binds Aβ with high affinity, K D of
The binding site of Aβ on the TTR monomer appears to be residues 106-117
TTR-Aβ complex has been detected in CSF
The protein has also been shown to promote Aβ clearance and reduced deposition in the brain of AβPPswe/ PS1A246E transgenic mice carrying TTR
Moreover, the overexpression of human TTR in APP23 transgenic mice (APP23/hTTR) showed improved cognitive function compared to control APP23 mice
The TTR concentration in CSF is altered in the course of
The protective mechanism likely relies on the binding of TTR to oligomeric Aβ, which inhibits primary and secondary nucleation of Aβ and thereby limits Aβ fibrillation
Other transporter proteins such as inter-alpha-trypsin inhibitor heavy chain H2 (ITIH2) and serotransferrin are found in senile plaques
ITIH2 is a carrier of hyaluronan, whose increased level is associated with AD
Serotransferrin is involved in iron transport and abnormal iron metabolism is, as already mentioned, observed in the brain of AD patients and can also influence Aβ aggregation
Taken together, the described examples highlight two classes of transport proteins that may have key roles in AD pathology: transporters of Aβ could affect its clearance and accumulation while dysfunctional iron transporters are linked to oxidative stress and neuronal damage.

Neural proteins
Neurosecretory protein VGF is a nerve growth factor that regulates neuronal development and activity through processing of the precursor protein into bioactive peptides.
One such peptide, TLQP-21, has been shown to enhance Aβ clearance through microglial phagocytosis and to promote fibrillar Aβ uptake by microglial BV2 cells through a complement C3a receptor-1 (C3aR1)-dependent mechanism
A more recent study further demonstrated TLQP-21 mediated microglial modulation via C3aR1 using wild-type and C3aR1-null mouse models
TLQP-21 was found to increase motility and phagocytic activity of microglial BV2 cells in wild-type but not in C3aR1-null mice.
Furthermore, intracerebroventricular administration of TLQP-21 to 5 months old 5×FAD mice showed a reduction of amyloid plaques and associated dystrophic neurites
However, the levels of VGF in AD patient CSF has been found to be lower than in controls
A recent bioinformatics study identified VGF as the "key driver" in a multiscale network model of AD
The same study validated the hypothesis by showing that overexpression of VGF in an AD mouse model rescued the animals from Aβ-related pathology.
Based on these lines of arguments, sequestration and inactivation of VGF in plaques may be a key process in ADassociated neurodegeneration.
Like VGF, proSAAS is a proteolytically processed protein with the main function in the neuroendocrine secretory pathway
It is recurrently found in pathological protein deposits
ProSAAS has been found highly colocalized with Aβ, both in dense core and diffuse plaques, in 12month-old APP695/PSEN1dE9 transgenic mice
ProSAAS is thought to have novel anti-aggregation chaperone function demonstrated by its ability to inhibit in vitro Aβ fibrillation and Aβ-induced neurotoxicity in Neuro2a cell cultures
Furthermore, proSAAS has also been found to inhibit fibrillation and toxicity of other disease-related proteins e.g., IAPP and α-synuclein
Neural cell adhesion molecule 1 (NCAM1) is an important component of the central nervous system (CNS) extracellular interface but also found in soluble form in CSF and plasma.
NCAM1 has key roles in modulation neuron-neuron adhesion, neurite outgrowth, synaptic plasticity, as well as in learning and memory and is also associated with several neurological disorders
It interacts with a range of other proteins and extracellular matrix (ECM) components, including APP [268] and chondroitin sulfate proteoglycans (see below)
Another member in the NCAM superfamily, NCAM2, has been shown to undergo Aβ-induced proteolysis resulting in reduced level of NCAM2 in hippocampus of AD patients and APP23 transgenic mice
Brevican and neurocan are chondroitin sulfate proteoglycans specifically expressed in the brain and neural tissues.
They are involved in CNS development, cell migration, maturation, and tissue homeostasis and are key components of perineuronal nets
It is known that altered regulation of these proteoglycans, e.g. by ADAMTS family proteases, is associated with AD as well as inflammation and other neurological disorders
Aβ accumulation may interfere with processing of brevican and thereby inhibit neural plasticity
Indeed, brevican has been found differently processed (the size of the chondroitin sulfate chain attached to brevican is smaller) in hippocampal tissue of plaque-bearing APPsw transgenic mice compared to non-transgenic control
Amyloid-like protein 1 (APLP1) is a transmembrane protein, which belongs to the amyloid precursor protein gene family.
Members of this family are known to play critical roles in the development of nervous system, the formation and function of synapses, including synaptic plasticity, learning, and memory
APLP1 is closely related to APP and share a similar structural organization
It is processed by the same set of secretases i.e., α-,β-,γ-secretase, as APP and generates a range of fragments
Immunochemistry and proteomics studies show that APLP1 is present in the senile plaque and the distribution of APLP1 overlaps with APP in the AD brain
APLP1 binds fibrillar Aβ in vitro
Nevertheless, the binding of fibrillar Aβ to APLP2, from the same family as APLP1, lead to an increased level of APLP2 in primary cultures of astrocytes and neuron
The accumulation of neural proteins in plaques provides a direct link between protein aggregation and reduced neuronal functions.
Some of the proteins may also have neuroprotective effects that are lost upon their inactivation.

Cell adhesion, extracellular matrix, and proteoglycans
The extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins and proteoglycans are often found in senile plaques and it has been confirmed that Aβ, and in particular its aggregated forms, can bind a range of ECM-associated proteins
Interactions with these components provide a link between extracellular environment, where the senile plaques are found, and potential intracellular effects.
This could be by triggering specific signaling pathways or by allowing entrance of foreign pathogens, such as amyloid oligomers.
Proteins such as vitronectin may assist in this
The ECM also determines the contact and interactions between adjacent cells and correct function is crucial for many processes, such as neuronal development and signaling pathways.
Proteoglycans are thought to play functional roles in cell-cell and cell-matrix interactions in the brain.
Moreover, proteoglycans appear to modulate Aβ aggregation and deposition and to play roles in Aβ internalization and cytotoxicity
A transgenic mouse model study showed that the overexpression of heparanase, a heparan sulfate degrading enzyme, significantly lowered the Aβ burden in the brain of tgHpa*Swe mice
In a different study, neuronal heparan sulfate was removed from APP/PS1 transgenic mouse, which led to a reduction of Aβ oligomerization and subsequent deposition
Also, enhanced Aβ clearance from the mouse brain was noted
These studies evident that heparan sulfate proteoglycans participate in Aβ deposition and thereby contribute to amyloid pathology.
Agrin is a heparan sulphate proteoglycan present in different areas of the brain including microvasculature but its functions in the brain remains unclear
The protein has been identified in AD plaque, cerebrovascular Aβ deposits as well as in neurofibrillary tangles in several studies
In vitro studies reported that agrin can bind Aβ and accelerate its fibrillation as well as protect fibrils from proteolytic degradation
Curiously, a mouse model study reports opposite effects of agrin on in vivo Aβ deposition.
Endothelial overexpression of agrin in AD transgenic mouse resulted in reduced Aβ accumulation, and conversely, mouse lacking endothelial expression of agrin showed an increased Aβ deposition in the brain
However, it is apparent that agrin affects brain Aβ deposition.
Agrin may have a specific affinity towards fibrillar Aβ (K D of 3.5 nM
Increased concentration of agrin has been measured in the hippocampus of AD brains compared to non-AD controls
Moreover, CSF agrin concentration increased with the age of AD patients
Agrin abnormalities are also thought to cause microvascular damage in AD
Likewise, glypican-1 (Gpc-1) seems to be predominant in senile plaques [287] and cerebrovascular amyloid
Notably, Gpc-1 is not present in the normal vessels
Indeed, it has been found that the expression of Gpc-1 is increased in human brain pericytes culture in the presence of Aβ
Within lipid rafts, Gpc-1 is thought to act as a scaffold and interact with normal cellular and diseaseassociated isoforms of prion protein and facilitate misfolding, thereby formation of pathogenetic prion
Such mechanisms may also occur for Aβ pathogenesis.
Aβ production machineries, as well as monomeric and oligomeric Aβ, exist in glycosphingolipid enriched domains where Gpc-1 may interact with Aβ and potentially trigger Aβ polymerization and subsequent cell death
Yet another proteoglycan family protein, decorin, is also found in senile plaques
The protein can interact with Aβ in vitro
However, the significance of this interaction in vivo has not been investigated broadly although the interaction likely also occurs in the AD brain.
The binding of decorin to Aβ may account for the deposition of Aβ in cerebrovascular amyloid deposit in AD
Cartilage acidic protein 1 (CRTAC1), an extracellular matrix protein in the β-propeller protein family, is present in the brain, but its function remains unclear
Nevertheless, CRTAC1 is linked to many diseases, including cardiovascular and neurological disorders
Curiously, the protein has a high propensity to form amyloid-like fibrils that may connect it to disease pathology
Vitronectin is another cell adhesion protein with the ability to form oligomers and amyloid fibrils
It was early reported to be part of senile plaques
Osteopontin (OPN), a protein with its main role in bone tissue structure, has been confirmed to be elevated in AD patients and there are findings that link the OPN expression to the Aβ load
It is linked to immune response and neuroinflammation
Increased cerebral expression of OPN (via glatiramer acetate (GA) or GA-and bone marrow-derived monocytes treatments) resulted in reduced plaque burden in ADtg mice compared to mice treated with phosphate buffer.
These mice also showed improved phagocytotic clearance of Aβ
Galectin-3-binding protein (G3BP) was just recently shown to inhibit the processing of APP into Aβ by direct interaction with APP [299].
Co-deposition of G3BP in senile plaque may be a consequence of this interaction but it could also result in reduced inhibitory capacity and thereby a positive feedback loop for Aβ production.
Direct interaction with APP has also been reported for fibulin-1 with consequent alterations of the neurotrophic activities of
This interaction was suggested to be mediated by the calcium-binding EGF motif in fibulin-1 and could then explain also the binding of EGF-containing fibulin-like extracellular matrix protein 1 to Aβ.
Some cell adhesion proteins, e.g.
vitronectin, osteopontin, fibulin-1 and galectin-3-binding protein, are known to also regulate complement system, immune response, inflammatory response or hemostasis and could thereby contribute to AD pathology through these processes
As seen in Table
However, the physiological significance of these proteins in AD still needs to be elucidated.
In summary, it is not surprising that many ECM-or cell-surface proteins are found in plaques but several of these proteins appear to be actively involved in the initiation and buildup of Aβ aggregates.
A better understanding of these interactions may reveal ways to delay the plaque pathology.

Other proteins
In addition to the proteins reviewed above, several proteins with confirmed binding to Aβ as well as presence in senile plaques, fall outside the functional categories in Table
Human cystatin C (CysC) was originally identified in CSF and subsequently found in other biofluids and tissues, including brain tissue
The association of CysC with AD has been established by its existence within parenchymal and vascular amyloid deposits in AD
It can bind monomeric Aβ [307], significantly reduce Aβ oligomerization
Moreover, CysC has been shown to protect neuroblastoma cells from Aβ induced neurotoxicity
A mouse model study showed ca.
50% decline of Aβ plaque burden in the cortex of Cys68 + APP23 + transgenic mice overexpressing human CysC compared to Cys68 -APP23 + mice
Besides its protective roles, CysC is also implicated in the development of CAA, and its binding with Aβ may initiate Aβ accumulation in vessel walls
Apart from its association with AD, CysC itself form amyloid and is linked to hereditary cystatin C amyloid angiopathy, or Icelandic type amyloidosis
Gelsolin is a ubiquitous actin-binding protein present in plasma and CSF as a secretory protein
The protein is linked to a Finish type of systemic amyloidosis (hereditary gelsolin amyloidosis)
Gelsolin has been found in AD plaques
Moreover, gelsolin inhibits Aβ fibrillation and dissociate preformed fibrils in vitro
Peripheral administration of gelsolin (from bovine plasma) in PS/APP transgenic mice showed reduced fibrillar Aβ in cerebral cortex and hippocampus
Another study also reported reduced amyloid pathology in mice where human gelsolin was expressed in plasma in two different PS/APP transgenic mice models using a gene delivery approach
These studies indicate that gelsolin may sequester plasma Aβ and thereby represent a candidate for a potential AD therapeutic.
Serum amyloid P component (SAP) is an important regulator of the innate immune system.
Nonfibrillar SAP is a universal component of all amyloid deposits, including parenchymal and vascular Aβ deposit in AD
The role of SAP in amyloidosis has been studied using SAP knockout (SAP -/-) serum amyloid A amyloidosis mouse.
Amyloid deposition in mice lacking SAP was found to be delayed and reduced compared to (SAP +/-) control
However, if and how SAP may contribute to AD pathology remains unclear.
Interestingly, the protein has a high binding affinity for Aβ, with a K D
Evidence from in vitro studies suggests that SAP accelerates Aβ fibrillation and stabilizes fibrils against proteolytic degradation
SAP may also modulate astrocytic and microglial Aβ uptakes as the ability of adult human astrocytes and microglia to internalize Aβ were found to be reduced when exposed to Aβ and a mixture of SAP-C1q
Besides its role in amyloid deposits, SAP is itself directly toxic to neurons
SAP can be an attractive therapeutic target for AD.
Indeed, it has been demonstrated that removal of SAP (using CPHPC, a SAP removal drug) from blood and CSF of a TASTPM transgenic mouse model of AD results in removal of it from the amyloid deposits, although the actual effect of CPHPC treatment on amyloid load was not investigated
Secreted frizzled-related protein 3 is involved in the Wnt signaling pathway
This pathway is fundamental to the development of the CNS and, in the adult brain, it is involved in the regulation of synapse plasticity and memory progress
Using neuronal cell culture and an animal model, it was shown that Aβ fibrilmediated toxicity can result in loss-of-function of Wnt signaling
Dickkopf-related protein 3 is also a Wnt signaling pathway protein.
The protein has been found to be produced locally and co-localized with Aβ in the brain
Several in vitro studies have demonstrated its binding to Aβ
Other proteins with fundamental roles in early development (e.g., olfactomedin-like protein 3), cell mobility (e.g., cytoplasmic actin 1), and antimicrobial and proteolytic activity (e.g., dermcidin) are found in senile plaques and bound to Aβ in vitro, nevertheless, their links with AD is still scarcely described in the literature.
Finally, we want to briefly mention two important proteins that are not included in Table
The roles of these proteins in AD have been extensively described in other reviews, e.g.
Although these are primarily intracellular proteins they are also found in CSF.
α-synculein was early associated with plaques as the origin of the non amyloid-β component (NAC)
Lewy body co-pathology is indeed common in AD and a more extensive role of α-synculein in AD pathology is emerging
In vitro experiments have confirmed interactions between Aβ and α-synculein but none of the studies using biological fluids (that constitute the basis for Table
This indicates that the origin of plaque-associated α-synculein (NAC) may be intracellular (vide infra).
Tau has already been mentioned as the main component in neurofibrillary tangles but it has also been found in plaques
This constitute one (of many) direct connection between amyloid and tangle pathologies although the role of plaque-associated tau in AD is most likely minor to that of its intracellular accumulation.
Despite the fact that an increased tau level in CSF as an established AD biomarker, tau was not identified as a binder to Aβ in our studies with CSF samples from AD patients
Hence, like in the case with α-synculein, tau in the plaques may originate from released intracellular aggregates.

Network analysis
In order to gain new insights from the assembled list of proteins we analyzed it (with the immunoglobulins excluded) by the STRING protein network tool
The network obtained with the 'high confidence' setting is illustrated in Fig.
There is indeed a dense network of connections between the proteins on the list and we find Aβ (APP) in a central position.
The functional classes used in Table
It seems that proteins involved in lipid metabolism or blood coagulation in general are found closer to APP than the other classes.
The majority of the nodes without any connection are classified as "other proteins".
STRING analysis also provides information about enriched properties of the network (Fig.
We note that characteristics related to various protein functions seem to be more enriched in the network than structural features.
Hence, the protein composition of the plaques may be connected to the functional roles of the proteins rather than their structural and chemical properties.
This is in line with absence of clear correlations between the binding to Aβ fibrils and physicochemical properties observed in previous studies
This means that the network may provide information about biological processes that can be triggered or inhibited by Aβ amyloid.
The processes that are highlighted as enriched in this network include protein activation/regulation/metabolism (and thereby various signaling pathways), complement system, blood coagulation, inflammation and immune response.
Interestingly the second most enriched KEGG pathway is "Staphylococcus aureus infection", which may indicate that Aβ fibrils could trigger responses similar to bacteria infection.

Intracellular proteins
Although Aβ amyloid plaques are per definition extracellular inclusions, investigations of plaques from brain tissue have revealed the presence of a large number of intracellular proteins.
These are clearly parts of the plaques as they have been found by top-down studies of tissue
Aβ is produced in different cellular locations.
Some release may occur directly from the plasma membrane
The formed amyloid will rapidly associate with other extracellular components, as outlined in the present review.
The amyloid plaques can activate the cellular defense and inflammation, mainly microglia but also astrocytes
The plaques can then be phagocytosed with the lysosomal degradation machinery as destination.
In this state the amyloid structure may associate with intracellular components.
However, too high load of engulfed material could lead to lysosomal dysfunction and release of the aggregated material to the extracellular space
An alternative route involves intracellular Aβ accumulation (Fig.
Aβ is produced in intracellular locations, including the trans-Golgi network, endoplasmic reticulum (ER), and endosomal, lysosomal and mitochondrial membranes
Moreover, neurons (as well as other CNS cells) can actively take up Aβ (monomeric or aggregated) from the surrounding through a number of cell surface receptors, including the α7 nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (α7nAChR), low-density lipoprotein receptors (LDLR), the scavenger receptor for advanced glycation end products (RAGE), and N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptors
This process Fig.
The nodes are colored based on the functional classification used in the article and the thickness of the connecting lines show the confidence of the association may eventually kill the cells and release the amyloid with the sequestered intracellular components
Taken together, all the material indicated in Fig.
In vitro biochemical binding studies of intracellular proteins similar to those in biological fluids are few.
Olschza et al. reported some proteins interacting with Aβ in human embryonic kidney 293 (HEK293T) cells, including translation initiation factors, chromatin regulators, RNA processing proteins, mitochondrial membrane proteins and chaperones.
It is not clear, however, what form(s) of Aβ that was responsible for the interactions
Another study used murine neuroblastoma N2a cells and investigated the binding of proteins to Aβ42 oligomers
They found ribosomal proteins, chaperones, and proteins associated with cytoskeleton or protein synthesis.
Experimental protocols to identify interaction partners from an intracellular environment are indeed more challenging than in biological fluids but could also provide extremely valuable information, e.g.,

Conclusions
Just by recognizing the normal and potential abnormal functions of the proteins listed in Table
This picture is also confirmed by the network analysis.
With this in mind it appears unlikely that sequestration of biomolecules in the plaques is merely a side effect of Aβ aggregation and Aβ-mediated toxicity.
More likely, co-aggregation and alteration of the associated biochemical processes are part of the mechanisms by which amyloid formation leads to neurodegeneration.
However, it still remains an open discussion which of the processes that are more important and how they may affect each other.
To address these questions it is important to gain better understanding of the molecular events (how do the proteins bind to the plaque components and how does the binding affect their structure and function) as well as the physiological consequences.
Hence, the multicomponent structures of senile plaques should be explored with both bottom-up and top-down approaches.
Among the outstanding questions regarding the molecular perspective are to decipher the details of the architecture of the multicomponent plaques; are they just random aggregates of sequestered proteins or is there some kind of order?
In vitro binding studies suggest that many proteins can bind Aβ with K D in the μM-nM range, which suggest specific binding event rather than unspecific sequestration.
Within the network there are also many proteins where mutual interactions are part of their biological function.
Such interactions could be important in recruiting certain proteins to the plaques.
More knowledge is also needed regarding whether the bound proteins retain their native structure or if the interaction can lead to misfolding.
It is intriguing that many of the proteins that associate with senile plaques in vivo or plaque-like particles in vitro are known to form amyloid themselves and to be associated with amyloid diseases.
This group of proteins include immunoglobulins, apolipoproteins (A-I, AII, A-IV, C-II, C-III), serum amyloid A, fibrinogen, cystatin C, gelsolin, and transthyretin.
Notably, NAC (i.e.
α-synuclein)
There are also proteins with confirmed ability to form amyloid aggregates but without any (known) connection to disease, e.g.
GAPDH
So far nothing is known about their conformational status when incorporated in the plaques.
How is further Aβ aggregation affected by the binding of other proteins?
As described above many of the sequestered proteins are known to affect Aβ aggregation in vitro.
Moreover, surface-catalyzed secondary nucleation seems to be a critical part in the amplification of Aβ aggregates
Most of the produced Aβ are secreted and can under certain circumstances aggregate in the extracellular environment.
The amyloid will bind to extracellular components to form multicomponent aggregates.
Amyloid deposits can also trigger cellular response through cell surface receptors leading to phagocytosis and co-accumulation of intracellular components.
In another route, the extracellular amyloid can promote the formation of oligomeric Aβ.
These oligomers, as well as Aβ monomers, can be internalized by cells and accumulate in the intracellular environment.
Too high intracellular load of aggregated proteins may eventually lead to cell death and release of the aggregated material affected by binding of other biomolecules to the fibril surfaces.
The reduced fibrillation rates observed for Aβ in CSF
Finally, it is also important to move on and explore how other biomolecules, e.g.
lipids or proteoglycans, are incorporated in the plaques and to investigate the sequestration of intracellular components and whole cells, as illustrated in Fig.
Embracing the multiprotein nature of amyloid deposits also expand the therapeutic opportunities.
All proteins on the list are potential drug targets.
Therapeutic effects could be achieved by inhibit binding or by modulating protein functions to restore loss-of-function effects or counteract toxic gain-of-function effects.
Having the highly connected functional network in mind, even small alterations in the composition of plaques could have significant effects on the pathology.



Fig. 2
Fig. 2 Approaches to explore the composition and organization of senile plaques.
(A) Top-down methods starts from plaque tissue samples and analyze the plaque structure by e.g.
microscopy or mass-spectrometry proteomics.
(B) Bottom-up methods make use of in vitro models in order to study composition, protein structure and interactions from a molecular perspective.
The amyloid corona refers to the layer of proteins from a biological fluid that is sequestered by the amyloid fibrils



Fig. 4
Fig. 4 Functional and structural enrichment in the STRING network.
The bar diagrams show the -log 10 of the false discovery rate for the 10 most enriched keywords from each category


List of abbreviations α2M: Alpha-2-macroglobulin; Aβ: Amyloid β; A1AT: Alpha-1-antitrypsin; ACT: Alpha 1-antichymotrypsin; AD: Alzheimer's disease; APLP1: Amyloid-like protein 1; ApoA-I: Apolipoprotein A-I; ApoA-II: Apolipoprotein A-II; ApoA-VI: Apolipoprotein A-VI; ApoB-100: Apolipoprotein B-100; ApoC-I: Apolipoprotein C-I; ApoC-II: Apolipoprotein C-II; ApoC-III: Apolipoprotein C-III; ApoC-IV: Apolipoprotein C-IV; ApoD: Apolipoprotein D; ApoE: Apolipoprotein E; ApoJ: Apolipoprotein J; APP: Amyloid β precursor protein; C1q: Complement 1q; C1r: Complement 1r; C1s: Complement 1s; C3: Complement 3; C3aR1: Complement 3a receptor-1; C4: Complement 4; C5: Complement 5; C7: Complement 7; CAA: Cerebral amyloid angiopathy; CD: Circular dichroism; CLU: Clusterin; CNS: Central nervous system; CRTA C1: Cartilage acidic protein 1; CSF: Cerebrospinal fluid; CysC: Cystatin C; ECM: Extracellular matrix; ELISA: Enzyme linked immunosorbent assay; ENO1: Alpha-enolase; G3BP: Galectin-3-binding protein; GAPD H: Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase; Gpc-1: Glypican-1; Hb: Hemoglobin; HDL: High-density lipoproteins; Hpt: Haptoglobin; Hpx: Hemopexin; IAPP: Islet amyloid polypeptide; ITIH2: Inter-alpha-trypsin inhibitor heavy chain H2; LC-MS/MS: Liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry; LCM: Laser capture microdissection; LRP2: Lipoprotein-related protein 2; MRM: Multiple reaction monitoring; NAC: Non amyloid-β component; NCAM1: Neural cell adhesion molecule 1; NMR: Nuclear magnetic resonance; OPN: Osteopontin; PCPE 1: Procollagen C-endopeptidase enhancer 1; PET: Positron emission tomography; PGK1: Phosphoglycerate kinase 1; SAP: Serum amyloid P component; SEC: Size exclusion chromatography; SPR: Surface plasmon resonance; TEM: Transmission electron microscopy; TREM2: Triggering receptor expressed on myeloid cells 2; TTR: Transthyretin; WB: Western blot



Table 1
Biochemical and biophysical evidence of interactions of Aβ with other proteins, and their presence in senile plaque and potential for AD biomarker



Table 1
Biochemical and biophysical evidence of interactions of Aβ with other proteins, and their presence in senile plaque and potential for AD biomarker (Continued)



Table 1
Biochemical and biophysical evidence of interactions of Aβ with other proteins, and their presence in senile plaque and potential for AD biomarker (Continued)



Table 1
Biochemical and biophysical evidence of interactions of Aβ with other proteins, and their presence in senile plaque and potential for AD biomarker (Continued)



Table 1
Biochemical and biophysical evidence of interactions of Aβ with other proteins, and their presence in senile plaque and potential for AD biomarker (Continued)


f,g,h,z † HC f,g , CCtx and Cve h