Systematic review of coexistent epileptic seizures and Alzheimer's disease: Incidence and prevalence
prevalence.

Reuse
Items deposited in White Rose Research Online are protected by copyright, with all rights reserved unless indicated otherwise.
They may be downloaded and/or printed for private study, or other acts as permitted by national copyright laws.
The publisher or other rights holders may allow further reproduction and re-use of the full text version.
This is indicated by the licence information on the White Rose Research Online record for the item.

Takedown
If you consider content in White Rose Research Online to be in breach of UK law, please notify us by emailing eprints@whiterose.ac.uk including the URL of the record and the reason for the withdrawal request.

Impact Statement
We certify that this work is a confirmatory of recent novel clinical research (Subota A, Pham T, Jette N, Sauro K, Lorenzetti D, Holroyd-Leduc J.
The association between dementia and epilepsy: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
Epilepsia.
2017 06;58:962-972).
This research specifically adds the following to the literature.

1.
Incidence of epileptic seizures was up to over 3 per 100 person-years in people with Alzheimer's disease (AD).

2.
Prevalence of seizures among people with AD showed variability, but consistent evidence was shown for people with pathologically verified AD.

3.
Generalised seizures were over represented in people with AD.

4.
Greater attention may be paid to the monitoring of seizures among people with autosomal dominant AD and younger AD patients.

5.
Evidence gaps exist for the incidence of AD among people with seizures, and the rates of AD among adults with childhood onset seizures.

Introduction
People with epilepsy (PWE) have 1.6 times higher hazard of incident Alzheimer's disease (AD) compared to those without epilepsy.
Conversely, a diagnosis of AD is associated with a six-fold increased risk of unprovoked seizures.
Apolipoprotein (APOE) ɛ4 genotype and mutations in the amyloid β precursor protein gene (APP), presenilin-1 (PSEN 1) and presenilin-2 (PSEN 2) are associated with AD as well as epilepsy.
myloid β and tau-protein elicit epileptiform activity,
lapping regional pathology includes accrual of hippocampal damage over time (shown in experimental mice with temporal lobe epilepsy), which results in progressive memory loss.
Depending on differences in AD duration and severity of cognitive impairment among people with AD, the incidence and prevalence of seizures vary.
1]
When two diseases co-exist, there are disagreements regarding whether focal
here is no imminent restorative treatment for AD, whereas seizure control is possible through sleeping well, reducing stress, avoiding drugs and alcohol, and taking antiepileptic drugs (AEDs),
To date, there is only one systematic review in this field, but it focuses on dementia rather than AD.
An up-to-date systematic review on the epidemiology and characteristics of comorbid seizure and AD would allow us to quantify the magnitude of this issue, so as to inform seizure and AD management guidelines.

Methods
The protocol of this review was registered in PROSPERO [CRD42020150479].
The review is reported according to the Meta-analysis Of Observational Studies in Epidemiology (MOOSE) guideline and Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic
Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) checklist.

Inclusion and exclusion criteria
This review was restricted to published observational studies reporting either or both

Search strategy and screening
Four databases were searched: MEDLINE, EMBASE, PsycINFO and CINAHL (from inception to 5 September 2019, Table
The following search terms were used as free text or controlled vocabulary as appropriate: epilepsy, epileptic, seizure(s), convulsion(s) AND Alzheimer(s), dementia, cognitive dysfunction.
Titles and abstracts of all references were screened to identify those relevant to the review, including 20% screened independently by a second reviewer.
Discrepancies were resolved through discussion.
Full articles of relevant references were examined to determine whether they met the inclusion criteria.
Lists of included and excluded studies in the full-text screening stage were checked independently by two reviewers.
One reviewer sought further literature by examining the reference lists and citation trails of eligible studies.

Data extraction and quality assessment
Data extraction was completed by one reviewer, and all extractions were checked by a second reviewer, and included country, year of publication, author, recruiting sites and periods, case selection (e.g.
population-, community-, hospital-, nursing homebased), study design (e.g.
cohort with prospective or retrospective recruitment), sample size, diagnostic criteria for seizures and AD, number of males, age, incidence or prevalence rates.
We judged articles to be from the same cohort if there was evidence of overlapping recruitment sites, study dates and similar participant characteristics.
Incidence or prevalence rates in the reports with the most complete estimation for the same cohorts were extracted.
Quality assessment was conducted independently by two reviewers using a preexisting quality assessment tool for prevalence studies (Text S1).
This tool considered the representativeness of the study sample, validity of diagnostic criteria for seizures and AD, and statistical methods.
Discrepancies in the judgements were resolved through discussion and adjudication by a third reviewer.

Statistical methodology
For incidence rates of seizures, the within study variances (i.e. standard error (SE))
were calculated as square root of the number of seizure cases, and the 95% confidence intervals (CIs) of incidence rates were calculated as  ( )±1.96 .
For prevalence rates, the within study variances were calculated as square root of (p × (1-p)/n), where p is the prevalence and n is the sample size.
The incidence and prevalence rates were sorted from lowest to highest rates, and displayed in forest plots with CIs.
Statistical heterogeneity (i.e.
variation in the incidence or prevalence rates between studies) and consistency were assessed using the standard Q statistic and I 2 (i.e. the percentage of total variation across studies that is due to heterogeneity rather than chance), with P < 0.05 indicating heterogeneity and I 2 > 75% indicating inconsistency.
Rates were synthesized using a random effect inverse variance approach for weighting, when there was no heterogeneity or inconsistency.
Subgroup analyses were conducted for the prevalence of seizures among people with AD, where studies were grouped based on the AD diagnosis (i.e.
clinical, pathological or autosomal dominant (AD)AD).
For the prevalence of AD among people with seizures, subgroup analyses were based on age of seizure onset (i.e.
seizure onset at > 40 years versus age of seizure onset unknown).
Publication bias was assessed by inspecting funnel plots.
We also conducted Egger`s tests to assess funnel-plot asymmetry.
All analyses were conducted using Stata 13.

Results
The search results and selection process are summarised in a PRISMA flowchart (Figure
A total of 6,246 references were identified, of which 105 full text articles were retrieved to assess for inclusion/exclusion.
Sixty-three articles were excluded with reasons (Text S2) and a total of 39 studies (42 articles, Text S3) were considered eligible for inclusion, including one study reporting both incidence and prevalence of seizures among people with AD,
One study included records from a research center Brain Bank, where autopsies were requested by families for research participation and confirmation of the dementia diagnosis,
We included this study for completeness, but also reported the combined prevalence after removing this study.

Incidence of seizures among people with AD
Seven studies (Table
There was one population-based,
Incidence of seizures generally ranged from 4.2 9 to 11.9
one study reported on recurrence of seizures, where among seven participants with seizures, a single seizure occurred in four cases, and more than one seizure occurred in three cases.
Studies examined the associations between various factors and occurrence of seizures (e.g.
sex, race, education, comorbidities, duration of AD), with none of these except age (univariate analysis) reaching significance.
Incidence of seizure in AD patients decreased with older age in five studies.
5 Prevalence of seizures among people with AD Twenty-five studies (27 articles, Table
The highest prevalence was 49.5% of 190 patients who had initial AD symptoms between 34 and 64 years old and had AD diagnosed before 70 years old.
alence estimates were statistically homogeneous (P = 0.4,
I 2 = 0.5%) among people with autopsy
after excluding the mentioned study with highly selective sample (P = 0.3, I 2 = 13%).
prevalence rates of seizures among people with ADAD were statistically heterogeneous and inconsistent (P < 0.0001, I
6]
The majority (144/240, 60%) of participants where seizure type was reported (in 13 studies) had generalized onset seizures, and another 26 cases (11%) had focal to bilateral tonic-clonic seizures.
31]
None of the studies reported etiology of seizures, but three studies partly excluded symptomatic seizures by excluding, e.g.
AD patients with a history of stroke,
Seizures preceded the onset of cognitive symptoms or a diagnosis of AD in a total of 40 participants in six studies,
The time gaps were not reported in the remaining four studies.
Seizures followed the onset of cognitive symptoms or a diagnosis of AD in a total of 408 participants in 12 studies,
21 participants from three studies, seizures occurred concomitantly with onset of cognitive symptoms or a diagnosis of AD.
phenytoin, carbamazepine, valproate acid, topiramate and phenobarbital) were reported to have been started in most AD patients with seizures in 11 studies.

Prevalence of AD among people with seizures
Eight studies (nine articles, Table
For participants who had onset of seizures after 40 years old,
Among them, seizures were remote symptomatic, verified clinically, or by computed tomography (CT)
or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) in 38% (26/68)
than half, 177/421 (42%) of those participants whose seizure type was reported had generalized seizures.
It was reported that seizures preceded the onset of cognitive symptoms or a diagnosis of AD (time gaps unreported),
Among the tested factors, being older was the only factor associated with occurrence of AD among people with seizures. 17

Publication bias and small study effects
Funnel plots provided little evidence for publication bias (Figure
Egger's tests showed no evidence for asymmetry to suggest publication bias in studies examining incidence (P = 0.69) or prevalence of seizures (P = 0.65), or prevalence of AD (P = 0.98).

Quality assessment
Overall, 20 studies were reported as being at low risk, 17 at medium and two at high risk of bias (Table
The main source of bias was representativeness of the study population, with the study population included in the most of studies (31/39, 79%) being judged as unlikely to be a close representation of their respective national populations with seizures or AD.
For example, one study only included those with mild or moderate AD who experienced decreased social capacity over a period of at least three months, which was not generalizable to the national population with AD.

Discussion
We summarized data from 39 studies reporting on seizure incidence and prevalence respectively in 21,198 and 380,777 participants with AD, and AD prevalence in 727,446 participants with seizures.
We found seizure incidence rates up to 31.5 per 1000 person-years, but mostly in the range of 4.2 to 11.9, higher than the 2.4 per 1,000 person-years in older people generally.
In general, estimates suggest that 10% of people with clinically diagnosed AD were affected by seizures, with this rising to 16% among people with pathologically verified AD and between three to over 40 percent of people with ADAD had co-existent seizures.
Eleven percent of people with adult-onset seizures had AD.
Increasing awareness of this co-existence and its importance is indicated by the number of studies documented in this review, where 17 (44%) were published in or after 2015.

Bi-directionality
Seizures variously preceded or followed the onset of cognitive symptoms, confirming the bi-directionality of the relationship between seizures and AD.
Seizures increase amyloid β deposition and neuronal excitability,
We note that the occurrence of seizures was sometimes as short as 5 months following 2 or concurrent with onset of AD or a diagnosis of AD,

Impact of age and other risk factors
We found consistent evidence of an increased risk of seizures during the study followup associated with younger age of AD symptom onset or diagnosis,
planations could include a more rapid disease progression in younger people with AD,
showing more brain amyloid accumulation in their 50s compared to the controls without epilepsy, suggesting that individuals with the APOE ε4 allele and idiopathic epilepsy syndromes might be particularly vulnerable to the development of amyloid pathology.
More evidence is required to determine whether duration and severity of AD, or other risk factors are associated with seizure occurrence, and what the risk factors are for AD among people with seizures.

ADAD and other dementia types
People with ADAD had more rapid cognitive and functional decline,
The lowest prevalence rate of seizures (2.8%) may be due to the fact that many participants were at early stages of the ADAD (very mild n = 68 and mild n = 18) in the DIAN study.
Notably, this article also reported on the published literature noting a combined prevalence rate of seizures at 20.3% (95%CI 17.4% to 23.2%) in 188 publications reporting on 1,228 ADAD patients, albeit the heterogeneity between studies was not reported for the pooled estimation.
None of the 188 publications met our inclusion criteria individually with most being case series of a few participants.
ures occur in both AD and non-AD dementia, and it is unclear whether AD is the pathology most strongly associated with seizures.
Some studies reported that AD was up to five times more commonly associated with seizures than non-AD dementia.
highest reported prevalence of seizures among people with all-cause dementia was 9.1%,
Contradictory evidence was that the incidence of seizures among people with clinically diagnosed vascular dementia (VD) was 7.5 per 1,000 person-years, higher than the 5.6 per 1,000 person-years among people with clinically diagnosed AD.
only 34 out of 64 participants with pathologically verified AD in one included study had pure AD pathology, while there were concurrent Lewy body dementia (LBD, n = 12), VD (n = 11) and LBD and VD (n = 7).
Up to 23.6%

Limitations
The heterogeneities present in the evidence base meant that meta-analysis was not considered feasible thus meaning that we were unable to produce an overall point estimate.
Nevertheless, we have represented the body of literature using forest plots to fully display the breadth and variation in the evidence.
Secondly, although it is common practice to exclude studies with low numbers of participants, we acknowledge that some of the evidence base may have been inadvertently excluded.
Furthermore, we note that tests for funnel plot asymmetry, Egger`s tests, are only recommended when there are at least 10 studies included in the meta-analysis.
Thirdly, the available information is insufficient to differentiate data based on a single epileptic seizure and epilepsy, albeit the limited evidence from six studies suggested that over half (62%) of seizure cases among AD patients had recurrent seizures.
Fourthly, seizure types were mostly determined clinically without EEG evidence, the etiology of seizures was unclear, and CT or MRI was not adopted to identify structural causes of seizures in most of the studies.
Finally, there may be under-or over-estimation.
In our review, 61% of the seizures that occurred in people with AD were generalized onset seizures, whereas in the seizure population this number was 42%.
The over representation of generalized seizures in those AD-oriented studies may be due to the lack of awareness and prespecified questionnaires to record focal seizure, leading to underestimation.
In the included studies, eight cases (2%) of acute symptomatic seizures
We note that alertness and attention alterations in AD, acute symptomatic seizures (especially for the older adults) and epilepsy mimics might have been counted as seizures in included studies, especially when the diagnosis of epilepsy was not centrally adjudicated by the researchers, leading to potential overestimation.
In clinical practice, these need to be ruled out, before introducing AEDs, but there is no reason to postpone AEDs in confirmed cases, since
AEDs have not been shown to be independently associated with cognitive dysfunction,
Presence of myoclonus increased the risk of developing seizures in one study,
Myoclonus described as brief shock-like muscular contraction,
The bi-directional relationship between seizures and AD was confirmed and there is increasing awareness of their co-existence.
Further research on the risk factors for the co-existence and examination on whether early treatment of seizures might help delay or prevent clinical manifestation of AD could help advise ways to ease disease burden, and provide guidance on health services and care planning.


, Figure2B) reported prevalence of seizures among 380,777 people with AD, in whom 20,312 cases of seizures were reported.
For clinically diagnosed AD, the diagnoses were made mainly according to the National Institute of Neurological and Communicative Disorders and Stroke and the Alzheimer's Disease and Related Disorders Association (NINCDS-ADRDA).


Radford is funded by Australian National Health and Medical Research Council (NHMRC) and Australian Research Council (ARC) Dementia Research Development Fellowship (No. 1103312).
K. J. Anstey is funded by the Australian NHMRC Research Fellowship (No. 1002560) and acknowledges support from the NHMRC Centre of Research Excellence in Cognitive Health (1100579).
C. S. Anderson is funded by Australian NHMRC Leadership grant (APP 1175861) and acknowledges grants from the Australian NHMRC (APP1175861 and APP1149987), and grants for stroke research (IISR-2017-101947 and IISR-2018-102649).
R. Peters is funded by the Australian NHMRC Dementia Centre for Research Collaboration.


2 = 97%): 2.8% out of 107 ADAD patients with APP, PSEN 1 or PSEN 2 mutations in the Dominantly Inherited Alzheimer Network (DIAN) study, 33 24% out of 121 ADAD patients with APP or PSEN 1 mutations, 34 31.3%
out of 64 ADAD patients with PSEN 2 mutation, 3 and 41.7% out of 132 ADAD patients with APP, PSEN 1 or PSEN 2 mutations.