Two-Year Longitudinal Monitoring of Amnestic Mild Cognitive Impairment Patients with Prodromal Alzheimer’s Disease Using Topographical Biomarkers Derived from Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging and Electroencephalographic Activity
Auditory "oddball" event-related potentials (aoERPs), resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging (rsfMRI) connectivity, and electroencephalographic (rsEEG) rhythms were tested as longitudinal functional biomarkers of prodromal Alzheimer's disease (AD).
Data were collected at baseline and four follow-ups at 6, 12, 18, and 24 months in amnesic mild cognitive impairment (aMCI) patients classified in two groups: "positive" (i.e., "prodromal AD"; n = 81) or "negative" (n = 63) based on a diagnostic marker of AD derived from cerebrospinal samples (A␤ 42 /P-tau ratio).
A linear mixed model design was used to test functional biomarkers for Group, Time, and Group × Time effects adjusted by nuisance covariates (only data until conversion to dementia was used).
Functional biomarkers that showed significant Group effects ("positive" versus "negative", p < 0.05) regardless of Time were 1) reduced rsfMRI connectivity in both the default mode network (DMN) and the posterior cingulate cortex (PCC), both also giving significant Time effects (connectivity decay regardless of Group); 2) increased rsEEG source activity at delta (<4 Hz) and theta (4-8 Hz) rhythms and decreased source activity at low-frequency alpha (8-10.5 Hz) rhythms; and 3) reduced parietal and posterior cingulate source activities of aoERPs.
Time × Group effects showed differential functional biomarker progression between groups: 1) increased rsfMRI connectivity in the left parietal cortex of the DMN nodes, consistent with compensatory effects and 2) increased limbic source activity at theta rhythms.
These findings represent the first longitudinal characterization of functional biomarkers of prodromal AD relative to "negative" aMCI patients based on 5 serial recording sessions over 2 years.

INTRODUCTION 29
The International Working Group has recently 30 made a useful distinction between diagnostic and topographical biomarkers of Alzheimer's disease 32 (AD) for research applications in patients with 33 amnesic mild cognitive impairment (aMCI) due to default mode network (DMN) is of interest for clinical applications to AD research, being non-invasive and repeatable over time even in patients with several cognitive deficits.
Previous rsfMRI studies have shown that this network includes nodes in posterior and anterior cingulate areas, angular gyri, occipital, and parietotemporal regions
In the resting state condition, the intrinsic DMN functional connectivity may be associated with specific self-related and internal processes that can be parcellated into several sub-classes including self-awareness or "mental self"
Other candidate topographic biomarkers of AD derive from electroencephalographic (EEG) techniques, which are noninvasive, cost-effective, and can be repeated several times along disease progression without learning effects affecting paradigms using tasks.
When compared to fMRI and FDG-PET, EEG techniques recording scalp potentials have a modest spatial resolution of some centimeters but a very high temporal resolution (milliseconds); that temporal resolution is ideal to investigate cortical EEG rhythms at different frequency bands within about 1-40 Hz during a resting state condition (i.e., resting state EEG, rsEEG) and quick brain dynamics reflected by positive and negative voltage peaks within tens to hundreds of milliseconds in response to cognitivemotor events challenging attention, short episodic memory, and sensorimotor integration (i.e., eventrelated potentials, ERPs).
A popular ERP paradigm used to investigate temporal dynamics of neural synchronization underpinning cognitive processes is the auditory oddball task
In such a paradigm, subjects are administrated a sequence of sensory stimuli of two classes, namely those with high (e.g., 80%) and low (e.g., 20%) probability to occur, with the instruction to pay attention and react (e.g., hand motor responses or mental stimulus) only to the rare ones considered as "targets"
The extraction of variables of interest from rsEEG and ERPs requires different procedures of data analysis and source estimation, mainly based on frequency
Derived rsEEG/ERP biomarkers may reflect synchronization and connectivity between large populations of cortical pyramidal neurons during resting state or cognitive tasks
Previous studies have shown that compared to control seniors, patients with aMCI and dementia due to AD were characterized by increased rsEEG power density at delta (<4 Hz) and theta (4-7 Hz) frequency bands in widespread cortical regions as well as decreased rsEEG power density at alpha
Concerning the oddball paradigm, these patients were characterized by ERP peak latency increase, amplitude decrease, and abnormal topography in a late ample positive component (i.e., P3b).
Specifically, P3b peaks at about 300-400 ms from the onset of rare (20-30% of probability) auditory or visual stimuli
As topographic biomarkers of progression, these rsEEG/ERP readouts pointed to increased abnormalities in delta/alpha rhythms and P3b peak in aMCI and AD patients with dementia at about 1-year follow up
These effects were typically discussed in relationship to death of cortical neurons, axonal pathology, and cholinergic neurotransmission deficits
Linear Mixed Models (R-package lme4) were used as statistical tests as they allow the use of individual longitudinal data sets even when some recording sessions are missing in the series (e.g., for technical failures or patients' problems).
The mentioned findings motivate the evaluation of rsfMRI and rsEEG/P3b as topographic biomarkers sensitive to prodromal (MCI) and dementia stages of AD.
This process needs to overcome the following methodological limitations of typical multi-centric longitudinal studies: 1) retrospective nature, 2) the use of few recording sessions over time (mostly a baseline and a 1-year follow up) subjected to the confounding effect of disease onset and trajectories in aMCI patients, 3) the lack of a careful characterization of aMCI due to AD as cognitive profile (only one test of episodic memory) and positivity to standard diagnostic biomarkers of AD, and 4) the absence of a control group of aMCI patients not due to AD with expected different disease evolution over time.
The European, prospective, multi-centric study entitled "PharmaCog -E-ADNI" (
addressed such limitations.
In the PharmaCog study, 147 aMCI patients were screened as APOE genotyping and AD diagnostic markers of CSF and followed longitudinally with clinical, neuropsychological, MRI, rsEEG/ERP, and blood markers for 24 months.
The aMCI patients were separated into two sub-groups, namely those "positive" (i.e., prodromal AD) and "negative" to CSF 185 diagnostic markers of AD (i.e., statistical thresholds 186 for A␤ 42 /P-tau ratio based on APOE 4 carrier sta-187 tus
Preparatory PharmaCog studies described 188 the successful multisite MRI harmonization efforts 189
For each participant and session, this analysis yielded the average connectivity z-score within the whole DMN, LFP, and also considering separately each one of the separate nodes within the DMN (PCC, LPC, RPC, and MFC)
These z-scores were used as functional connectivity measures and were the rsfMRI dependent variables in the statistical analyses.
The statistical analyses considered also two MRIrelated nuisance regressors for each session, the white matter temporal signal-to-noise ratio (tSNR), given its high variability across sites mostly driven by hardware differences
The rsEEG and ERP data were segmented and analyzed offline in consecutive 2-s and 3-s epochs, respectively.
Artifactual epochs were identified using a computerized home-made automatic software procedure
Artefact-free rsEEG epochs recorded during eyes open condition were used to control the expected reactivity of alpha rhythms as a sign of good quality of rsEEG recordings.
Artifact-free rsEEG epochs recorded during eyes open condition were used as an input for the 333 analysis of EEG power density spectrum and cortiremaining aMCI patients were denoted as "negative" aMCI.

EEG data

Recordings of rsEEG (eyes-closed and -open;

Statistical analysis
Statistical analyses were performed using SPSS software for descriptive statistics and R software Linear Mixed Models (R-package lme4) were used as statistical tests as they allow the use of individual longitudinal data sets even when some recording sessions are missing in the series (e.g., for technical failures or patients' problems).
Specifically, these models evaluated whether rsfMRI and rsEEG/ERP functional topographic biomarkers can differentiate a "positive" aMCI (prodromal AD) subgroup relative to a "negative" aMCI subgroup over 24 months.
Furthermore, two different types of Linear Mixed Models were used with all available values of the rsfMRI, rsEEG/P3b peak, and clinical variables in the whole aMCI cohort.
In the Models, the fixed effect Group included the two subgroups of "positive" and "negative" aMCI patients, while the fixed effect Time included the values of rsfMRI, rsEEG/P3b peak, and ADAScog13 for baseline recordings and follow-ups at 6, 12, 18, and 24 months.
The aMCI patients eventually progressing to dementia were no more called for subsequent follow ups in order to have a relatively homogeneous sample of data relative to aMCI condition.
Random intercept and random slope across the variables were used as random effects in the Models to account for individual differences in the biomarkers and ADAScog13 values at baseline as well as for individual changes of those variables across all aMCI patients over follow-ups.
All Models were adjusted for age, sex, and education.
The output of the Linear Mixed Models was presented in terms of standardized ␤ coefficient, corresponding p-value and, for the interaction factor only, effect size (pseudo h 2 ) calculated as ratio of explained variability of interaction effect on total variability of each model.
The first Linear Mixed Models of rsfMRI and EEG biomarkers were conducted with Time, Group,
All of them underwent rsfMRI acquisitions, while a slightly smaller group underwent to rsEEG/ERP recordings (n = 126 patients).
The main demographic and clinical characteristics of them are reported in Table
In both Tables, as mentioned above, the aMCI patients were aggregated in subgroups based on the baseline A␤ 42 , phospho-tau (P-tau), and total tau (T-tau) values in the CSF as a function of APOE genotype
The two aMCI subgroups were defined according to a standard diagnostic marker of AD in CSF samples (A␤ 42 /P-tau ratio;
Table
The "negative" aMCI patient group did not present conversions to dementia due to AD within 24 months, but presented 2-3% of conversions to dementia due to non-AD pathologies at 12-month follow up and 4-5% at 24-month follow up.
In contrast, the "positive" aMCI patients (i.e., prodromal AD) showed 11% of conversion to dementia due to AD at 12-month follow up, 27-29% at 24-month-follow up, and no conversion to dementia due to non-AD pathologies within 24 months.
These features are compatible with the use of 1 SD as a threshold of memory deficits in the present inclusion      with aMCI patients possibly due to other pathologies.
These patients were followed during a relatively long observation period of 24 months.

Functional biomarkers Group effects
The Linear Mixed Models showed a fixed effect of Group ("positive" versus "negative" aMCI sub- Concerning rsEEG topographic biomarkers, the present Linear Mixed Models showed a fixed effect of Group ("positive" and "negative" aMCI) on several variables of interest.
Compared with the "negative" aMCI subgroup, the "positive" (i.e., prodromal AD) aMCI subgroup exhibited lower posterior (parietal, occipital, temporal and limbic) source activity of the low-frequency alpha band (8-10.5 Hz) while widespread delta (<4 Hz) and theta (4-8 Hz) source activity was higher.
These results specify in source space and prodromal AD condition a bulk of previous rsEEG evidence showing that AD patients with dementia are characterized by high power in widespread delta and theta rhythms, as well as low power in posterior alpha and/or beta
Furthermore, a shortterm cholinergic regimen with acetylcholinesterase inhibitors partially normalizes theta
and delta
In the same line, long-term administration of the drug regimen shows beneficial 777 effects on theta and alpha/theta band ratio, especially 778 over the frontal areas

779
Concerning ERP topographic biomarkers, the Lin-  Group


190 and "negative" aMCI subjects as neuropsychologi-191 cal, MRI (i.e., hippocampal atrophy, morphometry, 192 and diffusion), and rsEEG/ERP at the baseline stage 193 [23, 52, 53].
194 This article is part of a Mini Forum on Phar-195 maCog matrix of biomarkers of prodromal AD in 196 patients with aMCI, which is based on four papers 197 published in the Journal of Alzheimer's Disease.
The 198 specific aim of this article is to evaluate longitudi-199 nal functional topographical biomarkers derived from 200 rsfMRI and rsEEG/ERP data in a population of aMCI 201 enrolled in the PharmaCog project and test if these 202 markers can differentiate the group of the "positive" 203 aMCI patients with prodromal AD from the "nega-204 tive" aMCI subgroup during a time window of 24 205 months with 5 serial recordings 6 months apart.
A patients were enrolled in 13 European memory clinics 230 of the Innovative Medicine Initiative (IMI) Pharma-examinations were performed every 6 months for at 233 least 2 years or until patient progressed to clinical tive reserve [23, 58].
The anatomical characteristics 272 of the DMN and LFP regions and the data analysis 273 procedure are reported in previous methodological 274 study of the Consortium [49].
In brief, Group Inde-275 pendent component analysis (ICA) was performed 276 using 10 spatial components on the concatenated data 277 from each MRI site followed by back-reconstruction 278 [59] to derive the single session DMN and atten-279 tion LFP network from each subject [49].
DMN 280 regions-of-interest (ROIs) for functional connectiv-281 ity measurements were obtained by thresholding at 282 z > 4 the aggregate DMN site component



n = 126 )
and auditory "oddball" ERPs (n = 125) were performed by commercial digital EEG systems in the Clinical Units of the PharmaCog Consortium (see more details in [52]).
A minimum of 19 scalp electrodes was positioned according to the international 10-20 montage system and referenced to linked earlobes or cephalic reference according to the constraints of the local EEG systems.
Ground electrode was placed over the scalp, according to the local standard of the Clinical Units.
To monitor eye movements and blinking, bipolar vertical and horizontal electrooculograms (EOGs; 0.3-70 Hz bandpass) were simultaneously recorded.
Furthermore, a standard electrocardiographic (EKG) channel was also recorded by a monopolar V6 derivation to remove possible EKG artifacts from EEG data.
All electrophysiological data were digitized in continuous recording mode (from 128 to 1000 Hz sampling rate according to the constraints of the local EEG systems).
To minimize drowsiness and sleep onset, the duration of the rsEEG recordings was established subject-by-subject from at least 3 minutes to a maximum 5 minutes for each condition (i.e., eyes closed, eyes open).



(
A language and environment for statistical computing, version 3.4.1)
for the computation of Mixture and Linear Mixed Models.
Characteristics of the aMCI participants at the baseline recordings were assessed by parametric t-tests (or corresponding nonparametric Mann-Whitney) for continuous Gaussian (or non-Gaussian) distributed variables (p < 0.05) and by Chi-square tests for categorical data (p < 0.05).


437 effects (regardless of Time), Time effects (regardless 438 of Group), and the Time × Group interaction (the dif-439 ferential progression of the positive aMCI subgroup 440 relative to the negative aMCI subgroup).
Specifi-441 cally, the Group effect showed functional biomarkers 442 distinguishing the two subgroups of aMCI patients 443 regardless the Time effect, while the Group × Time 444 interaction unveiled those biomarkers characterizing 445 the disease progression over-time in the "positive" 446 aMCI subgroup (i.e., prodromal AD).
447 The second Linear Mixed Models of rsfMRI and 448 EEG biomarkers tested if those functional biomark-449 ers (independent variable) and Time effects predicted 450 cognitive decline over time in the aMCI subgroups 451 as revealed by ADAS-cog13 scores (dependent vari-452 able).



454
PharmaCog aMCI patients' features455 Diagnostic markers of CSF and APOE genotypes 456 were available in 144 out of 147 aMCI patients of 457 the PharmaCog/E-ADNI cohort, thus the final data 458 analyses were performed in 144 patients.
The main demographic and clinical characteristics of these 144 aMCI patients are reported in Table


functional cortical connectivity over time regardless of Group (DMN: p = 0.01, Std ␤=-0.1;
PCC: p = 0.05, Std ␤=-0.09),
reflecting the progressing impairment of that functional cortical connectivity in the general relation with the worsening of cognitive performance.
Furthermore, both DMN and PCC functional connectivity measures also exhibited a significant Group effect pointing to reduced functional cortical connectivity in the "positive" aMCI subgroup (i.e., prodromal AD) compared with the "negative" aMCI subgroup regardless of Time (DMN: p = 0.01, Std ␤=-0.2;
PCC: p = 0.001, Std ␤=-0.3),
reflecting the greater impairment of that functional cortical connectivity in the former than the latter subgroup.



Figure 1 (Fig. 1 .
Figure 1 (upper diagrams) illustrates these Group and Time effects of functional connectivity in PCC.
The plot displays the mean modeled connectivity in the two subgroups of aMCI patients over the 5 recording sessions.
The profile of DMN changes is very similar (results not shown).
As it can be seen in Fig. 1 for PCC, the functional connectivity decay in the time interval of the study is similar in both subgroups, which is consistent with the finding of no significant Time × Group interactions in DMN and PCC.
Interestingly, only functional cortical connectivity in the LPC node showed a significant Time × Group interaction, indicating an increase of connectivity over time in the "positive" (i.e., prodromal AD) relative to the "negative" aMCI subgroup (p = 0.01, Std ␤ = 0.2). Figure 2 (upper diagram) illustrates the mean values of rsfMRI connectivity in LPC in the "positive" (i.e., prodromal AD) and "negative" aMCI subgroups over the 5 recording sessions.The attention LFP network showed no Group effect or Group × Time interaction (p > 0.05).
Indeed, the only significant finding was a Time effect indicating a lower functional cortical connectivity over time in



Fig. 2 .
Fig.2.
Longitudinal profile of functional topographical biomarkers showing significant Time × Group effects (p < 0.05).
Patients were stratified in two aMCI groups: A␤ 42 /P-tau "positive" (red) as prodromal AD and A␤ 42 /P-tau "negative" (green) as a control group.
Mean (±standard error of the mean, SEM) model values are shown from 5 recording session starting at time zero (baseline) and 6-, 12-, 18-, and 24-month follow-ups.
Time × Group effects show differential progression in the two groups.
Top: rsfMRI functional connectivity measures in the left parietal cortex (LPC) of the DMN, showing a progression towards increased connectivity in the "positive" aMCI subgroup relative to the "negative" aMCI subgroup.
Bottom.
Mean (±SEM) values of cortical limbic sources of rsEEG rhythms at theta frequency band (4-8 Hz), showing an increase in cortical neural synchronization in the "positive" (i.e., prodromal AD) subgroup relative to the "negative" aMCI control subgroup.


groups) on both rsfMRI and EEG (i.e., rsEEG and auditory "oddball" ERPs) topographic biomarkers regardless of Time effects.
From a general neurophysiological point of view, this finding suggests that the prodromal AD group can be differentiated from the non-prodromal aMCI group by intrinsic functional connectivity and cortical neural synchronization differences (i.e., at rest), as well as by synchronization differences during the oddball task.Concerning rsfMRI topographic biomarkers, functional connectivity within the DMN, especially within the PCC, was significantly lower in the "positive" (i.e., prodromal AD) than in the "negative" aMCI subgroup regardless of Time effects, while no group difference was observed in the attention LFP network.
This finding complements and extends to the prodromal AD condition a large body of previous rsfMRI evidence of cross-sectional studies pointing to a selective disruption of functional connectivity in DMN regions as possible early functional consequences of amyloid-neurodegenerative cascade on cortical systems underpinning resting state condition and low vigilance in AD patients relative to cognitively intact controls (
As a novelty, the present finding showed a selective disruption of functional connectivity within DMN regions (no difference at an attention frontoparietal network) using a longitudinal study design with several serial recording sessions and a relatively large sample of aMCI patients suffering from prodromal AD (n = 81) compared with control aMCI patients not due to AD.
Such a control group made the present finding on prodromal AD independent of patients' cognitive grade (i.e., all patients suffered from an aMCI condition), while the longitudinal design with variable intercepts as random effects minimized the confound of patients' disease stage in the comparison of the two aMCI subgroups.
The present finding has also the robustness of international multicentric studies using harmonized and qualified MRI scanners
Furthermore, it overcomes the methodological limitations of longitudinal studies just based on one follow up (typically after 1 year).
On the other hand, some of the methodological limitations of this study have been previously discussed
In particular, the harmonization of the rsfMRI acquisitions across the 3T Consortium resulted in a common acquisition rate of TR = 2.7 s for full brain coverage.
Full brain sub-second acquisition protocols [54] are possible with simultaneous multi-slice selection techniques, which are becoming more widely available as product sequences in clinical scanners and maybe preferable in future studies.
The use of higher temporal resolution protocols may improve not only the sensitivity and specificity of rsfMRI connectivity estimates but also enable the exploration of advanced markers of cortical network dynamics
However, the results from both modalities refer to a very similar patients' psychophysiological condition as induced by instructions to the patients about the "resting state condition", based on a shared standard operating procedure among the PharmaCog recording units.
Indeed, lower/increased level of vigilance, directed attention, and global mental efforts during the resting state condition are clearly related to the brain activity reflected by the present rsfMRI and EEG variables



780ear
Mixed Models showed a fixed effect of Group 781 ("positive" and "negative" aMCI) on P3b peak of 782 an auditory "oddball" paradigm.
Compared with 783 the "negative" aMCI subgroup, the "positive" (i.e., 784 prodromal AD) aMCI subgroup pointed to lower pari-785 etal and posterior cingulate source activities.
These 786 findings extend to spatial source localization previ-787 ous evidence showing that P3b peak amplitude at 788 scalp posterior electrodes was smaller in AD patients 789 than control seniors, as a possible dynamic neural 790 underpinning of abnormal attention and short-term 791 episodic memory information processes.
However, 792 these findings did not replicate in the two aMCI 793 subgroups previous slowing of P3b peak latency in 794 aMCI and AD patients with dementia compared with 795 elderly control subjects, even across various "odd-796 ball" task difficulties and stimulus modalities [37, 797 89-91].
Those effects were previously discussed as 798 related to AD pathology for visual and olfactory 799 modalities [20, 92].
In contrast, the present findings 800 would suggest that P3b peak latency may preferably 801 reflect physiological aging [93] and general deterio-802 ration of cognitive performance across pathological 803 aging rather than specific processes of prodromal AD. 804 Functional biomarkers Time × Group effects: 805 Differential progression profiles 806 Here the Linear Mixed Models showed a signifi-807 cant interaction between Time (5 recording sessions 808 6 months apart) and Group ("positive" and "nega-809 tive" aMCI) on both rsfMRI and rsEEG biomarkers.810
This interaction suggests that in an aMCI group, 811 differential progression profiles between prodromal 812 and non-prodromal AD may be captured by intrin-813 sic functional connectivity (e.g., rsfMRI biomarkers) 814 and cortical neural synchronization (e.g., rsEEG 815 biomarkers).816
Concerning rsfMRI biomarkers, we found that the 817 sensitivity to disease progression in aMCI patients 818 varies across cortical networks.
Specifically, we 819 found that functional connectivity in the whole DMN, Instead, functional connectivity in LPC exhibited significant differential effects, with increased functional connectivity over time faster in the "positive" (i.e., prodromal AD) relative to the "negative" aMCI subgroup.
Again, this finding stressed the selective feature of this disruption of functional connectivity within DMN regions as compared to the lack of effects in the attention frontoparietal network.
Our longitudinal rsfMRI findings are in good agreement with previous evidence showing both cortical network impairment (connectivity reduction) and compensation (connectivity increase) effects in the DMN in aMCI subjects relative to control seniors, despite gray matter atrophy [54, 94-96].
Here we extend those results by confirming similar effects in prodromal AD relative to control aMCI subgroup.
Further, the present findings showed a maximum sensitivity of rsfMRI LPC functional connectivity at 2-year follow up, generally consistent with previous longitudinal rsfMRI studies considering baseline and 2-3 year follow-up evaluations in groups of patients with AD dementia and aMCI [54-56, 96], the latter sometimes diagnosed only on clinical basis.
Interestingly, the present lateralization in the left LPC of the effects of longitudinal disease progression in prodromal AD extends recent findings of a longitudinal rsfMRI study with two measurements 2 years apart in a small population of aMCI patients [95].
Such previous study exhibited sensitivity of functional connectivity between left precuneus and other DMN nodes in accounting for the greater progression of aMCI patients in the group of converters to dementia (n = 14) than that of non-converters (n = 17) [95].
Another recent longitudinal rsfMRI study (baseline and 35 month follow up) in aMCI patients evaluated genotype-by-diagnosis interaction effects [23, 97].
Using seed-based rsfMRI analyses on the hippocampus, the Authors detected functional cortical connectivity reductions in APOE 4 carriers and functional cortical connectivity increases in noncarriers.
In the light of those findings, the present results should not be interpreted as an indication that rsfMRI functional biomarkers of prodromal AD are limited to DMN nodes.
It is reasonable that functional connectivity within the episodic memory brain networks including prefrontal, entorhinal regions, and hippocampus may represent another sensitive dimension in prodromal AD.
Concerning rsEEG biomarkers, the "positive" (i.e., prodromal AD) aMCI subgroup was characterized by increasing limbic source activity of theta rhythms over time.
The effect was evident across the serial recordings and robust effects were evident for the 878 progression of prodromal AD in periods of about 12 879 months.
Taking into account the relatively low spatial 880 resolution of the EEG techniques used in the present 881 study (i.e., they cannot disentangle the various lim-882 bic regions of cortical midline and medial temporal 883 lobe), this finding suggests a limbic localization of 884 prodromal AD processes affecting the generation of 885 abnormal rsEEG rhythms during the disease progres-886 sion in aMCI patients.
This topographical suggestion 887 is in line with the well-known localization of ini-888 tial AD physiopathological processes in entorhinal 889 regions, medial temporal lobe, and midline regions 890 of DMN.
Furthermore, it provides a neuroanatomi-891 cal framework to previous rsEEG evidence showing 892 that AD patients with dementia are characterized by 893 high power in widespread scalp regions of delta and 894 theta rhythms, as well as low power in posterior alpha 895 and/or beta (13-20 Hz) rhythms [27, 28, 32, 98, 99].
896 What do rsfMRI and EEG topographic 897 biomarkers tell us about prodromal AD? 898 The rsfMRI findings of the present study support 899 the general view that at least for two years, pro-900 dromal AD is associated with a partial functional 901 cortical disconnection within DMN nodes in the rest-902 ing state condition.
It can be speculated that this 903 functional disconnection might induce an abnormal 904 elaboration of information about self-body milieu and 905 autobiographical memory, thus affecting the sense 906 of self-awareness and continuity of self across time 907 [6, 77] (for theories and controversies about the neural 908 basis of consciousness see [101]).
This speculation is 909 based on the well-known concept that midline corti-910 cal nodes of DMN such as PCC and MPF contribute 911 to the integration of the general functions related to 912 the sense of self-awareness [102, 103].
In this line 913 of reasoning, PCC might represent information con-914 cerning individual's own self-beliefs and first-person 915 perspective in adults [104].
Furthermore, structural 916 maturation of the neural connectivity between PCC 917 and MPF in the adolescence accompanies the devel-918 opment of self-related and social-cognitive functions 919 [105].
Moreover, previous evidence has shown that 920 posterior parietal regions of DMN might contribute 921 to the formation of self-related cognitive represen-922 tation as a convergence zone binding cortical neural 923 populations involved in the memorization of inter-924 modal details of episodic events concerning the 925 self [106].
Patients with lesions in those parietal 926 regions manifest difficulties in re-experiencing a past autobiographic event when request by experimenters 928 [107].
This speculation encourages the inclusion of 929 cognitive tests probing the richness of the autobio-930 graphic memories and self-awareness in prodromal 931 AD patients over time and the analysis with Linear 932 Mixed Models of the correlation between rsfMRI 933 topographic biomarkers of DMN and the perfor-934 mance to those tests.



Finally, both
International Working Group-2
In the Phar-maCog project, we followed those guidelines for the diagnosis of the prodromal AD in aMCI patients.
As a novelty, here we propose that the present rsfMRI and rsEEG readouts changing over time (e.g., 24 months) in prodromal AD patients may be used to characterize and monitor the effect of the disease on their brain functions, thus enriching the picture disclosed by the guideline biomarkers.
Specifically, these readouts may complement "N" biomarkers in future longitudinal clinical studies, revealing effects of the prodromal AD progression and new anti-AD drugs on brain functional connectivity with high spatial resolution (i.e., probing fine spatial features of the functional brain topography) and neural synchronization processes with high temporal resolution (i.e., probing multiple oscillatory features of that synchronization facilitating or inhibiting neural signal processing), respectively.
Relative neurophysiological insights may better explain clinical manifestations of the disease and therapy response beyond diagnostic and prognostic purposes.
Of note, the present article appears in an editorial Mini Forum of the Journal of Alzheimer's Disease together with other articles derived from the same PharmaCog clinical trial.
One of these articles reports results of systematic statistical comparisons among structural and functional MRI, rsEEG/ERP, and blood biomarkers in prodromal AD patients.
CONCLUSIONS In the PharmaCog project, auditory "oddball" ERPs, rsEEG, and rsfMRI functional biomarkers were tested in aMCI patients to characterize prodromal AD.
The prodromal AD in patients with aMCI was established based on abnormal CSF levels of amyloid and P-tau measured at baseline.
To take into account the confounding effect of different disease stages and cognitive grades, we used 5 serial recording sessions over 2 years, controlling of cognitive grade using a control group of aMCI patients supposed not due to AD. Functional biomarkers were able to detect significant Group effects stable over time in the prodromal AD patients compared with the control aMCI subgroup: 1) reduced rsfMRI functional connectivity in the DMN and in the PCC node; 2) increased rsEEG source activity at delta (<4 Hz) and theta (4-8 Hz) rhythms and decreased source activity at alpha (8-10.5 Hz) rhythms; and 3) reduced parietal and posterior cingulate source activities of P3b peak of ERPs.
Functional biomarkers were also able to show Time × Group effects, giving differential progression profiles over time in the prodromal AD subgroup relative to the control aMCI subgroup: 1) increased rsfMRI functional connectivity in the LPC node of the DMN and 2) increased limbic source activity at theta rhythms.
Topographical biomarkers may have different sensitivity at different phases of the disease [1, 127].
At the present stage, we do not know the neuropathological correlates explaining why some rsfMRI and EEG biomarkers were found to be sensitive to Group effects and others to Group × Time effects over 24 months.
Future studies correlating those biomarkers with PET maps of A␤ 1-42 and P-tau accumulation in the brain may enlighten such an explanation.
The effects observed in this study may be related to the progression of the neurodegeneration shown by 1) FDG-PET maps of hypometabolism in parietal and medial temporal cortical areas, 2) atrophy of hippocampus, entorhinal, and temporal neocortex, and 3) biomarkers of tau aggregation in the brain as revealed by CSF samples 1081 and PET maps.
1082 The present findings represent the first longi-1083 tudinal characterization of functional topographic 1084 biomarkers of prodromal AD.
If cross-validated, 1085 these findings may be used for the stratification and 1086 monitoring of the effects of disease-modifying drugs 1087 in aMCI patients suffering from AD. Indeed, topo-1088 graphic biomarkers of brain function as those derived 1089 from rsfMRI and EEG (or the magnetoencephalo-1090 graphic counterpart) may be more likely to respond 1091 to an effective disease-modifying intervention rela-1092 tive to structural neuroimaging atrophy markers (e.g., 1093 cortical or hippocampus atrophy) or topographic 1094 biomarkers of brain hypometabolism (e.g., those 1095 measured by FDG-PET), which may only partially 1096 recover as they are markedly dependent on neurodebeen carried out in the Work Pack-1100 age 5 of PharmaCog project (2010-2015, Grant no.
1101 115009; http://www.pharmacog.org).
The Pharma-1102 Cog project was funded by the Innovative Medicine 1103 Initiative of European Seventh Framework Program, 1104 which was granted by the European Committee 1105 (50%) and the European Federation of Pharmaceu-1106 tical Industries and Associations (50%).1107
Dr. Giovanni Frisoni's group was supported for the 1108 development of this study and extraction of magnetic 1109 resonance image (MRI) biomarkers by an in-kind 1110 contribution of AstraZeneca AB, Södertälje, Sweden.
1111 Dr. Claudio Babiloni's group was also sup-1112 ported for the extraction of electroencephalographic 1113 (EEG) biomarkers by an in-kind contribution of F. 1114 Hoffmann-La Roche, Basel, Switzerland.
1115 The Authors are grateful to all members and 1116 collaborators of the PharmaCog project and to all 1117 amnesic mild cognitive impairment (aMCI) patients 1118 who agreed to participate in this study as well as 1119 the healthy elderly volunteers who participated in the 1120 preliminary harmonization phase of the study.
Pasquier F, Rabinovici G, Robert P, Rowe C, Salloway S, 1129 Sarazin M, Epelbaum S, de Souza LC, Vellas B, Visser PJ, Advancing research diagnostic criteria for Alzheimer's 1132 disease: The IWG-2 criteria.
Lancet Neurol 13,



Table 1



Table 2
Clinical and socio-demographic features of aMCI patients undergone to resting state electroencephalographic (rsEEG) and event-related potential (ERP) recordings in the present study.These patients, a subgroup of those described in Table1, were stratified into CSF A␤ 42 /P-tau "positive" and "negative" according to APOE4-specific cut-offs for carriers and non-carriers of APOE4 genotyping.
See Methods section for more details Assessed by ANOVA (for continuous Gaussian distributed variables) or Kruskal-Wallis with Dunn correction (for continuous non-Gaussian distributed variables) and Chi-square tests (for categorical variables).
b Range 0-85, with 0 as the best score.
ADAS-cog13, Alzheimer Disease Assessment Scale-Cognitive Subscale, version 13; A␤ 42 , amyloid-␤; APOE, Apolipoprotein E; CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; P-tau, tau phosphorylated at threonine 181; T-tau, total tau; SD, standard deviation.



Table 3 Number



Table 4
Resting state fMRI nodes showing significant functional connectivity effects explained by a Linear Mixed Model of longitudinal changes (baseline, 6, 12, 18, 24 months follow ups) in aMCI patients stratified into two groups ("positive" as prodromal AD and "negative" as a control group) The model included Group (A␤ 42 /P-tau ratio), Time, and Time × Group interaction as main predictors of interest adjusted by age, sex, baseline MMSE score, temporal signal-to-noise ratio, and mean fractional head displacement as nuisance variables.
Significant (p < 0.05) fixed effects are emphasized in bold.
DMN, default mode network (all nodes); PCC, posterior cingulate cortex; LPC, inferior left parietal cortex; LFP, left attention frontal-parietal network; Std ␤, standardized ␤ coefficient of Linear Mixed Model.



Table 5
Resting state EEG and auditory oddball ERP measures showing significant cortical neural synchronization effects explained by a Linear Mixed Model of longitudinal changes (baseline, 6, 12, 18, 24 months follow ups) in aMCI patients stratified into two groups ("positive" as prodromal AD and "negative" as a control group)