Prospective longitudinal atrophy in Alzheimer’s disease correlates with the intensity and topography of baseline tau-PET
β-amyloid plaques and tau-containing neurofibrillary tangles are the two neuropathological hallmarks of Alzheimer's disease (AD) and are thought to play crucial roles in a neurodegenerative cascade leading to dementia.
Both lesions can now be visualized in vivo using positron emission tomography (PET) radiotracers, opening new opportunities to study disease mechanisms and improve patients' diagnostic and prognostic evaluation.
In a group of 32 patients at early symptomatic AD stages, we tested whether β-amyloid and tau-PET could predict subsequent brain atrophy measured using longitudinal magnetic resonance imaging acquired at the time of PET and 15 months later.
Quantitative analyses showed that the global intensity of tau-, but not β-amyloid-PET signal predicted the rate of subsequent atrophy, independent of baseline cortical thickness.
Additional investigations demonstrated that the specific distribution of tau-PET signal was a strong indicator of the topography of future atrophy at the single patient level and that the relationship between baseline tau-PET and subsequent atrophy was particularly strong in younger patients.
These data support disease models in which tau pathology is a major driver of

Introduction
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is characterized by the co-occurrence of β-amyloid (Aβ) deposition into extracellular plaques and neurofibrillary tangles composed of aggregated hyper-phosphorylated tau
The aggregation of Aβ and tau is thought to play a crucial role in a neurodegenerative cascade that results in the loss of neurons and synapses
The development of radiotracers binding to Aβ plaques
Those imaging biomarkers offer an opportunity to improve patient diagnosis and to study the development of AD pathophysiology by describing the relationships between protein aggregation, neurodegeneration, and cognitive impairment.
Cross-sectional neuroimaging studies have demonstrated that lower brain volumes are more strongly associated with tau-than with Aβ-PET burden in patients with mild cognitive impairment and dementia
Moreover, studies examining the topography of neuroimaging biomarkers have indicated that the pattern of neurodegeneration (i.e.
regions with low cortical volume/thickness
However, the spatial extent of tau-PET signal appears to exceed the extent of neurodegeneration
Converging evidence also suggests that the intensity and topography of tau-PET, but not Aβ-PET, are strongly associated with the severity of each patient's specific clinical deficits
In addition, earlier age of onset seems to be associated with higher tau-PET signal
Since tau-PET imaging is a relatively novel technique, most previous studies have been based on cross-sectional data, which leads to technical and conceptual limitations.
First, cross-sectional studies define neurodegeneration as low volume/metabolism, as they cannot directly measure decline in volume/metabolism over time.
Resulting metrics are then biased by pre-existing inter-individual variability in cerebral anatomy and function
Second, cross-sectional designs do not allow direct observation of a chronological sequence of biomarker abnormalities.
More recently, retrospective longitudinal studies (in which longitudinal MRI data were acquired before tau-PET acquisition) have also highlighted a close association between tau-PET and neurodegeneration
In the present observational study, we prospectively assessed and compared the associations between baseline Aβ and tau-PET burden (using [11C]Pittsburgh Compound B (PIB) and [18F]Flortaucipir (FTP), respectively), and subsequent longitudinal atrophy in a group of patients at the early clinical stages of AD.
Our primary hypothesis was that the tau deposition detected with FTP-PET drives, and therefore precedes regional neurodegeneration in early symptomatic AD.
From a precision medicine perspective, we were interested in testing PET imaging's ability to predict neuroimaging changes at the individual patient level.
Based on the cross-sectional evidence described above, we hypothesized that higher baseline FTP-, but not PIB-PET would be associated with higher atrophy rates, and that the topography of FTP-PET binding would predict the pattern of subsequent atrophy at the individual patient level.
We had two secondary aims.
First, we tested whether baseline PIB and FTP-PET data could help predict patients' clinical deterioration, measured with the clinical dementia rating scale sum of boxes (CDR-SB), a measure of disease severity based on functional decline
Lastly, we investigated whether the previously highlighted association between earlier age of onset and greater atrophy rates could be explained by baseline differences in tau burden.

Results
The current study included 32 patients in early clinical stages of AD (Mild Cognitive Impairment or mild dementia, and a positive PIB-PET scan).
All patients underwent structural MRI and PET with both PIB and FTP at the baseline visit, and a second structural MRI at a follow up visit (median time interval: 15 months).
Two Siemens 3T-MRI scanners were used in this study (see Method and Discussion sections).
Demographics are presented in Table
The sample was heterogeneous and included 6 patients fulfilling criteria for logopenic variant Primary Progressive Aphasia, lvPPA
Patients were between 49 and 83 years old at the time of PET scan (20 patients (63%) being under 65yo).

At the group level, longitudinal atrophy is greater in regions with high baseline FTP binding
For each patient, baseline PET scans were processed to calculate Standardize Uptake Value Ratio (SUVR) maps (see
The two MRI scans were processed using a specific longitudinal pipeline
All maps were masked to restrict the investigations to the cortical gray matter (Figure
We first created group-average images of PIB, FTP, and longitudinal atrophy using images warped to template space (Figure
PIB binding predominated in medial areas (prefrontal and posterior cingulate/precuneus regions);signal was also elevated in lateral frontal and temporo-parietal cortices (Figure
FTP binding was maximal at the temporo-parietal junction and the posterior cingulate / precuneus, and moderate in dorsal frontal, occipital and infero-medial temporal cortices (Figure
The pattern of longitudinal atrophy is shown in Figure
Atrophy was maximal in temporo-parietal areas, posterior cingulate / precuneus and dorsal frontal areas, surviving stringent familywise error (FWE) correction (p FWE <0.001) in those regions where baseline FTP-PET signal was particularly elevated.

Patients with high baseline FTP-PET binding develop more severe cortical atrophy
We investigated the relationships between baseline cortical alterations (PIB SUVR, FTP SUVR, and cortical thickness) and the severity of subsequent atrophy across patients.
Figure
Longitudinal cortical atrophy was strongly associated with baseline FTP (r FTP-atrophy =0.670, 95%CI [0.388, 0.841], p<0.001), in contrast with weaker correlations with baseline cortical PIB (r PIB-atrophy =0.291, 95%CI [-0.029, 0.546], p=0.07), and baseline global cortical thickness (r thickness-atrophy =0.281, 95%CI [-0.067, 0.586], p=0.12).
Pairwise comparisons of correlations (based on bootstrapping of correlation coefficient pairs with 5,000 permutations) showed that longitudinal atrophy was more strongly correlated with FTP than PIB (Δr=0.379,
95%CI [0.121, 0.594], p=0.004), but the difference between r FTP-atrophy and r thickness-atrophy was not significant at α=0.05 (Δr=0.390,
95%CI [-0.119, 0.821], p=0.11).
When including all three baseline predictors in a single multiple regression model to predict subsequent longitudinal atrophy, FTP remained significant (standardized β=0.696, t=4.2, p<0.001; versus β=-0.083,
t=-0.5, p=0.58 for PIB and β=0.173, t=1.3, p=0.22 for thickness; see Table

Voxelwise FTP-PET patterns predict maps of subsequent atrophy at the individual patient level
We next assessed whether the topography of PIB and FTP binding could help predict the pattern of atrophy at the individual patient level, using a voxelwise approach.
For each patient, the topographical similarity between 3D maps of PET binding and atrophy were quantified using a voxelwise spatial correlation approach restricted to a cortical mask, as previously described
Resulting spatial correlation coefficients (baseline PIB to longitudinal atrophy and baseline FTP to longitudinal atrophy) were then z-transformed to allow analysis at the group level (see Figure
Across the 32 patients, spatial correlation between baseline PIB and subsequent atrophy was minimal: mean z(r)=0.183,
95%CI [0.131, 0.226] (percentile bootstrap CI based on 5,000 permutations), indicating 3% [2%, 5%] shared variance on average.
In contrast, the spatial correlation between baseline FTP and longitudinal atrophy was high: mean z(r)=0.780,
95%CI [0.682, 0.859], indicating 43% [35%, 48%] shared variance on average.
Spatial correlation with longitudinal atrophy was significantly higher for baseline FTP than PIB (paired t-test conducted on the z(r) values: t(31)=14.9,
p<0.001).
It should be noted that correlations were higher for FTP than for PIB in all 32 patients, as shown in Figure

Baseline tau-PET predicts longitudinal atrophy independent of baseline thickness
Our finding that baseline FTP-SUVR correlates with subsequent atrophy could be confounded by the fact that these regions are usually already atrophic at baseline, and that atrophy tends to accelerate locally.
In addition, low cortical thickness at baseline could reduce the PET signal due to partial volume effects, and introduce additional noise in the measurements.
We therefore conducted additional analyses to assess the potential confounding effect of "baseline atrophy" on the association between FTP-PET and subsequent atrophy at a regional level.
This set of analyses was conducted using regions of interests, enabling the use of partial volume corrected (PVC) PET data.
Each patient's cortex was segmented into 68 regions of interest (ROI) using Freesurfer 5.3, and the average cortical thickness was extracted from the baseline MRI for each ROI.
For each patient, cortical thickness values were converted to a Z-score (based on normative data, see methods) to be used as indicators of baseline neurodegeneration.
Average baseline FTP-SUVR PVC , and jacobian values were extracted from each ROI as well (see Figure
The spaghetti plots in Figure
Linear mixed effect models (LMEMs) were used to test the respective contribution of each baseline measure to longitudinal atrophy.
All ROIs from all patients were included in LMEMs (68 x 32 = 2,176 entries), with random slopes and intercepts for both ROI and patient factors (See Table
Separate LMEMs were first conducted for each predictor, and both were significant (p<0.001,
see Figure
marginal R 2 =0.444, conditional R 2 =0.785) than baseline thickness (t=5.1, marginal R 2 =0.057, conditional R 2 =0.610).
However, when entering both predictors in the same model (Figure
p<0.001, versus t= -1.7, p=0.09 for thickness).
In addition, this full model roughly explained the same amount of variance (marginal R 2 =0.426, conditional R 2 =0.800) as the model including baseline FTP PVC only, and had a slightly decreased AIC value (-15,579 versus -15,498; see Table
The conclusions of the LMEMs were very similar when using non-PVC PET data, and when including baseline PIB-SUVR in the model (see Figure

Baseline tau-PET is more strongly associated with follow up than baseline cortical thickness
We hypothesized that baseline tau PET will correlate more strongly with cortical thickness measured at follow up than at baseline, consistent with a conceptual model in which tau deposition precedes neurodegeneration.
Figure
95%CI [0.166, 0.663] versus r=0.168, 95%CI [-0.150, 0.480], Δr=0.263, bootstrapped 95%CI [0.026, 0.517], p=0.026).
We also tested the spatial similarity between baseline tau-PET and cortical thinning measured at each timepoint (Figure
The method was similar to that presented in Figure
Across the 32 patients, baseline FTP PVC spatially correlated with concurrent cortical thickness: mean spatial correlation z(r) = 0.787, 95%CI [0.681, 0.876], indicating 43% [35%, 50%] shared variance on average.
Yet, the spatial correlation was higher between baseline FTP PVC and follow-up thickness patterns: mean z(r) = 0.833, 95%CI [0.727, 0.921], indicating 47% [39%, 53%]; paired t-test on the z(r) values: t(31)=2.86,
p=0.008.

Longitudinal precuneus atrophy parallels clinical decline
The CDR-SB was used to measure clinical progression; to control for variations in clinical follow-up duration (mean = 15.0 months, min = 11.1, max = 23.7),
changes in CDR-SB were annualized ((follow-up -baseline) / time interval).
On average, CDR-SB increased by 1.6 ± 2.0 points per year (one-sample t-test: t(31)=4.52,
p<0.001).
Annualized CDR-SB increase was poorly correlated with global cortical measures of baseline PIB SUVR (r=-0.125,
p=0.51),
FTP SUVR (r=-0.041,
p=0.80), cortical thickness (r=0.006,
p=0.95), or longitudinal atrophy (r=0.095,
p=0.65; see Figure
Voxelwise analyses showed that increase in CDR-SB over time was associated with longitudinal atrophy in the precuneus/posterior cingulate area (surviving FWEcorrection at the voxel level; see Figure
In contrast, no regional association was found with any of the three baseline predictors (based on the p uncorrected <0.001 threshold).

Earlier disease onset is associated with higher tau burden and thus more rapid atrophy
Older age at baseline was associated with lower baseline abnormalities (Figure
p=0.07) and baseline thickness (r= -0.224, p=0.12, see Figure
In addition, older patients had lower rates of atrophy (correlation between age and reversed average cortical jacobian: r= -0.542, p=0.006 Figure
When including both patient's age and baseline cortical FTP-SUVR in a multiple regression model, FTP remained highly predictive of longitudinal atrophy (standardized β=0.536, p=0.003), while the effect of age was reduced (standardized β=-0.235,
p=0.16).
Mediation analyses further showed that the relationship between patient's age and longitudinal rate of atrophy was at least partly mediated by baseline cortical FTP-SUVR (Figure
No mediation effect was found using baseline PIB-SUVR or baseline cortical thickness (see Figure
Voxelwise analyses showed that both FTP-SUVR and longitudinal atrophy decreased with greater patient age throughout the brain (Figure
Finally, the spatial similarity between baseline FTP-SUVR maps and patterns of subsequent atrophy (quantified at the individual patient level using the voxelwise spatial correlation method described in Figure
p=0.005), see Figure
Spatial correlation values went from an estimated z(r)~0.9 at age 55 (R 2 =52% shared variance) to z(r)~0.63 at age 75 (R 2 =31% shared variance).
The spatial correlation between baseline PIB and longitudinal atrophy was low regardless of patient's age (r=-0.253,
p=0.13, see Figure

Discussion
In this prospective longitudinal neuroimaging study conducted in patients at early clinical stages of AD, we investigated the associations between baseline PET measures of tau and Aβ burden and subsequent neurodegeneration measured as MRI atrophy over time.
In line with our original hypotheses, we found that baseline tau PET, but not Aβ-PET, predicted the degree and spatial distribution of cortical atrophy over the subsequent year.
The association between baseline FTP-PET and subsequent atrophy, and notably the topographical similarity between the two patterns, was a strong and robust finding.
Indeed, the association was found at both the group (Figure
The predictive value of the baseline tau-PET pattern on future atrophy remained substantial even after adjusting for baseline cortical thickness, with tau-PET explaining ~40% of unique variance in longitudinal atrophy.
Finally, although cross sectional relationships can be found between tau-PET and concurrent neurodegeneration, we showed that tau-PET more closely resembles neurodegeneration at a future time point (Figure
Taken together, these longitudinal results expand on previous findings from post-mortem and cross-sectional studies, by providing prospective evidence that the aggregation of tau predicts future neurodegeneration in patients with biomarkerconfirmed AD.
These results support a sequential relationship between tau fibrillar aggregates and downstream degeneration.
This directionality is in line with a recent longitudinal tau-PET study from our group showing that, at the clinical stage of AD, tau pathology and brain atrophy progress in different regions, likely reflecting a phase shifting, with tau elevation locally preceding atrophy
Multiple studies
Our finding of an association between global cortical FTP and global cortical atrophy (Figure
The replicability of the tau biomarker/subsequent atrophy association across biomarker types (fluid versus imaging) is also consistent with the relationships found between PET and CSF measures of tau
The topographical information embedded in the PET data constitutes a major advantage compared to CSF markers.
Indeed, we demonstrated that tau-PET is not only predictive of how much but also of where atrophy will occur, which has major implications for patient prognosis and clinical trials.
Our findings suggest that tau-PET could be useful for the design of clinical trials, and notably could increase the ability to detect a treatment effect, even over a relatively short timeframe
First, tau-PET could be used to enrich trials with patients with tau PET signal predictive of upcoming atrophy, or to stratify patients in trials based on the degree of expected atrophy in the upcoming year.
Second, tau-PET could help determine how (i.e.
where) atrophy should be measured to maximize study sensitivity.
In fact, a major issue of using MRI to monitor disease progression is the inter-individual heterogeneity in atrophy patterns
A given generic ROI (e.g. the hippocampus) would not optimally capture every patient's brain atrophy (e.g.
patients with "hippocampal-sparing AD"
Alternative options exist to maximize detection of AD atrophy using data-driven ROIs
This approach could capture tau-mediated neurodegeneration in every patient in a more optimal manner, agnostic of any a priori assumptions.
Alternatively, the tight relationship between tau and atrophy might imply that, in regions with elevated tau-PET signal, the pathological cascade leading to neurodegeneration has already been triggered and that neurodegeneration processes are now uncoupled from tau pathology.
In that case, anti-tau therapies could be more effective in preventing atrophy in regions with low-to-mild tau-PET signal, while atrophy in high tau-PET regions would be difficult to modify with anti-tau therapies.
Clinical decline measured with the CDR-SB was associated with atrophy in the precuneus, but was not correlated with baseline FTP-PET.
This weak relationship might be related to methodological factors: the small sample size, the intrinsic noise of measuring clinical progression based on 2 timepoints, or the use of memory-centric CRD-SoB in a clinically diverse cohort like ours that includes language, and visuospatial-predominant AD phenotypes.
Alternatively, the lack of correlation with FTP could also reflect the indirect relationship between tau pathology and clinical deficits that is thought to be at least partly mediated by brain degeneration
In contrast to tau-PET, neither the burden nor topography of Aβ-PET were strong predictors of future atrophy.
This is consistent with multiple reports that Aβ-PET has no or weak relationships with the patterns of neurodegeneration or clinical deficits at symptomatic stages
The quantitative and topographical dissociation between Aβ and neurodegeneration is also consistent with autopsy data
To our knowledge, the relationships between baseline volume or thickness and future atrophy has not been thoroughly investigated, but studies have suggested that atrophy accelerates over time, before decelerating in later stages
This non-linear relationship might explain why we could not identify consistent and robust relationships between baseline MRI findings and subsequent atrophy.
Baseline tau-PET accounted for ~40-50% of the severity and topography of subsequent atrophy in our cohort.
Future investigations will be needed to study additional predictors of atrophy (e.g.
inflammation
Our analyses identified patient's age as an important factor regarding not only the severity of tau burden and brain atrophy, but also the relationship between pathology and longitudinal atrophy.
First, we replicated previous findings that later age of disease onset is associated with lower tau-PET burden
Moreover, we showed that the spatial association between FTP and longitudinal atrophy sharply decreased with patient's age (Figure
Altogether, these results are consistent with the idea that early-onset AD might constitute a more pure form of AD in which neurodegeneration is mainly driven by AD pathology, while later-onset clinical AD is multifactorial, associated with distinctive risk factors, and related to more frequent co-morbidities and co-pathologies
Previous clinico-pathological studies showed that the relationship between AD neuropathology and dementia decreased in older patients
Altogether, growing evidence suggests that potential disease-modifying drugs that specifically target AD neuropathology may benefit patients with earlier-onset AD more than older patients.
A number of study features and limitations should be highlighted to appropriately interpret our results.
First, it should be noted that PET signal is only a proxy for underlying pathology, and while post-mortem studies suggest FTP binds to paired helical filaments of tau
Second, the sample size was modest, though similar to previous cross-sectional tau-PET/atrophy association studies.
The use of complementary robust statistical approaches, and the inspection of all scatterplots and images clearly showed that results were not influenced by outliers.
Third, the patients included in our study constitute an academic-based cohort of diverse and relatively young patients, which may limit generalizability.
It should be noted that the results remained unchanged when excluding non-amnestic variants (language or visuo-spatial phenotypes of AD, see Figure
Fourth, our cohort encompassed early clinical stages of AD, and the results cannot be extrapolated to earlier (i.e.
preclinical) or more severe stages of the disease, when neurodegeneration might be associated or driven by distinct mechanisms.
Fifth, due to the recent development of FTP, patients only had one follow up MRI after the baseline visit, and additional time points would enable a more precise characterization of atrophy trajectories.
Future studies will be needed to determine if the prognostic value of baseline tau-PET over longer follow-up.
Similarly, clinical decline was evaluated based on two time points only, and more data would be needed to improve signal to noise; the limited available time points, together with the heterogeneity of the cohort, might account for the lack of associations between baseline tau-PET and clinical decline.
Lastly, our patients underwent MRI scanning on 2 different Siemens 3T scanners, which might have added noise to the estimation of longitudinal atrophy.
However, further analyses showed that the present results were found independently of MRI scanning protocol (Figure
In summary, our study illustrates the potential of PET imaging to identify the pathological drivers of neurodegeneration in AD, and to help predict individual patients' future evolution.
These results outline the robust local relationships between accumulation of tau-containing paired helical filament and neurodegeneration, emphasizing tau as a relevant target for disease-modifying drugs at this early clinical stage
Additional studies will be needed to extend our approach to larger cohorts, notably considering additional disease stages, older age-of-onset, and longer follow up duration.

Materials & Methods

Experimental design
The main objective of this study was to test whether amyloid and tau-PET could predict future brain atrophy in patients at symptomatic stages of AD.
Data was derived from an ongoing longitudinal observational study including repeated MRI, PIB-PET and FTP-PET in patients with a clinical diagnosis of AD at the mild cognitive impairment or dementia stage.
No power analysis was performed prior to the study but the sample size is within the range of previous papers assessing relationships between tau-PET and brain volume in symptomatic patients
Data preprocessing steps were performed using automated pipeline agnostic of the baseline tau-and amyloid-PET data.
Quality control of the preprocessing steps was done blind to the baseline PET measures.
No outlier was detected and all data was included in all analyses and plotted on each figure.

Patients
All patients underwent a comprehensive clinical evaluation
We selected patients who i) had a clinical diagnosis of AD (at either the Mild Cognitive Impairment or dementia stage(62, 63)), ii) had undergone 3 Tesla structural MRI, FTP-PET and PIB-PET at their baseline visit, iii) had a positive PIB-PET (based on visual read (64)), and iv) had a follow up 3T MRI at least 9 months after the first visit.
By 12/01/2018, 36 patients fulfilled these criteria, but 4 were excluded because of movement artifacts on an MRI and/or failure of the longitudinal MRI pipeline.
The remaining 32 patients were included in the analyses.
Written informed consent was obtained from all patients or their surrogates.
The study was approved by the University of California (San Francisco and Berkeley) and Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory (LBNL) institutional review boards for human research.

Image acquisition
T1-weighted magnetization prepared rapid gradient echo (MPRAGE) MRI sequences were acquired at UCSF, either on a 3T Siemens Tim Trio or a 3T Siemens Prisma Fit scanner.
Both scanners had very similar acquisition parameters (sagittal slice orientation; slice thickness = 1.0 mm; slices per slab = 160; in-plane resolution = 1.0x1.0
mm; matrix = 240x256; repetition time = 2,300 ms; inversion time = 900 ms; flip angle = 9°), although echo time slightly differed (Trio: 2.98 ms; Prisma: 2.9 ms).
PET data were acquired on a Siemens Biograph PET/CT scanner at the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory (LBNL).
Both radiotracers were synthesized and radiolabeled at LBNL's Biomedical Isotope Facility.
In this paper, we analyzed PET data that was acquired from 50-70 min after the injection of ~15 mCi of PIB (four 5-min frames), and 80-100 min after the injection of ~10mCi of FTP (four 5-min frames).
A low-dose CT scan was performed for attenuation correction prior to PET acquisition, and PET data were reconstructed using an ordered subset expectation maximization algorithm with weighted attenuation and smoothed with a 4 mm Gaussian kernel with scatter correction (calculated image resolution 6.5 x 6.5 x 7.25 mm based on Hoffman phantom).

SUVR calculation
Each patient's baseline MRI was segmented using Freesurfer 5.3 (
PET frames were realigned, averaged and coregistered onto their corresponding MRI.
SUVR images were created using Freesurfer-defined cerebellar gray matter for PIB-PET.
For FTP, Freesurfer segmentaton was combined with the SUIT template (65) (which was reverse normalized to each patient individual space using SPM12) to only include inferior cerebellum voxels therefore avoiding contamination from off target binding in the dorsal cerebellum

Longitudinal pipeline and voxelwise analyses
For each patient, the baseline and follow up MRIs were processed using SPM12 pairwise longitudinal registration
In this original Jacobian map, negative values indicate contraction over time (e.g.
classically in the brain), whereas positive values indicate expansion (e.g. in the ventricles).
The Jacobian maps were reversed (i.e.
multiplied by -1) so higher values in the cortex indicate greater atrophy.
PIB and FTP-SUVR images were moved from baseline MRI space to the mid-point average MRI space using SPM12's deformation toolbox, to be aligned with the Jacobian rate map.
The mid-point average MRI was then segmented into gray matter, white matter and cerebrospinal fluid.
The tissue segments were used to derive a binary gray matter mask, that was later masked to exclude basal ganglia (because of FTP off-target binding
PET reference region) using the Hammers atlas
The reversed Jacobian rate map and the PET-SUVR images were finally smoothed within this mask using AFNI 3dBlurInMask command and applying differential kernels (4mm for PET, 8mm for Jacobians) so all three images had equivalent final smoothness (Figure
These images were used to calculate spatial correlations between patterns of atrophy (Jacobian values) and PET binding (Figure
PIB, FTP and Jacobian maps from all patients were warped to MNI space using the deformation parameters estimated during the mid-point average MRI segmentation step and averaged to create across patient averages for PIB SUVR, FTP SUVR and jacobians (Figure
Template warped jacobian maps were entered in a voxelwise one-sample t-test to detect areas of significant atrophy (reversed jacobians > 0) over time (Figure
All voxelwise results were presented using an uncorrected voxel threshold of p<.001 combined with a corrected cluster threshold of p FWE <0.05; voxels that reached more conservative voxel-level thresholds (p FWE <0.05 and p FWE <0.001) were also highlighted.

Freesurfer segmentation and ROI analyses
In order to quantify baseline cortical neurodegeneration (i.e. in a cross sectional design), we used the FreeSurfer segmentation outputs derived from the previous step (see "SUVR calculation" section above) and based on the first MRI.
The average thickness measure of each of the 68 cortical ROIs was extracted from each patient's FreeSurfer directory and converted into a Z-score based on the code and the data provided by Potvin et al
Briefly, patients' thickness values were converted into Z-scores denoting the deviation from their expected values, as calculated based on the patient's characteristics (age, sex, estimated total intracranial volume, scanner manufacturer, and magnetic field strength) and a normative multicentric sample of 2,713 healthy controls aged 18 to 94 years.
This approach was previously used to quantify cortical thickness in AD
To assess the correlation between the patterns of baseline GM and subsequent atrophy (i.e. are regions that shrink over time already abnormally small at baseline?), we extracted the average SPM12-generated jacobian values from each of the 68 Freesurfer ROIs for each patient.
Average FTP-PET SUVR values were extracted from all 68 ROIs using a partial volume correction (PVC) algorithm based on geometric transfer matrix technique (see
Linear mixed effect models were run including all ROIs from all patients (including random slopes and intercepts for both factors), with longitudinal atrophy (jacobian values) as the dependent variable, and baseline thickness Z-score and/or FTP-SUVR PVC as predictors.

Statistical analyses
All statistical analyses were conducted using Matlab 2015a (The MathWorks, Inc., www.mathworks.com/) and the Robust correlation toolbox (69) to calculate Pearson correlation estimates and percentile bootstrap CI (from which p values were derived).
Jamovi (www.jamovi.org) was used to conduct multiple regressions, ANOVAs, mediation analyses, and linear mixed effect models using dedicated modules.
Details about each specific analysis are provided with the description of the analyses in the result section or supplementary materials.
Imaging results were displayed on 3-dimensional brain surfaces using BrainNetViewer
Supplementary Datafile 1 contains most of the data used in the analyses presented in the article.
A. Group-average PET SUVR maps at baseline.
B. Voxelwise pattern of longitudinal cortical atrophy.
Left: average of 32 reversed GMmasked and smoothed reversed jacobian maps (higher value means higher rate of atrophy).
Right: statistical map corresponding to a voxelwise one-sample t-test including the 32 individual maps, showing areas of significant atrophy (reversed jacobians > 0) based on three increasingly conservative thresholds (p uncorrected < 0.001, Family-wise error (FWE) corrected p FWE < 0.05 and p FWE < 0.001 at the voxel level; all three with a p FWE < 0.05 at the cluster level).
All maps are available for visualization at
Details about the statistical analyses, including a multiple regression with all three baseline predictors are available in the result section and Table
The images used for illustration correspond to a patient with close-to-average values.
For each patient, correlations were assessed on all voxels of the cortex (see Figure
B. Group level analyses.
Resulting correlation coefficients were z-transformed to be analyzed at the group level.
Gray lines show individual patients while colored bars indicate average z-transformed coefficients (with 95% confidence intervals).
P value corresponds to two-tailed paired t-test.
The top panel shows the histogram of the difference between ztransformed spatial correlation coefficients between PIB and atrophy and FTP and atrophy across all 32 patients, highlighting that the latter was higher than the former in all 32 cases.
Mediation analysis showed that baseline cortical FTP-SUVR mediated the effect of age on longitudinal atrophy; see Figure
B. Voxelwise analyses showing the regional associations between increasing patient's age and lower FTP-SUVr or atrophy rates (see Figure



Figure 1 .
Figure 1.
Voxelwise patterns at the group level.



Figure 2 .
Figure 2. Bivariate associations between baseline measures and subsequent atrophy across the 32 patients.



Figure 3 .
Figure 3. Voxelwise spatial correlations between baseline PET patterns and the topography of subsequent atrophy.



Figure 4 .
Figure 4. Relative contribution of baseline partial volume corrected FTP-PET and baseline thickness patterns to predict the topography of subsequent atrophy using FreeSurfer-defined cortical regions of interest.
A. Group average values in the 68 FreeSurfer cortical regions of interest (ROI). .
The colorscale was adapted to the range of values of each modality to best illustrate regional variations.
SUVR PVC : Partial Volume-Corrected Standardized Uptake Value Ratio.
B. Spatial associations between patterns of baseline FTP-SUVR PVC , thickness, and longitudinal atrophy were conducted for each patient based on the 68 ROI, as illustrated in the left panel.
The spaghetti plots on the right illustrate the 32 regression lines obtained at the patient level for each pair of variables.
The statistical indices on top of each spaghetti plot are related indicate the results of linear mixed effect models (LMEMs) to predict reverse jacobians; separate models were run with each of the two baseline variables as a predictor.
A full model included both predictors together are described in the result section and in TableS2.



Figure 5 .
Figure 5. Association between baseline FTP-PET and cortical thickness at baseline and follow-up A. Association between baseline global cortical partial volume-corrected (PVC) FTP-SUVR values and cortical thickness at baseline (yellow) and follow-up (orange) across patients.
Cortical thickness measures were Z-scored based on normative data and reversed so higher values indicate more neurodegeneration.
95% confidence intervals are based on bootstrap with 5,000 permutations.
B. Spatial similarity between FTP-SUVR PVC and low cortical thickness at each time point was assessed at the single patient level using a correlation approach based on Freesurfer regions of interest (top panel).
Cortical thickness was extracted from 68 FreeSurfer cortical ROIs, transformed into a Z-score using normative data, and reversed to higher values indicate more neurodegeneration; FTP-SUVR PVC values were extracted from each ROIs.
Correlations were Fisher z-transformed to be analyzed at the group level (bottom panel).
Each gray line represents a single patient and color bars illustrate group averages with bootstrap 95% confidence intervals.
P value corresponds to a paired t-test, showing that patterns of baseline FTP binding are more similar to patterns of low cortical thickness at follow up than baseline.



Figure 6 .
Figure 6.
Effect of patient age on baseline tau pathology and subsequent atrophy.