Recent Advances in the Modeling of Alzheimer’s Disease
1 Knock-in of APP sequence (from intron 15 to intron 17) including a humanized Aβ region.
* 2 The mutation was introduced into the murine Psen1 gene by using Base Editor (BE) or Target-AID.
* 3 The mutation was introduced into the murine Psen1 gene by using VQR-BE.
* 4 Replaced the entire genomic sequence of the murine Mapt gene (from exon 1 to exon 14) with the human MAPT gene from the ATG codon of exon 1 to the 3 -UTR.
* 5 As of September 30, 2021.
Since 1995, more than 100 transgenic (Tg) mouse models of Alzheimer's disease (AD) have been generated in which mutant amyloid precursor protein (APP) or APP/presenilin 1 (PS1) cDNA is overexpressed (1st generation models).
Although many of these models successfully recapitulate major pathological hallmarks of the disease such as amyloid β peptide (Aβ) deposition and neuroinflammation, they have suffered from artificial phenotypes in the form of overproduced or mislocalized APP/PS1 and their functional fragments, as well as calpastatin deficiency-induced early lethality, calpain activation, neuronal cell death without tau pathology, endoplasmic reticulum stresses, and inflammasome involvement.
Such artifacts bring two important uncertainties into play, these being (1) why the artifacts arise, and (2) how they affect the interpretation of experimental results.
In addition, destruction of endogenous gene loci in some Tg lines by transgenes has been reported.
To overcome these concerns, single App knock-in mouse models harboring the Swedish and Beyreuther/Iberian mutations with or without the Arctic mutation (App NL-G-F and App NL-F mice) were developed (2nd generation models).
While these models are interesting given that they exhibit Aβ pathology, neuroinflammation, and cognitive impairment in an age-dependent manner, the model with the Artic mutation, which exhibits an extensive pathology as early as 6 months of age, is not suitable for investigating Aβ metabolism and clearance because the Aβ in this model is resistant to proteolytic degradation and is therefore prone to aggregation.
Moreover, it cannot be used for preclinical immunotherapy studies owing to the discrete affinity it shows for anti-Aβ antibodies.
The weakness of the latter model (without the Arctic mutation) is that the pathology may require up to 18 months before it becomes sufficiently apparent for experimental investigation.
Nevertheless, this model was successfully applied to modulating Aβ pathology by genome editing, to revealing the differential roles of neprilysin and insulin-degrading enzyme in Aβ metabolism, and to identifying somatostatin receptor subtypes involved in Aβ degradation by neprilysin.
In addition to discussing these issues, we also provide here a technical guide for the application of App knock-in mice to AD research.
Subsequently, a new double knock-in line carrying the App NL-F and Psen1 P117L/WT mutations was generated, the pathogenic effect of which was found to be synergistic.
A characteristic of this 3rd generation model is that it exhibits more cored plaque pathology and neuroinflammation than the App NL-G-F line, and thus is more suitable for preclinical studies of disease-modifying medications targeting Aβ.
Furthermore, a derivative App G-F line devoid of Swedish mutations which can be utilized for preclinical studies of β-secretase modifier(s) was recently created.
In addition, we introduce a new model of cerebral amyloid angiopathy that may be useful for analyzing amyloidrelated imaging abnormalities that can be caused by anti-Aβ immunotherapy.
Use of the App knock-in mice also led to identification of the α-endosulfine-K ATP channel pathway as components of the somatostatin-evoked physiological mechanisms that reduce Aβ deposition via the activation of neprilysin.
Such advances have provided new insights for the prevention and treatment of preclinical AD.
Because tau pathology plays an essential role in AD pathogenesis, knock-in mice with human tau wherein the entire murine Mapt gene has been humanized were generated.
Using these mice, the carboxyterminal PDZ ligand of neuronal nitric oxide synthase (CAPON) was discovered as a mediator linking tau pathology to neurodegeneration and showed that tau humanization promoted pathological tau propagation.
Finally, we describe and discuss the current status of mutant human tau knock-in mice and a non-human primate model of AD that we have successfully created.

1st, 2nd, AND 3rd GENERATION MOUSE MODELS OF ALZHEIMER'S DISEASE
The deposition of amyloid β peptide (Aβ) in the brain is the major pathological hallmark of Alzheimer's disease (AD), which is considered the most common type of dementia in the world
To date, disease-associated mutations in the presenilin 1 (PSEN1) and presenilin 2 (PSEN2) genes number more than 300, while more than 50 mutations have been reported in the amyloid precursor protein (APP) gene (Alzforum
In response to these findings, many transgenic mouse models overexpressing mutant APP or APP/PSEN1 cDNAs have been developed (1st generation models)
Neither of these fragments appears to accumulate in AD brains, meaning that artificial endosomal abnormalities
Other overexpression artifacts include calpain activation
Furthermore, it was demonstrated that the random insertion of transgene(s) resulted in the destruction of unexpectedly large regions of endogenous gene loci in the host animal
We suggest that all transgenic mouse models being used in research in which APP or APP/PSEN1 are overexpressed should undergo whole genome sequencing (WGS) so that destroyed loci that possibly affect their phenotypes can be identified
To overcome these drawbacks, single App knock-in mice, i.e., App NL-G-F/NLG-F knock-in (App NL-G-F ) and App NL-F/NL-F knock-in (App NL-F ) lines, were generated that harbor the Swedish (KM670/671NL)
These mice, which exhibit typical Aβ pathology, neuroinflammation and memory impairment FIGURE 1 | Mislocalization of APP in APP-overexpressing mice.
App KO mice, WT mice, APP23 (APP-overexpressing mice) and App KI mice (App NL-F/NL-F ) were subjected to immunohistochemistry using antibodies to APP, 22C11 (upper panels) and synaptophysin, a synaptic vesicle marker (lower panels) as indicated.
App KO mice were used as negative controls for APP staining.
While APP is selectively expressed in the axons of WT and KI mice, APP23 expresses unphysiologically high levels of APP not only in the axons but also in the soma and dendrites.
The scale bar indicates 2 mm.
At present, the App NL-G-F line is being used more frequently than the App NL-F line given that it develops Aβ pathology approximately three times faster
Human Arctic mutation carriers are indistinguishable from other familial and sporadic AD patients in pathological and neurological terms except for low retention of 11 C-labeled Pittsburgh compound B (PiB) in PET study
In addition to App NL-F and App NL-G-F models, App knock-in mice devoid of the Swedish mutations (App G-F mice) have been recently developed, in which the Swedish mutations (NL) were replaced by a wild-type sequence (KM) (Figure
The App G-F mice are more suitable for preclinical studies of βsecretase inhibition given that the Swedish mutation affects the reactivity of APP to β-site amyloid precursor protein cleaving enzyme 1 (BACE1) and most AD patients do not carry Swedish mutations
Despite the advantages mentioned above, the App NL-G-F line is not suitable for investigating the metabolism, clearance or deposition of Aβ because the Arctic mutation present in the middle of the Aβ sequence results in an Aβ that is resistant to proteolytic degradation
Moreover, this model is not suitable for use in preclinical immunotherapy studies due to its affinity for anti-Aβ antibodies, even in the presence of guanidine hydrochloride (GuHCl)
The Arctic mutation may also directly or indirectly interfere with interactions between Aβ deposition and the apolipoprotein E genotype
In contrast, the App NL-F line accumulates wild-type human Aβ, but it may take up to 18 months for the pathology to become sufficiently evident for investigational studies to be carried out
Therefore, a new mouse model that accumulates wild-type human Aβ as quickly as the App NL-G-F model, but did not depend on the presence of the Arctic mutation was desired.
To achieve this, the heterozygous Psen1 P117L/WT mutant line (Psen1 P117L ) which, of the several Psen1 mutants, exhibits the largest increase in Aβ 42 /Aβ 40 ratio in the brain
The Psen1 P117L line was generated by base editing technology
The App NL-F mice were crossed with Psen1 P117L mice, despite it being unclear whether their pathogenic effects, both of which act on the γ-cleavage of CTF-β, would be additive or not in vivo (Figure
The pathological phenotypes of App NL-F mice were markedly enhanced in a synergistic manner with the Psen1 P117L mutation
These double mutant mice (3rd generation model) will likely become highly relevant tools for examining the pathologic mechanisms upstream of Aβ deposition.
Moreover, these mice can be highly useful for the preclinical screening of disease-modifying therapy candidates promoting Aβ degradation or disaggregation, without the added concern associated with artificial effects caused by the Arctic mutation.
We expect the double homozygous line, App NL-F X Psen1 P117L/P117L , to exhibit an even more-aggressive pathology.
In any case, the App NL-F X Psen1 P117L mice are superior to the App NL-G-F mice or the App NL-G-I mice
The App NL-G-I mice are similarly designed as the App NL-G-F mice, in which the Beyreuther/Iberian mutation was replaced by the Austrian mutation
The characteristics of the App knock-in mouse lines are listed in Table

PRECAUTIONS REGARDING THE UTILITY OF App KNOCK-IN MICE
There are several precautions to be aware of to make the best use of the App knock-in mice.

Nomenclature
A number of the App knock-in mouse users use incorrect nomenclature such as APP-NLF, APP NLF and APP NL-F instead of the App NL-F mice, which accords with international rules of standard genomic nomenclature.
Genetic names always need to be italicized.

Line-Ups and Biochemical Analyses
Approximately 20 lines of mutant mice, published or unpublished, can currently or in the very near future be (1) Behavioral analysis using IntelliCage
(2) Three-dimensional visualization of amyloid pathology by transparency
(3) Impairment of gamma oscillations in medial entorhinal cortex
(4) Additional genetic manipulation of the 2nd generation models through genome editing
(5) Generation of the double knock-in mouse models
(
(7) Assessment of sleep dysfunction in the 2nd generation models
(
(
(10) Application of spatial transcriptomics
provided to academic and not-for-profit researchers for non-commercial research in a timely fashion with minimum restrictions (Table
It is also recommended that scientists use optimized protocols for isolating Aβ from animal brain as previously described
The method allows the most sensitive quantification of both soluble and insoluble Aβ with the smallest protocol deviations.
Maintaining Mouse Lines on a Clean C57BL6/J Background
In most cases, the knock-in mice are used in a homozygous state to accelerate the generation of pathological and behavioral phenotypes.
However, the number of recessive mutations increases over time if the breeding of mice is maintained in this way.
It is necessary therefore to back-cross heterozygous mutant mice with the wild-type C57B6/J mice to remove these extraneous mutations, preferentially for 5-10 generations at an interval of 5-10 generations.
Those groups dealing with poor reproductive output of mice due to their extremely inbred nature can contact RIKEN BioResource Research Center (email: animal.brc@riken.jp), a national mouse repository of Japan

Choosing Appropriate Anti-Aβ Antibodies
It was previously indicated that some anti-Aβ antibodies are inappropriate for biochemically and pathologically detecting the Arctic Aβ produced by App NL-G-F mice
Note that the App NL-G-F is the most frequently used model because it recapitulates Aβ pathology and neuroinflammation much faster than other lines.
This applies to all other transgenic and knock-in mice that carry intra-Aβ mutations, including the Arctic and Dutch mutations
In contrast, there is no restriction regarding use of antibodies for the App NL-F X Psen1 P117L mice.

Preclinical Nature of Behaviors
In our experience, the most sensitive and reproducible test involves contextual fear conditioning, although its irreversible nature can be problematic.
In a more complex sense, the application of a multi-task paradigm such as IntelliCage (NewBehavior AG, Zurich, Switzerland) would be more informative
We recently showed that the mouse genotypes can be predicted from their behavioral parameters by machine learning
It should be emphasized that the App knock-in  mice are models of preclinical AD because the App knockin mice, like all the APP and APP/PS1 transgenic mice, do not recapitulate tau pathology alone
Consistently, we observe only mild cognitive decline in these mice.
In contrast, the App knock-in mice crossbred with mutant MAPT knock-in mice exhibited accelerated tau pathology (Table

A NEW MODEL OF CEREBRAL AMYLOID ANGIOPATHY
Most AD patients exhibit parenchymal and vascular Aβ deposition in the brains, and both pathologies seem to be driven by impaired Aβ clearance within the interstitial fluid and perivascular drainage pathways
Importantly, in AD model mice, glymphatic CSF influx is reduced and the clearance of Aβ is severely impaired
Impaired glymphatic pathway may contribute to the deposition of Aβ in the blood vessels of the brain, cerebral amyloid angiopathy (CAA).
Although CAA is profoundly observed in most AD patients
Notably, human vascular endothelial cells express significant level of APP770 and human plasma contains ∼100 ng/ml of sAPP770
Since peripheral blood cells other than platelet do not express APP, and platelets release sAPP770 upon their activation
Because in rodents plasma sAPP is a markedly lower (∼100 pg/ml) than that of humans
To overcome this, a mouse line that specifically expresses human APP770 in endothelial cells has just been generated (unpublished).
In brief, floxed hAPP770NL mice under the CMV early enhancer/chicken β-actin promoter were first generated.
These mice were then crossed with Tie2-Cre mice, in which the Tie2 promoter directs the expression of Cre recombinase in the endothelial cells to obtain double transgenic (Tg) mice.
App knock-in mouse models were previously produced by
These mice carry the Swedish (K670N/M671L), Dutch (E693Q), and London (V717I) mutations with the humanized Aβ sequence.
The Dutch mutation results in an intensive CAA pathology in humans, thereby causing brain hemorrhage and early mortality
This mutation is therefore not specifically responsible for causing FAD.
These mice did not develop prominent Aβ deposits over their lifespan, but when they were crossbred with Psen1 M 146V knock-in mice, an age-dependent deposition of Aβ was seen in the resultant double knock-in mice.
The deposition of Aβ was detected not only in the parenchyma of the cerebral cortex but also in the cerebral vasculature, similar to that seen in CAA in humans.
Double knock-in mice that did not have the Dutch mutation exhibited virtually no vascular pathology.
In this way, if the authors had used the Beyreuther/Iberian or Austrian mutation instead of the London mutation in the mouse App gene then they probably would not have had to introduce the Psen1 knock-in mice.
Knock-in mice harboring the Dutch mutation can still serve as relevant models for CAA; however they may not be appropriate for examining the effect of immunotherapy on CAA because the Dutch mutation is present in the middle of the Aβ sequence.

NEPRILYSIN-SENSITIVE AMYLOIDOGENIC Aβ AS A PROBABLE CAUSE FOR SPORADIC ALZHEIMER'S DISEASE
NEP and insulin-degrading enzyme (IDE) are considered the two major catabolic enzymes that degrade Aβ
NEP is capable of degrading both soluble and insoluble Aβ (F) Immunohistochemistry using various anti-Aβ antibodies.
Brain sections derived from App NL-F mice (24 months old) were immunostained using antibodies with different epitopes after antigen retrieval as indicated (upper panels); those of App NL-G-F mice (9 months old) were similarly immunostained (lower panels).
Scale bars represent 500 µm.
Unfortunately, their roles in Aβ metabolism in vivo have never been compared in an impartial and side-by-side manner.
Once double mutants crossbred single App knock-in mice with NEP (Mme) KO mice and with IDE (Ide) KO mice were analyzed in detail for their biochemical properties and Aβ pathology properties, it would be clear their distinct roles in APP metabolism and the AD pathogenesis.
Further to the above, a deficiency of NEP had no significant impact on the levels of various neuropeptides
This argues against the concern that NEP up-regulation for the treatment of preclinical AD would reduce the levels of these neuropeptides.
These findings also indicate that NEP relatively selectively degrades Aβ in the brain.
Whereas familial AD (FAD) is unambiguously caused by an increased anabolism of Aβ, and of Aβ 42 and Aβ 43 in particular
These observations suggest that NEPsensitive amyloidogenic Aβ likely plays a primary pathogenic role in the etiology of SAD.
Our findings are consistent with the agingdependent decline of NEP expression in the human brain and with recent genome-wide association studies (GWAS) indicating that variants of the gene encoding NEP (MME) are associated with the risk of SAD development
Taken together, our results imply that the aging-associated decrease in NEP expression is a primary cause of SAD and could thus be a target for the treatment of preclinical AD once other factors such as apolipoprotein E genotypes have also been considered.

REGULATION OF Aβ METABOLISM VIA SOMATOSTATIN RECEPTOR SUBTYPES THROUGH MODULATION OF NEP ACTIVITY
Since NEP is a major Aβ-degrading enzyme and it is downregulated upon aging, its decreased levels in the brain will most likely lead to increased Aβ levels
NEP is regulated by the neuropeptide somatostatin
Somatostatin, which binds to somatostatin receptors, is also decreased upon aging and in AD possibly due to loss of somatostatin-positive interneurons
Somatostatin, which was first identified to regulate secretion of growth hormone from pituitary, has been traditionally abbreviated as SRIF (somatotropin releaseinhibiting factor)
SST 1 , SST 2 , SST 3 , SST 4 , and SST 5 are used to express somatostatin receptor subtypes 1-5.
Interestingly, mutations in SRIF are linked to AD
By using a combination of in vitro and in vivo approaches to identify the subtype specificity of the five SSTs expressed in the brain and considered to be involved in the regulation of NEP.
We would like to emphasize that it is necessary to use a co-culture system of primary neurons from the cortex, hippocampus, and striatum for in vitro experiments
Using a battery of Sst double knockout (dKO) mice, we found that NEP is regulated by SST 1 and SST 4 in a redundant manner.
Sst 1 and Sst 4 dKO mice exhibit a specific decrease of presynaptic NEP in the Lacunosum molecular layer.
Moreover, a genetic deficiency of Sst 1 and Sst 4 in the App knock-in mice aggravated the Aβ pathology in the hippocampus.
As a first proof of concept towards an Aβ-lowering strategy involving NEP, a treatment with an agonist selective for SST 1 and SST 4 could ameliorates the Aβ pathology and improves cognitive outcomes in the App knockin AD mouse model as schematized in Figure 8
These results indicate that a combination of SST 1 and SST 4 homodimers or the SST 1 and SST 4 heterodimer may become a target for pharmaceutical intervention to treat preclinical AD.
Of note, the expression of SRIF in human brain declines with aging and in AD

SRIF-EVOKED Aβ CATABOLISM IN THE BRAIN: MECHANISTIC INVOLVEMENT OF THE α-ENDOSULFINE-K ATP CHANNEL PATHWAY
Although SRIF is known to regulate Aβ catabolism by enhancing NEP-catalyzed proteolytic degradation, the mechanism by which SRIF actually regulates NEP activity is yet to be fully FIGURE 8 | Somatostatin receptor subtypes 1 and 4 (SST 1/4 ) regulate the Aβ-degrading enzyme NEP.
The neuropeptide somatostatin (SRIF) was identified as a regulator of NEP activity through in vitro screening.
Subsequent analysis of the effect of genetic deletion of somatostatin receptor (SST) subtypes in mice revealed that SST 1 and SST 4 regulate NEP in a redundant manner.
This was further confirmed by concurrently deleting SST 1 and SST 4 in App KI mice, which aggravated the Aβ pathology.
SST 1/4 can be either a combination of SST 1 and SST 4 homodimers or an SST 1 /SST 4 heterodimer.
elucidated.
Proteomic analyses enabled α-endosulfine (ENSA), an endogenous ligand of the ATP-sensitive potassium (K ATP ) channel, to be identified as a negative regulator of NEP downstream of SRIF signaling
The expression of ENSA is significantly increased in AD mouse models and in patients with AD.
In addition, NEP directly contributes to the degradation of ENSA, suggesting a substratedependent feedback loop regulating NEP activity.
It was also discovered the specific K ATP channel subtype [sulfonylurea receptor subunit 1 (SUR1) and inwardly rectifying K + channel 6.2 (Kir6.2)]
that modulates NEP activity, resulting in altered Aβ levels in the brain.
Pharmacological intervention targeting this particular K ATP channel by diazoxide attenuated Aβ deposition, with impaired memory function rescued via the NEP activation in our AD mouse model.
These findings provide a mechanism explaining the molecular link between K ATP channels and NEP activation.
They also provide new insights into how ENSA and the K ATP channel could profile as a new therapeutic target for lowering Aβ and thus provide an alternative strategy to prevent AD. Figure

HUMANIZATION OF THE ENTIRE MURINE Mapt GENE TO GENERATE hMAPT KNOCK-IN MICE
To date, most if not all, mouse models of tauopathy have been unable to recapitulate the tau pathology without overexpressing mutant human tau protein.
As a novel in vivo platform for studying human tauopathy, human MAPT knock-in mice have been developed in which the entire Mapt gene including all exons and introns are humanized
In each strain, the MAPT and Mapt genes encoded human and murine tau proteins, respectively.
This was done by crossing MAPT knock-in mice with single App knock-in mice in order to study the role of the Aβ-tau axis in the etiology of AD.
The double knock-in mice exhibited a more pronounced tau phosphorylation status than single MAPT knock-in mice but lacked evidence of tau pathology and neurodegeneration (in a manner similar to that of single App knock-in mice) even after waiting until the mice were 24 months old.
In both the absence and presence of Aβ amyloidosis, the tau humanization has been found to significantly accelerate the propagation of AD brain-derived pathological tau (Figure
Tau accumulation was intensified in the latter case and closely associated with dystrophic neurites, consistently showing that Aβ amyloidosis affects tau pathology.
These results indicated that pathological human tau interacted better with human tau than with murine tau, and suggest the presence of a species-defined preference between the pathogenic proteins.
The MAPT knock-in mice also facilitate the investigation of behavioral properties and of human tau characteristics in living animal models.
In addition, mutant MAPT knockin mice carrying various pathogenic mutations have been generated (Table
These mice exhibit aging-dependent tau aggregation and cognitive impairment in a manner accelerated by Aβ pathology and are being provided to the research community upon request.

THE ROLE OF CAPON IN TAU PATHOLOGY-MEDIATED TOXICITY
Pathological tau causes synaptic dysfunction and loss of synapses.
One of promising molecules that mediates tau pathology-induced neurotoxicity is N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor (NMDAR).
For example, tau accumulation disturbs synaptic plasticity through JAK2/STAT1-mediated suppression of NMDAR
Phosphorylation of tau at Tyr18, which is mediated by the tyrosine kinase Fyn, enhances NMDAR-dependent excitotoxicity
Several reports indicated that glutamateinduced excitotoxicity was prevented by downmodulation of tau FIGURE 10 | Propagation of AD-tau in mouse brains.
Propagation of tau in each mouse line was observed 3 months after AD-tau injection.
Brain sections were immunostained with AT8 (red).
Humanization of the host animal tau affects the transmission of the pathogenic agents.
App NL-G-F /MAPT dKI mice exhibited greater pathological propagation than App NL-G-F KI mice.
We also previously identified a NMDAR-related molecule as a tau binding protein which is involved in tau pathology-induced neurodegeneration.
To elucidate key molecules underlying tau accumulationinduced neurodegeneration, a comprehensive screening of tauinteracting proteins (tau interactome) was constructed.
Taubinding proteins were isolated by immunoprecipitation-LC-MS/MS (IP-MS) using a Flag-tag antibody and wild-type tau Tg (wtau-Tg) mice, which is expressing human tau tagged with a flag epitope
Considering that tau is a microtubule-binding protein, we validated the methods used to generate the tau interactome by identifying the tubulin beta-4A chain as one of the tau-binding proteins.
Of the many proteins identified in the tau interactome, we focused on carboxy-terminal PDZ ligand of neuronal nitric oxide synthase (CAPON)
CAPON acts as an enzyme for the production of nitric oxide (NO) and is involved in NMDAR-mediated excitotoxicity
It is thought to recruit substrates to nNOS and facilitate their NO-mediated modification through protein-protein interactions
The presence of CAPON polymorphisms associated with schizophrenia and other psychiatric disorders has been reported in several studies
Moreover, CAPON was shown to positively regulate spine density
These findings suggest that CAPON contributes to neurotransmission and neuronal excitotoxicity.
In addition, one report showed that CAPON is upregulated in CA1 pyramidal cells in the AD brain
The mechanism(s) underlying these effects nevertheless remain(s) unknown.
To further elucidate the effects of CAPON on AD pathology, we introduced CAPON cDNA into the brains of App NL-G-F and App NL-G-F X MAPT (hTau) double-KI mice using a newly developed adeno-associated virus (AAV)-mediated approach.
We analyzed the effects of human tau protein as it is known that the hTau-KI mouse expresses an endogenous level of WT human tau.
These experiments revealed that CAPON expression facilitates hippocampal atrophy in conjunction with neuronal cell death, and that a deficiency of CAPON in the P301S-Tau-Tg tauopathy mouse model suppressed tau pathology and neurodegeneration (Figure
From our results, an intervention in the interaction between CAPON-tau or CAPON-nNOS could be a new approach for the treatment of AD.

GENERATION OF NON-HUMAN PRIMATE MODELS OF FAMILIAL ALZHEIMER'S DISEASE
Common marmosets (marmosets, Callithrix jacchus) are small non-human primates that belong to the New World Primates (Figure
They have been increasingly utilized in neuroscience because of advantages that were observed over other research primates
Marmosets possess physiological functions, brain structures and complex cognitive/social behaviors similar to those of humans; they communicate mainly via visual and auditory measures.
In association with AD research, the amino acid sequence of Aβ in marmosets is identical to that of humans, with aged wild-type marmosets starting to accumulate Aβ from 7 years of age or even earlier
In addition, adolescent marmosets exhibit tau hyperphosphorylation, but not neurofibrillary tangle formation, in the brain that increases with aging
Their life spans in captivity are as long as 10-15 years, making them suitable for age-related research
Their immune systems and metabolic functions resemble those of humans (t
Because sleep disorder is an early clinical symptom of AD
Among various non-human primate species, the marmoset seems most applicable to genetic manipulation, i.e., generation of designed mutants, for which their high reproductive efficacy is advantageous
Furthermore, fecundity characteristics of marmosets, such as a short period of sexual maturity, multiple births, and short gestation interval, are suitable for producing genetically modified disease models
Majority of FAD-causing mutations reside in the PSEN1 gene (Scearce-Levie et al., 2020).
Typically, deletion mutations in exon 9
The point mutations instigate exon 9 elimination and S290C modification in the corresponding mRNA at the junction sites of exons 8 and 10 via the conversion of alternative splicing
Thus, generation of a marmoset model of AD is set out in which exon 9 of the PSEN1 gene product is deleted using gene-editing technologies to produce AD marmoset models.
Since TALEN exhibited high genome-editing efficacy, generates few off-target effects, and produces little mosaicism, the TALEN would be a suitable tool for producing exon 9 deletion in the PSEN1 gene
Although it is a non-peer review data, the exon 9 deletion in the PSEN1 gene that is an AD causing mutation has been successfully introduced into non-human primates by TALEN



FIGURE 2 |
FIGURE 2 | Second generation mouse models of Alzheimer's disease.
See text for detailed explanation.



FIGURE 3 |
FIGURE 3 | App G-F mice suitable for studies of BACE1 inhibitors.
The App G-F line is devoid of the Swedish mutation that influences the β-secretase activity and elevates the quantity of CTFβ.
(The App G-F line instead carries a wild-type sequence: KM.)
The App G-F model would be appropriate for use in preclinical studies of β-secretase inhibitors without the interference of the Swedish mutation.



FIGURE 4 |
FIGURE 4 | Scheme of App NL-F× Psen1 P 117L double-mutant mice.
For the generation of the double-mutant mice, the App NL-F line was crossbred with the Psen1 P 117L line whose mutation was introduced in the endogenous Psen1 gene utilizing base editing technology.
The synergistic effects of the pathogenic mutations in the App and Psen1 genes strongly accelerates the deposition of wild-type human Aβ in mouse brains.



FIGURE 5 |
FIGURE 5 | AD pathology in the hippocampus of a 3rd generation model mouse.
A 12-month-old App NL-F X Psen1 P 117L/WT mouse was analyzed by immunohistochemistry. Blue: Aβ plaques; red: microglia; green: astrocytes.
The bar indicates 25 µm.



FIGURE 6 |
FIGURE 6 | Outlined protocols for extraction and quantification of Aβ from tissues.
See text for detailed explanation.



FIGURE 9 |
FIGURE 9 | Role of ENSA in the regulation of NEP activity.
Schematic illustration of the mechanism describing NEP activity in the brain.
ENSA, a downstream protein of SST-SST 1/4 signaling, plays a role as a ligand of the K ATP channel composed of sulfonylurea receptor subunit 1 (SUR1) and inwardly rectifying K + channel 6.2 (Kir6.2),
resulting in the activation of NEP.
SST 1/4 can be either a combination of SST 1 and SST 4 homodimers or an SST 1 /SST 4 heterodimer.



FIGURE 11 |
FIGURE 11 | Functions of CAPON in neurodegeneration.
(A) Brain sections from WT, P301S-Tau-Tg or nos1ap-/-/P301S-Tau-Tg mice stained by the conventional method using hematoxylin and eosin (H&E).
A CAPON (Nos1ap) deficiency restores AD-related pathological phenotypes in P301S-Tau-Tg mice.
(B) Scheme of CAPON action.
Aβ pathology elevates the level and localization of CAPON in hippocampal pyramidal cells.
CAPON-induced neuronal cell death is closely associated with the pathological tau protein, although there appears to be a tau-independent mechanism in play as well.



FIGURE 12 |
FIGURE 12 | Photograph of common marmosets (Callithrix jacchus).
The photo shows members of captive common marmoset family.
Their small body size, fecundity, and high cognitive functions are a suitable model for neuroscience.
The photograph of marmosets was taken by WK at CIEA.



TABLE 2 |
List of mutant mice that are and will be made available to the research community.



TABLE 3 |
Characteristics of the App knock-in mouse lines.