Regional multimodal relationships between tau, hypometabolism, atrophy, and fractional anisotropy in atypical Alzheimer's disease
Alzheimer's disease (AD) can present with atypical clinical forms where the prominent domain of deficit is not memory, that is, atypical AD.
Atypical AD patients show cortical atrophy on MRI, hypometabolism on [ 18 F]fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) PET, tau uptake on [ 18 F]AV-1451 PET, and white matter tract degeneration on diffusion tensor imaging (DTI).
How these disease processes relate to each other locally and distantly remains unclear.
We aimed to examine multimodal neuroimaging relationships in individuals with atypical AD, using univariate and multivariate techniques at region-and voxel-level.
Forty atypical AD patients underwent MRI, FDG-PET, tau-PET, beta-amyloid PET, and DTI.
Patients were all beta-amyloid positive.
Partial Pearson's correlations were performed between tau and FDG standardized uptake value ratios, gray matter MRI-volumes and white matter tract fractional anisotropy.
Sparse canonical correlation analysis was applied to identify multivariate relationships between the same quantities.
Voxel-level associations across modalities were also assessed.
Tau showed strong local negative correlations with FDG metabolism in the occipital and frontal lobes.
Tau in frontal and parietal regions was negatively associated with temporoparietal gray matter MRI-volume.
Fractional anisotropy in a set of posterior white matter tracts, including the splenium of the corpus callosum, cingulum, and posterior thalamic radiation, was negatively correlated with parietal and occipital tau, atrophy and, predominantly, with hypometabolism.
These results support the view that tau is the driving force behind neurodegeneration in atypical AD, and that a breakdown in structural connectivity is related to cortical neurodegeneration, particularly hypometabolism.
compared with typical AD
Different pathophysiological aspects of atypical AD can be captured by different neuroimaging modalities, such as gray matter atrophy with structural magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), tau protein deposition with [ 18 F]AV-1451 positron emission tomography (PET), Aβ protein deposition with [ 11 C]Pittsburgh compound B (PiB) PET, hypometabolism with [ 18 F]fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) PET, and white matter tract degeneration with diffusion tensor imaging (DTI).
Multimodal neuroimaging analyses, combining measurements from MRI, PET, and DTI, allow for an in vivo investigation of the relationships between atrophy, protein deposition, glucose hypometabolism, and white matter disruption at the regional-and voxel-level.
This knowledge is essential to understand the causes of neurodegeneration and inform new treatments tailored to address the pathophysiology of the disease.
Studies have suggested that the regional pattern of Aβ deposition is consistent across clinical phenotypes of AD and is not related to neurodegeneration
Additionally, it has been observed that AD pathological proteins may spread along functional brain networks, with strongly connected regions displaying a higher tau burden
The majority of these studies have assessed the spectrum of AD clinical presentations, including both typical and atypical variants.
However, it has become increasingly clear that pathophysiological relationships in atypical AD likely differ from typical AD, with other comorbidities and pathologies contributing to the clinical phenotype in late-onset typical AD.
We have previously demonstrated that the topographic relationship between tau uptake on [ 18 F]AV-1451 PET and both atrophy and hypometabolism is stronger in younger AD patients and in patients with atypical clinical presentations
However, little is known about regional relationships between the different pathophysiological aspects of the disease in atypical AD.
Furthermore, white matter tract degeneration has been observed in atypical AD
Understanding these relationships may help shed light on the underlying mechanisms of white matter damage in atypical AD.
Correlation maps offer an easily interpretable way to observe how one disease process relates to another, both locally and distantly.
However, univariate analysis methods present some limitations, such as the considerable number of multiple comparisons necessary to directly assess such correlations and the high computational cost
Multivariate methods can be implemented to overcome such limitations in high dimensional datasets.
Sparse canonical correlation analysis (SCCA) is an unsupervised multivariate method that estimates the linear relationship between two set of variables by projecting them onto dimensions where they are maximally correlated to each other
In the projection onto the canonical dimensions, each variable is assigned a coefficient called canonical weight.
Unlike the classic canonical correlation analysis
SCCA has been implemented in neuroimaging to compute spatially disjoint multivariate associations
In addition to combining univariate and multivariate techniques, combining regions-of-interest (ROI)-and voxel-level analyses offers a wider perspective for characterizing the associations between multimodal neuroimaging biomarkers
We aimed to describe cross-sectional regional relationships between tau-PET uptake, gray matter atrophy, glucose hypometabolism, and white matter tract degeneration (measured using fractional anisotropy
We hypothesized that tau would be the driving factor for local measures of neurodegeneration, that is, hypometabolism and atrophy, and therefore we expected strong local associations among these quantities.
In addition, we expected to highlight associations between degeneration of white matter tracts that are connected to the regions of the brain most involved in the disease.
We did not investigate spatial relationships involving Aβ-PET uptake, since the population of patients we analyzed was at an advanced stage of the disease and therefore the already widespread amyloid was unlikely to reveal spatial association with the other imaging modalities.
Indeed, other studies already highlighted the absence of regional associations between Aβ deposition and neurodegeneration

| METHODS

| Participants
Patients were recruited from the Mayo Clinic Department of Neurology into an NIH-funded study assessing atypical AD (PI Whitwell).
We recruited patients meeting clinical criteria for posterior cortical atrophy (PCA)
All patients underwent structural MRI, DTI, tau-PET, and Aβ-PET.
We selected patients (n = 40) with Aβ deposition on Aβ-PET (n = 20 diagnosed with PCA, n = 20 diagnosed with lvPPA).
Among these patients, 31 also underwent FDG-PET.
All patients underwent a comprehensive neurological evaluation by a Behavioral Neurologist (KAJ or JGR), details of which can be found in a previous study
The demographic and clinical features of the cohort are shown in Table
The study was approved by the Mayo Clinic IRB, and all patients consented to participate in this study.

| Image acquisition
All PET scans were acquired using a PET/CT scanner (GE Healthcare, Milwaukee, Wisconsin) operating in 3D mode.
For tau-PET, an intravenous bolus injection of approximately 370 MBq (range 333-407 MBq) of [ 18 F]AV-1451 was administered, followed by a 20 min PET acquisition performed 80 min after injection.
For Aβ-PET, participants were injected with PiB of approximately 628 MBq (range, 385-723 MBq) and, after a 40-60 min uptake period, a 20 min PiB scan was obtained.
Both PiB and [ 18 F]AV-1451 scans consisted of four 5-min dynamic frames following a low dose CT transmission scan.
Tau-PET and Aβ-PET were performed on the same day for all the patients except one, for whom Aβ-PET was performed 21 days after tau-PET.
For FDG-PET, patients were injected with [ 18 F]FDG of approximately 459 MBq (range 367-576 MBq) and, after a 30-min uptake period, an 8-min FDG-PET scan was acquired consisting of four 2-min dynamic frames following a low dose CT transmission scan.
Standard corrections were applied.
Emission data were reconstructed into a 256 × 256 matrix with a 30-cm FOV (pixel size = 1.0 mm, slice thickness = 1.96 mm).
All patients had the FDG-PET scan performed within 1 day from the Aβ and tau-PET scans, except for 10 patients who had the FDG-PET scan within 3.6 months, on average, from the Aβ-PET scan (range: 7 days to 9 months).
All participants underwent a 3 T head MRI protocol performed on the same day as the tau-PET scan, except one participant who had the MRI 2 months after the tau-PET.
The MRI protocol included (1) a magnetization prepared rapid gradient echo (MPRAGE) sequence TR/TE/TI, 2,300/3/900 ms; flip angle 8 , 26-cm field of view (FOV); 256 × 256 in-plane matrix with a phase FOV of 0.94, and slice thickness of 1.2 mm

| Image processing
All PET images were registered to the patients' MPRAGE using 6 degrees-of-freedom rigid body registration.
Normalization parameters were computed between each MPRAGE and the Mayo Clinic Adult Lifespan Template (MCALT) (
With these parameters, the MCALT atlas was propagated to the native MPRAGE space and used to calculate regional PET values in the gray and white matter.
Tissue probabilities were determined by segmenting each MPRAGE using Unified Segmentation
Median PET values in each ROI were divided by median uptake in cerebellar crus gray matter (for tau-PET and Aβ-PET) or pons (for FDG-PET) to create standard uptake value ratios (SUVR).
Gray matter MRI-volumes were also summed from the SPM12 segmentations for each MCALT atlas ROI.
PET images were not partial volume corrected; however the adopted approach of masking atlas regions based on the segmentation avoids outlying voxels that are mostly nontissue, and thus reduces the effects of partial volume.
Ninety-two ROIs in the frontal, sensorimotor, temporal, parietal, and occipital lobes and subcortical regions were selected for the statistical analyses.
The complete list of these ROIs can be found in Table
A global Aβ-SUVR was generated for each patient in the study and a cut-point of 1.42 was used to establish Aβ positivity
PET and MR images of each subject were subsequently spatially normalized to the MCALT template and blurred with a 6 and 8 mm full width at half maximum kernel, respectively, for the voxel-based analyses.
The DTI-FA images were processed as described in a previous study
Briefly, DTI-FA images were normalized to a study-specific template using ANTs tools
ROI values were computed using the Johns Hopkins University (JHU) single-subject "Eve" DTI Atlas
The median DTI-FA scalar values within 49 left and right white matter tract ROIs were measured.
each map), multiple comparisons correction was necessary to assess their significance.
A permutation approach was implemented as described in
Briefly, we randomly permuted 1,000 times one of the two input datasets so that, for several pairs, the data did not come from the same subject.
We then recomputed all the correlations for all the permuted datasets and calculated a corrected p-value as the ratio between the number of times the correlation coefficient obtained using the permuted datasets was higher than the one obtained using the original datasets and the number of permutations computed.
If the corrected p-value was greater than .05, the correlation was not considered significant.
The permutation approach is less strict than the classic Bonferroni method.
However, it was appropriate because the Bonferroni's assumption of independence between statistical tests does not hold true for correlations between ROIs that are spatially close to each other.
The statistical analyses were performed in Matlab2018a (The Mathworks, Inc., Natick, MA).

| Multivariate ROI analysis
SCCA was applied using the penalized multivariate analysis (PMA)
R package
In each analysis, a lasso penalty of 0.3 for PET and MRI data and 0.4 for DTI data was assigned to achieve the desired level of sparsity
The same permutation approach that was used for the univariate analyses was applied to assess the significance of the canonical dimensions
To display the results, we color-coded the MCALT atlas, assigning a color to the voxels inside the ROIs that were associated to a nonzero canonical weight.
patients showed an increased uptake of tau-PET tracer in the parietal regions (Figure
Additionally, the tau signal was more elevated in the occipital regions for PCA patients and more prominent on the left side for lvPPA patients (Figure
Similar patterns were observed for gray matter loss (Figure
Both patient groups showed decreased FA in the posterior regions of the brain (Figure

| Voxel-level multimodal analysis

| Multimodal analyses
In the following sections, we present the results from the multimodal analyses conducted on the whole cohort of patients.
Only partial
Pearson's correlations that survived the permutation test are shown  in the maps and discussed in the text.
Similarly, only canonical dimensions that were significant after the permutation test are discussed and their canonical weights are reported in Tables
The VoxelStats maps are reported after the RFT correction for multiple comparisons.
Partial Pearson's correlation maps and significant SCCA canonical dimensions are reported separately for the PCA and lvPPA groups in Supporting Information (Supporting Information Figures S1-S4, Supporting Information Tables

| Tau multimodal relationships
Tau-SUVR showed strong negative regional relationships with both FDG-SUVR and MRI-volume (i.e., increased tau was associated with decreased metabolism and volume) (Figure
The strongest associations between tau deposition and FDG metabolism were observed between increased tau in the occipital lobes and decreased metabolism in the parietal and occipital lobes, and between increased tau and decreased metabolism in the frontal lobes (Figure
The first two dimensions from the SCCA (Figure
Local correlations in the parietal and occipital lobes were observed for both the PCA and lvPPA patients, when analyzed separately, but were more evident in PCA (Supporting Information Figures
The frontal lobe revealed local correlations only for lvPPA (Supporting Information Figure
Tau showed negative associations with MRIvolume in the occipital lobe, although the strongest relationships were observed between increased tau across frontal, sensorimotor, parietal and occipital lobes, and decreased volume in the lateral temporoparietal lobes (Figure
The first two dimensions of the SCCA both involved frontal and parietal regions for tau and temporoparietal regions for MRI-volume, although Dimension 1 was mainly right lateralized and Dimension 2 was more bilateral or left lateralized (Figure
Analogous, although weaker, associations were noted in the two groups, when analyzed separately, without clear differences in asymmetry (Supporting Information Figures
Two opposite trends were observed for the relationship between tau and white matter tract DTI-FA (Figure
The SCCA performed on tau-SUVR and DTI-FA did not survive the permutation test.
While the associations between tau-SUVR and DTI-FA in the PCA patients were very similar to the ones found for the whole cohort (Supporting Information Figure
The VoxelStats maps (Figure
A negative relationship between tau-PET and FDG-PET uptake was present mostly within voxels in the occipital (superior and middle occipital, cuneus, calcarine, lingual), frontal (superior, middle and inferior), sensorimotor (rolandic operculum, precentral), medial parietal (precuneus), and lateral temporal (inferior and middle temporal) bilateral regions (Figure
The negative relationships between tau-PET uptake and gray matter MRI-volume were less widespread but also involved the occipital lobe (superior, middle and inferior occipital, cuneus, lingual), bilaterally with an emphasis on the right side (Figure
The VoxelStats analyses performed on the PCA and lvPPA groups separately revealed hardly any association, possibly because of the lack of statistical power due to the small samples.

| Neurodegeneration multimodal relationships
Regional associations between FDG-SUVR and MRI-volume were strong (Figure
Specifically, hypometabolism and atrophy were locally positively correlated in the frontal, parietal and occipital regions.
More distant relationships were also present with medial temporal atrophy associated with widespread hypometabolism, and frontal hypometabolism associated with widespread atrophy.
The first two dimensions of the SCCA included parietal and occipital regions for both modalities (Figure
VoxelStats confirmed the diffuse bilateral positive association between FDG-PET uptake and gray matter MRI-volume (Figure
Analyzing the two groups separately, we observed weaker local frontal, parietal, and occipital correlations in both the PCA and the lvPPA group, when compared with the whole cohort (Supporting Information Figures
The distant relationship between medial temporal atrophy and widespread hypometabolism was present in PCA (Supporting Information Figure
The relationship between white matter tract DTI-FA and FDG-SUVR (Figures
Medial temporal, parietal, and occipital hypometabolism was associated with decreased DTI-FA in the posterior thalamic radiation, cingulum, sagittal stratum, and splenium of the corpus callosum (Figure
These relationships were captured in the first dimension of SCCA (Figure
The second dimension of SCCA between FDG-SUVR and DTI-FA did not survive the permutation test.
Similar associations were noted in the PCA group, while the lvPPA group did not show many relevant associations (Supporting Information Figures
Lateral parietal atrophy was positively correlated to decreased DTI-FA in several white matter tracts such as the posterior thalamic radiation, internal capsule, and splenium of the corpus callosum (Figure
The PCA group showed the same trends as the whole cohort, while the lvPPA group did not show any clear pattern, except for greater involvement of frontal volumes (Supporting Information Figures

| DISCUSSION
This study investigated multimodal relationships between tau deposition, hypometabolism, gray matter atrophy, and white matter tract degeneration in atypical AD.
To do so, we implemented complementary univariate and multivariate statistical approaches, both ROI-and voxel-based, using tau-PET and FDG-PET images, MRI and fractional anisotropy DTI collected in a population of 40 atypical AD patients, presenting with either PCA or lvPPA clinical phenotype.
We showed that, in atypical AD, tau deposition (as measured by [ 18 F]AV-1451
PET uptake) has a close relationship to neurodegeneration and therefore it is likely a crucial player in determining regional patterns of atrophy and, particularly, hypometabolism.
We also showed that damage Tau uptake measured on [ 18 F]AV-1451 showed strong regional associations with both hypometabolism and atrophy, with correlations particularly high locally, that is, within a lobe, as another study observed in a cohort of AD patients
Specifically, we found strong correlations between tau deposition and both hypometabolism and atrophy in the occipital lobes, as well as between tau deposition and hypometabolism in the frontal lobes across the atypical AD cohort.
This finding is in agreement with the topology of neurodegeneration in atypical AD, where both the frontal and occipital lobes can be affected
In general, we found that tau tracer uptake was associated more strongly with hypometabolism than with atrophy, as we observed in our previous study
In addition, while the strongest associations between tau and hypometabolism were local, we observed more diffuse and distant relationships between tau and atrophy, with temporoparietal atrophy correlating with tau deposition in the frontoparietal lobes.
This regional disconnection may support the notion that MRI-atrophy occurs further in time from the tau deposition, compared with hypometabolism.
It could also suggest that tau-PET and FDG-PET are more sensitive indicators of the respective underlying abnormality than atrophy on MRI is, therefore, the correlations were stronger, or that PET scans are methodologically consistent and therefore correlate better with each other
Interestingly, SCCA performed on tau-PET and MRI-volumes and on tau-PET and FDG-PET uptakes selected mostly bilateral or right regions in the first canonical dimension and mostly left regions in the second canonical dimension.
This likely reflects the fact that tau uptake and neurodegeneration in atypical AD subjects can be asymmetric
In contrast, tau deposition was only mildly related to the degeneration of white matter tracts.
Specifically, the presence of tau in the posterior regions of the brain was connected to a reduced fractional anisotropy in a set of tracts that connect to these regions, including the splenium of the corpus callosum, and in tracts that connect posterior regions of the brain to the thalamus (i.e., posterior thalamic radiation and sagittal striatum).
The corpus callosum, cingulum and posterior thalamic radiations have previously been shown to be involved in atypical AD
The relationships between tau and white matter tract degeneration were, however, relatively weak.
We also observed a few tracts in which increased tau was associated with less degeneration, suggesting caution in interpreting these relationships.
The positive associations between tau and fractional anisotropy could reflect the fact that the internal and external capsule were relatively spared in our atypical AD cohort and remain unaffected as tau uptake increases, although we cannot rule out potential methodological confounds.
Gray matter volumes from MRI revealed strong local associations with FDG-PET uptake in the frontal, parietal and occipital lobes, suggesting that atrophy and hypometabolism are deeply interconnected in AD
Distant associations were also present: specifically, frontal hypometabolism was related to temporal, parietal and occipital atrophy, and medial temporal atrophy was related to widespread hypometabolism.
This suggests a particularly high sensitivity of FDG to frontal abnormalities and of MRI to medial temporal abnormalities in atypical AD and that optimum regional biomarkers from FDG-PET and MRI may differ.
It also suggests that frontal hypometabolism and medial temporal atrophy may be late features of the disease, given that patients with these features already have widespread cortical neurodegeneration.
The markers of neurodegeneration, particularly hypometabolism, showed strong correlations with white matter tract degeneration.
The relationships of white matter tract degeneration with tau and FDG uptake presented several similarities.
They were in the same direction, that is, lower fractional anisotropy corresponded to more tau deposition and lower metabolism, and they involved similar white matter tracts, such as the splenium of corpus callosum, cingulum, posterior thalamic radiation and sagittal striatum, and brain regions, such as the parietal and occipital lobe.
However, white matter tract degeneration showed a stronger relationship with hypometabolism than with tau deposition or atrophy.
This may support a Wallerian degeneration model of white matter tract degeneration, where reduced FA results from reduced metabolism in the neuron, rather than directly from tau deposition in the axon.
Indeed, in AD, tau deposition occurs primarily in the form of neurofibrillary tangles which are found in the neuron.
Although we selected fractional anisotropy as a marker of white matter tract degeneration, the same findings (not shown) held true for mean diffusivity.
When the two clinical variants of atypical AD (PCA and lvPPA)
were analyzed separately, their multimodal associations were similar to those of the whole cohort.
However, they were generally weaker, with most SCCA not surviving the permutation test, likely because of the smaller sample sizes.
For the associations between tau-SUVR and FDG-SUVR, we observed strong local correlations in both groups, similar to the whole group patterns.
However, these analyses suggested that local correlations in the occipital lobe were driven mainly by PCA, while the local correlations in the frontal lobe were driven by lvPPA.
The occipital lobe did show the most striking tau uptake and hypometabolism in PCA in the voxel-based morphometry analysis, as expected, but the frontal lobe was not the most affected region in lvPPA, begging the question of why this region showed the strongest local correlations between tau and hypometabolism.
Other multimodal relationships, such as between tau uptake and DTI-FA and between MRI-volume and DTI-FA, were also observed in the frontal lobe in lvPPA.
These findings could suggest that we have captured the lvPPA group at a phase in the disease where tau deposition and neurodegeneration is actively occurring in the frontal lobes, perhaps having spread from an earlier focus in the temporoparietal cortex.
This hypothesis is, however, difficult to prove without longitudinal data.
Generally, the results we obtained in the whole group for multimodal relationships between DTI-FA and the other metrics better mirrored the findings in PCA, with weaker and less focal associations observed in lvPPA.
The lvPPA group also showed less striking patterns of white matter degeneration in the voxel-based morphometry maps, as we have previously found in an independent sample
We could conclude from this that white matter tract degeneration is a more prominent feature of PCA, or involves a more homogeneous set of white matter tracts in PCA, compared with lvPPA.
Interestingly, the local multimodal relationships between MRI-volume and FDG-SUVR were strong in the whole cohort but much weaker for the two groups analyzed separately, perhaps because of the smaller sample size or because the range of data is truncated when analyzing the separate, more homogeneous, clinical variants.
Although the separate analyses of the two clinical phenotypes are informative, the benefits of merging them into one larger cohort (n = 40) are a better range in the data and increased power, therefore a higher confidence in our conclusions.
Regional associations between PET SUVR and MRI volumes raise the methodological question on the utility and impact of partial volume correction (PVC).
In this study, we analyzed the data both with and without two-compartment PVC
Because PVC did not affect our main PET findings, we concluded that they were not driven by the presence or absence of atrophy.
We decided to show results without PVC in order to keep our PET and MRI analyses relatively methodologically independent of each other and avoid adding unnecessary correlations between these channels of information.
Regarding the statistical methods we used, the SCCA produced results that were largely equivalent to the correlation maps.
However, SCCA provided some advantages in terms of interpretability of the results: its multivariate nature allowed looking at relationships between imaging modalities in an overarching way, and its sparsity constraint selected only a compact set of ROIs that significantly impacted those relationships.
In addition, the SCCA were less computationally expensive than the univariate analyses.
To summarize, SCCA proved to be an effective and efficient methodology to identify the regions of the brain that are associated to each other between modalities.
A limitation of the study is that, with a different lasso penalty, we would have obtained potentially different results.
In fact, depending on how the sparse parameter is selected, one will either have more distributed or more selective regions
Additionally, one could employ different lasso penalties for each SCCA input variable.
We adopted this approach only for the analyses that involved DTI, since the number of white matter tracts (49) was smaller than the number of PET and MRI ROIs (92).
In the rest of the analyses, we used the same penalty for both PET/MRI input variables for simplicity and consistency.
In this study, we adopted a two-view SCCA approach in order to compare the results to those obtained with the univariate technique.
However, multi-view SCCA algorithms are available to relate more than two imaging modalities to each other.
We used cross-sectional analyses to uncover spatial relationships between protein accumulation and neurodegeneration in atypical AD.
Although some imaging modalities revealed overlapping patterns (e.g., strong local associations between tau uptake and hypometabolism) that could be interpreted as duplicative information, the abundancy of distant multimodal relationships suggests that the different modalities offer rather complementary information on the complex pathology of atypical AD.
According to the current understanding of AD, Aβ deposition begins years, if not decades, before the clinical symptoms of cognitive decline, which are directly caused by neurodegeneration, and tau accumulation happens in between the two
Therefore, the natural continuation of this research will be to gather longitudinal data and integrate the current findings with the temporal associations between protein accumulation, atrophy, hypometabolism, and white matter disruption.
In summary, our study elucidated significant spatial pathophysiological relationships between protein deposition (tau), neurodegeneration (hypometabolism, atrophy), and structural connectivity networks (white matter tract fractional anisotropy) involved in atypical AD.
These findings could have important consequences for selecting imaging biomarkers as outcome measures in clinical trials and even in the development of new therapeutic strategies for atypical AD.


FIGURE 1 SPM maps of increased tau uptake (a), gray matter volume loss (b), hypometabolism (c), and FA reduction (d) for PCA and lvPPA patients in comparison to normal controls.
Results are shown after correcting for multiple comparisons (FWE, p < .05)
[Color figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]



TABLE 4
Canonical weight for each ROI in the first two canonical dimensions for SCCA MRI-volume and tau-SUVR.
Canonical weights equal to zero for both variables and dimensions are not listed



FIGURE 2
FIGURE 2 Pearson's partial correlation coefficients corrected for age for tau-SUVR versus FDG-SUVR (a), MRI-volume (b), and white matter tract DTI-FA (c).
A negative correlation with FDG-SUVR, MRI-volume or DTI-FA is a correlation in the "expected" direction, that is, increased tau associated with hypometabolism, atrophy, or reduced white matter FA.
Correlations that did not survive the permutation test were set to zero [Color figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]



FIGURE 3
FIGURE 3 First and second canonical dimensions from sparse canonical correlation analyses between tau-SUVR and FDG-SUVR (a) and between tau-SUVR and MRI-volume (b).
Colors represent the canonical weights found by SCCA for the ROIs that contributed to the canonical dimensions.
ROIs associated to weights less than 0.1 are left transparent [Color figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]



FIGURE 5
FIGURE 5 Pearson's partial correlation coefficients corrected for age for FDG-SUVR versus MRI-volume (a), FDG-SUVR versus white matter tract DTI-FA (b), and MRI-volume versus white matter tract DTI-FA (c).
A positive correlation between FDG-SUVR, MRI-volume or DTI-FA means a correlation in the "expected" direction.
Correlations that did not survive the permutation test were set to zero [Color figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]



FIGURE 6
FIGURE 6 First and second canonical dimensions from sparse canonical correlation analysis between FDG-SUVR and MRI-volume (a) and between FDG-SUVR and white matter tract DTI-FA (b-Second dimension did not survive permutation test).
Colors represent the canonical weights found by SCCA for the ROIs that contributed to the canonical dimensions.
ROIs associated to weights less than 0.1 are left transparent [Color figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]



For
the most part, voxel-wise analyses confirmed the local relationships between modalities.
Since the number of ROIs is obviously smaller than the number of voxels, ROI-based analyses were less computationally expensive than VoxelStats analyses, despite including both local and distant statistical tests.



TABLE 1
Demographic and clinical features of the atypical AD patients


based morphometryFull factorial analyses were implemented in SPM12 (Wellcome Trust Centre for Neuroimaging, London, UK) for all the imaging modalities to identify alterations in tau deposition, gray matter volume, glucose metabolism, and fractional anisotropy in the two patient groups (PCA and lvPPA) relative to a cohort of 111 age-matched cognitively normal controls that had been recruited into the Mayo Clinic Study of Aging.



TABLE 3
Canonical weight for each ROI in the first two canonical dimensions for SCCA between FDG-SUVR and tau-SUVR.
Canonical weights equal to zero for both variables and dimensions are not listed



TABLE 5
Canonical weight for each ROI in the first two canonical dimensions for SCCA between FDG-SUVR and MRI-volume.
Canonical weights equal to zero for both variables and dimensions are not listed



TABLE 6
Canonical weight for each ROI in the first canonical dimension for SCCA between FDG-SUVR and white matter tract DTI-FA.
Canonical weights equal to zero are not listed