Understanding the Role of ApoE Fragments in Alzheimer' s Disease
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is one of the most devastating neurodegenerative diseases.
It has been known for decades that the APOE ɛ4 allele is the most significant genetic risk factor for late-onset AD and yet its precise role in the disease remains unclear.
The APOE gene encodes apolipoprotein E (apoE), a 35 kDa glycoprotein highly expressed in the brain.
There are three different isoforms: apoE3 is the most common allele in the population, whilst apoE2 decreases, and apoE4 increases AD risk.
ApoE has numerous functions that affect neuronal and non-neuronal cells, thus how it contributes to disease onset and progression is hotly debated.
The apoE4 isoform has been linked to the accumulation of both of the major pathological hallmarks of AD, amyloid plaques containing amyloid β peptides, and neurofibrillary tangles containing hyperphosphorylated tau protein, as well as other hallmarks of the disease, including inflammation and oxidative stress.
Numerous studies have shown that apoE undergoes fragmentation in the human brain, and that the fragmentation pattern varies between isoforms.
It was previously shown that apoE4 has neurotoxic functions, however recent data has also identified a neuroprotective role for the apoE N-terminal 25 kDa fragment, which is more prevalent in apoE3 individuals.
The ability of the apoE 25 kDa fragment to promote neurite outgrowth was recently demonstrated and this suggests there is a potential loss of neuroprotection in apoE4 individuals in addition to the previously described gain of toxic function for specific apoE4 fragments.
Here we review the enzymes proposed to be responsible for apoE fragmentation, the specific functions of different apoE fragments and their possible links with AD.

Introduction
Apolipoprotein E (apoE) is a 35-kDa glycoprotein widely expressed in the human body that functions as a lipid transporter.
Three different alleles of the APOE gene are present in the population: ɛ2, ɛ3 and ɛ4 , with frequencies of 6.4, 78.3 and 14.5%, respectively
The ɛ4 allele is the major genetic risk factor of late-onset AD, whilst ɛ2 protects against the disease
The mechanisms by which APOE genotype influence AD onset and progression are incompletely understood.
In the brain, apoE is an extracellular protein that is expressed primarily by astrocytes and taken up by neurons; however, under certain circumstances, apoE can also be expressed by microglia and neurons
ApoE plays a major role in the transport of cholesterol and other lipids, participating in their redistribution to cells and facilitating their cellular uptake
Moreover, in the brain apoE promotes Aβ clearance and neuronal signalling

ApoE structure and isoforms
The domain structure of apoE is composed of two main domains, with the N-and C-terminus, linked by a hinge region (Fig.
The N-terminal domain (residues 1-167) consists of a four alphahelix bundle with a region enriched in arginine and lysine residues (135-150) that forms the LDLreceptor binding region.
The C-terminal domain (residues 206-299) consists of amphipathic alphahelices characteristic of the apolipoprotein family
The three major alleles of the APOE gene found in the population give rise to six different genotypes: the homozygotes ε2/2, ε3/3 and ε4/4, and the heterozygotes ε2/3, ε2/4 and ε3/4.
The difference between the three alleles is only two nucleotides, resulting in a protein change of two amino acids located in positions 112 and 158.
As shown in Fig.
This amino acid change within the isoforms leads to differences in protein stability and interactions: by changing Cys 112 into Arg 112 in apoE4, the protein loses the ionic association between Glu 109 and Arg 61 , leaving Arg 61 free to interact with Glu 255 , and therefore creating an inter-domain interaction that reduces the lipid binding capacity of apoE4.
In apoE3 and apoE4 there is a salt-bridge between Arg 158 and Asparagine (Asp) 154 that is lost in apoE2 with Cys 158 .
In this case there is a salt-bridge between Asp 154 and Arg 150 that removes the positive side chain of Arg 150 away from the LDL receptor binding region, affecting its binding capacity
Due to these amino acid interactions, the protein stability differs, with the apoE4 isoform the least stable, followed by apoE3, while apoE2 is the most stable

The APOE ɛ4 allele is the major genetic risk factor of Alzheimer's disease
The ɛ4 allele of the APOE gene is the major genetic risk factor of late onset AD
Carriers of one copy of the APOE ɛ4 are three times more likely to develop AD, and those that are homozygous for the APOE ɛ4 have a ten times increased risk of developing the disease
Moreover, the age of onset is lower in the APOE ɛ4 AD population
The exact mechanism by which apoE influences AD remains unclear.
Two of the major hallmarks of AD are the presence of extracellular deposition of Aβ, forming amyloid plaques, and the intracellular presence of NFT, composed of aggregations of hyperphosphorylated tau protein
One hypothesis linking apoE and AD involves a direct interaction between apoE and Aβ peptides.
ApoE has been identified within Aβ plaques found in AD brains
However, another in vitro study detected minimal levels of interaction between apoE and Aβ using the physiological levels found in cerebrospinal fluid (Aβ:apoE molar ratio of 1:50-75), and proposed instead that apoE influences Aβ metabolism via interaction with other transporters and receptors in cells
ApoE knock-out studies in mice have shown that apoE is necessary to initiate and maintain Aβ plaques
Moreover, apoE4 has been shown to be less effective in the inhibition of Aβ fibril formation than apoE3
Even if the exact mechanism by which apoE interacts with Aβ remains to be clarified, microglia could be a central player in mediating this interaction.
Microglia upregulate apoE under certain stress conditions, and they have been found surrounding Aβ plaques
Moreover, a recent study showed that apoE deficiency in mice reduced microglial activation around Aβ plaques
Another hypothesis linking apoE with AD is the direct interaction between apoE and tau protein.
ApoE has been located in NFT mediated by tau
Stable complexes between the microtubulebinding domain of tau and the LDL-receptor binding domain of apoE3, but not apoE4, have been shown in vitro
Overexpression of human apoE4 in neurons of transgenic mice caused an increase in tau hyperphosphorylation mediated by Erk activation
Moreover, apoE-deficient mice show increased hyperphosphorylation of tau than control mice
This paper also identified a role for microglia in relation to tau, finding that the presence of the apoE4 background promoted microglial reactivity after lipopolysaccharide treatment

ApoE is proteolytically cleaved in the brain
Apolipoprotein E has been shown to be proteolytically cleaved in the human brain generating truncated fragments.
Unfortunately, not much is known regarding fragmentation of apoE2, and reports on the mechanism of generation and the function of the fragments are inconsistent in the literature.
However it is evident that the apoE fragmentation pattern differs between the apoE3 and apoE4 isoforms
There is a 50% reduction of the 25 kDa N-terminal fragment in apoE4 compared to apoE3 brains
When apoE3 or apoE4 was overexpressed specifically in either neurons or astrocytes, there was no fragmentation of apoE when overexpressed in astrocytes and in neurons there were fewer fragments of apoE4 than apoE3
This paper also identified that fragmentation was specific to brain regions highly affected in AD, such as the neocortex or hippocampus
Although astrocytes are responsible for high levels of apoE expression, together this data suggests that the enzyme responsible for fragmentation is specifically expressed by neurons and that the fragments may have a role in disease onset or progression.
A number of enzymes have been proposed to be responsible for apoE fragmentation in different studies (Table
Enzymes belonging to either the aspartic or the serine protease family have taken most of the attention.
The first study by
Moreover, the 22 kDa fragment from the apoE4 isoform showed higher toxicity than the apoE3 fragment
However, the apoE fragmentation pattern generated in vitro by thrombin digestion is different from the pattern observed in the human brain
Cathepsin D, an aspartic protease, was proposed by Zhou et al. to generate a 24 kDa apoE fragment that does correspond to the fragmentation observed in the brain
The apoE fragments and cathepsin D also colocalize with the Aβ plaques and NFTs in post mortem human tissue
A chymotrypsin-like serine protease was proposed by Harris et al., supported by studies using the specific enzyme inhibitor α1antichymotrypsin
It was also shown that the C-terminal fragment of apoE4 formed with the chymotrypsin-like protease, comprising amino acids 272-299, induces neuropathology and behavioural deficits in transgenic mice overexpressing the fragment
Most recently, hightemperature requirement serine protease A1 (HtrA1) was shown to induce fragmentation of apoE in vitro, generating a fragment of 25 kDa, encompassing amino acids 1-195.
HtrA1 was able to cleave apoE4 faster and to a greater extent than apoE3
Of particular interest, recombinant HtrA1 generated apoE3 fragments, particularly a stable 25 kDa fragment
Moreover, inducing apoE expression in SK-N-SH neuroblastoma cells with all-trans retinoic acid led to the formation of a 25 kDa N-terminal apoE fragment, the formation of which was blocked by either HTRA1 knock-down or inhibition with the specific HtrA1 boronic acid inhibitor
These last two papers together suggest that HtrA1 expressed by neurons could be responsible for generating the 25 kDa N-terminal apoE fragment.
Some studies have shown a brain homogenate pattern composed of one fragment detected at ~23-25 kDa and a smaller fragment detected at ~10 kDa
The hinge region of apoE (that connects the Nterminal and C-terminal regions) is highly exposed, thus it is a likely potential target of enzyme cleavage.
Moreover, apoE4 has been shown to form a molten globule, in which the N-terminal region is more open, and therefore more accessible to be cleaved by enzymes
Predicted cleavage sites for cathepsin D, chymotrypsin-like protease and HtrA1 are located throughout the amino acid sequence of the protein, and specifically in the hinge region.
These data also support the pattern seen in the human brain, as the predicted molecular weight of the N-terminal domain is ~24 kDa and the Cterminal domain is ~10 kDa.
Small variations in apoE molecular weight in different studies could be due to a carbohydrate molecule attached to Thr 194 via O-linked glycosylation

Understanding the function of apoE fragments
The difference in the apoE fragmentation pattern observed in apoE3 and apoE4 brains leads us to question the biological roles of the different apoE fragments and whether they have a relationship with AD pathogenesis (Table
Specific apoE fragments have been directly linked with the formation of Aβ plaques or NFT or the initiation of neurodegeneration
An 18 kDa N-terminal fragment (1-172 aa) of apoE4 was found within NFT of AD patients
Huang et al. found a different fragment, 1-271 aa of apoE4, to be part of NFT-like inclusions in neuronal cells
Moreover, there was reduced truncation of apoE3 compared to apoE4 and the inclusions did not occur in non-neuronal cells
The same group generated a transgenic mouse overexpressing the fragment 1-271 of apoE4.
The mice that expressed high levels of the fragment died at 2-4 months of age, showing AD-like neurodegeneration in the cortex and hippocampus.
Meanwhile, the mice that expressed lower levels of the fragment showed impaired learning and memory at 6-7 months of age
Transgenic mice hAPP FAD
However, the overexpression of the apoE4 1-271 fragment resulted in lower binding to Aβ peptides than apoE3 or apoE4, suggesting there was a decrease in Aβ clearance and an increase in Aβ deposition
A similar fragment size was also tested in Neuro-2a mouse neuroblastoma cells, showing that the 1-272 apoE4 fragment (including both LDL-receptor binding and lipid binding regions) induced neurotoxicity and mitochondrial dysfunction, whereas the 1-240 fragment of apoE4 (containing only the LDL-receptor biding region) or full-length apoE4 did not
However, the 214-272 fragment of apoE4 (containing only the lipid-binding region) did not induce neurotoxicity; this data therefore suggests a requirement for both regions of apoE4 to cause mitochondrial dysfunction and neurotoxicity
Other research groups have used mimetic peptides to address the function of specific fragments.
The apoE fragment 141-155 was shown to cause specific degeneration of neurites in embryonic chick sympathetic neurons
Another peptide, apoE 133-149, corresponding with the LDL-receptor binding region, was shown to be responsible for reducing inflammation after injury.
The peptide was able to mimic the effects of the full-length protein, suppressing microglial activation and release of tumor necrosis factor-α and nitric oxide after lipopolysachharide administration in BV2 mouse microglial cells
The same 133-149 apoE peptide showed a neuroprotective function after exposure to N-methyl-D-aspartate, suppressing cell death and calcium influx in primary neuronal-glia mixed cultures from brain cortices of fetal rats
From the same group, the peptide was studied in mouse models of other disease models, including multiple sclerosis and post-ischemia necrosis and also led to an improvement after administration of the 133-149 apoE peptide
Another group used the same peptide apoE 133-149 to understand its interaction with neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine receptors (nAChRs)
There was a complete inhibition of acetylcholine-evoked responses in rat hippocampal slices when the peptide was added.
Furthermore, the same effect was seen when using the shorter peptide apoE 141-148, but not with 133-140, demonstrating that the interaction with nAChR is mediated by the arginine-rich domain
Further studies in Xenopus laevis oocytes showed that the interaction of the apoE 133-149 peptide, or the shorter 141-148, disrupted nAChR signaling by blocking the α7 nAChRs
Isoform-specific proteolysis has been identified in a number of different studies, showing higher levels of fragmentation of apoE4 compared to apoE3.
A study in Neuro2a mouse neuroblastoma cells identified an intracellular apoE C-terminal 13 kDa fragment following transfection with the human apoE3 or apoE4.
This fragment, that was highly expressed in apoE4-transfected cells, inhibited the formation of Aβ fibrils and stabilized the formation of Aβ hexamers in vitro
Other studies have focused on the role of different N-terminal apoE4 fragments ranging from 17 to 22 kDa.
Love et al.
suggested the extracellular proteases collagenase and matrix metalloprotease-9 produce a 17 kDa apoE 1-151 fragment and in the apoE4 background the fragment traffics to the nucleus of BV2 mouse microglial cells increasing cell death
However, the 1-185 fragment of apoE4 promotes matrix metalloprotease 9 / tissue inhibitor of metalloprotease 1 (MMP-9/TIMP1), induced by expression of IL-1β in human neuroblastoma SK-N-SH cells and astrocytoma cells SW-1783 cells
The 22 kDa fragment proposed to be generated by thrombin cleavage exhibited neurotoxicity from apoE4 but not when generated from apoE3 in primary neurons
The same fragment was studied in embryonic chick sympathetic ganglia and embryonic rat hippocampus tissue showing that the fragment generated an increase in intracellular calcium and the neurotoxic function of the apoE4 fragment was mediated through the heparan sulfate proteoglycan-LDL receptor-related protein complex
We recently identified that the 25 kDa fragment generated by HtrA1 cleavage in the apoE3 background of SK-N-SH human neuroblastoma cells was stable and induced neuritogenesis
This suggests that the 25 kDa apoE fragment may also promote neurite outgrowth in vivo.
Thus, the reduction of this 25 kDa N-terminal fragment in apoE4 subjects could contribute to a reduction in neuritogenesis, in addition to the potential neurotoxic effects previously proposed for the apoE4 C-terminal fragments along with other apoE peptides (Table

Conclusions
Since the APOE ɛ4 allele is the major genetic risk factor for AD, understanding its role in the development of AD is paramount.
A direct link between apoE and the two major hallmarks of the disease, Aβ plaques and NFTs, has been identified but the precise roles that apoE plays in AD are still debated.
ApoE is expressed in the brain mainly by astrocytes, however the evidence suggests that neurons rather than astrocytes express the enzymes leading to apoE fragmentation.
A number of enzymes have been proposed to cleave apoE, whilst different fragments have been shown to have diverse effects on cells.
The majority of studies have focused on the toxic impact of apoE4 (reviewed
neurodegeneration
However, our recent study has found a protective function of the apoE 25 kDa fragment that is more prevalent in apoE3 than apoE4 brains
This suggests that in addition to the neurotoxic effects of apoE4 fragments, a loss of neuroprotective apoE3 fragments may also contribute to neurodegeneration in AD.
Future studies need to address the role of apoE fragments in astrocytes, microglia and other nonneuronal cell types and their precise role in AD pathogenesis.
Very little is known about the fragmentation of apoE2 and this should be investigated in the future.
Understanding the differences between apoE isoforms in different cell types will undoubtedly involve the use of induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) that express physiological levels of endogenous genes, rather than relying on overexpression models.
In particular the use of genome-edited isogenic lines



Fig. 1
Fig. 1 Structure of apolipoprotein E. The N-terminal domain (1-167 aa) is connected by a hinge region with the C-terminal domain (206-299 aa).
The LDL-receptor binding (135-150 aa) and the lipid binding (244-272) regions are shown.
Positions 112 and 158 show the different amino acids that give rise to each of the apoE isoforms (ɛ2, ɛ3 and ɛ4).



Fig. 2
Fig. 2 Overview of apoE structure and the function assigned to each of the fragments studied.
Red fragment, apoE4; blue fragment, apoE3; black fragment, N/A.



Fig. 1 Fig. 2
Fig. 1



Table 1 . Enzymes proposed to cleave apolipoprotein E.



Table 2 . Proposed functions of apolipoprotein E fragments in cell and animal models related to AD and differences in apoE isoforms.