SERS-Based Immunoassay Enhanced with Silver Probe for Selective Separation and Detection of Alzheimer’s Disease Biomarkers
Purpose: Developing a sensitive SERS-based method to quantitatively detect serum biomarkers (Aβ1-42 and P-Tau-181) for the early diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease (AD).
Methods: In this study, a novel SERS-based sandwich immunoassay, which consists of tannin-capped silver nanoparticles and magnetic graphene oxide (Fe 3 O 4 @GOs), was developed.
We firstly applied this method for the detection of protein standards in buffer solution, obtaining the regression equation.
Then, its potential value on real serum samples of AD was further explored.
The detection linear range of Aβ1-42 and P-Tau-181 protein standards were observed to range from 100 pg mL -1 to 10 fg mL -1 , 100 pg mL -1 to 1 fg mL -1 respectively.
We finally explored clinical application of the proposed method in 63 serum samples.
As a result, P-tau-181 differentiated AD from non-AD dementia patients (AUC = 0.770), with a more favored ROC than Aβ1-42 (AUC = 0.383).
The developed SERS-based immunoassay is successfully applied to the determination of Aβ1-42 and P-Tau-181 in human serum specimens, which provides a promising tool for the early diagnosis of AD.

Introduction
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a serious neurodegenerative disease of the cerebral nervous system, which performs a high morbidity in the elderly.
By 2050, practically one million new cases are expected to occur each year, which means the occurrence of a new case every 33 seconds.
4]
Previous studies have confirmed two neuropathological symbols of AD patients, amyloid β peptide (Aβ) and hyperphosphorylated Tau protein.
Among all subtypes of amyloid, Aβ1-42 shows more amyloidogenicity and toxicity.
In addition, it has been discovered that Tau proteins in the brain of AD patients exist in phosphorylated form and combine with each other in neurocytes, constituting the so-called NFT.
At present, the concentration of Aβ-amyloid and Tau protein was mainly detected by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA).
In addition, biosensors or magnetic contrast agents based on nanomaterials have shown many advantages for the early diagnosis of AD.
It is indicated that nanoparticles could be used as drug delivery tools for the treatment of neurological diseases.
1]
Therefore, the development of an ultra-sensitive detection technology for Aβamyloid and Tau protein is urgently needed for the early diagnosis of AD.
Surface-enhanced Raman scattering (SERS), a novel analytical technique, has the superiority of enhancing Raman signals up to 10 4 -10 7 magnitude compared to traditional Raman spectroscopy.
Furthermore, SERS can be rather more sensitive compared to other methods, such as ELISA, especially when the sample contains a very small amount of test substances.
4]
8]
Weber et al suggested that TA could form a continuous coating in the aqueous buffer system in the presence of four-coordinate or higher metalloid anions.
This makes it widely used for material wrapping and coating modification.
Ag or Au-enhanced Raman spectroscopy has been widely used for SERS-based biological detection.
ue to good magnetic properties, Fe 3 O 4 magnetic nanoparticles have been widely used in biological detection and analysis.
However, Fe 3 O 4 is intended to be highly gathered because of the interaction of magnetic dipoles.
Poor performance, such as narrow linear range and low sensitivity, are drawbacks of biological sensors constructed with pure Fe 3 O 4 nanoparticles.
To solve this problem, graphene sheets decorated with magnetic nanoparticles are a good choice.
Graphene oxide usually functions as a biosensor, which has the superiority of low cost, good biocompatibility and superb dispersion.
raphene sheets decorated with magnetic nanoparticles have been proved a superior performance in biomedical fields, which could not be realized by either pure GO or pure Fe 3 O 4 .
this paper, a SERS-based sandwich immunoassay was developed and applied for the early diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease.
On one hand, uniform tannincapped Ag nanoparticles were chosen to be a probe for SERS detection, which were labeled with 4-mercaptobenzoic acid (4-MBA).
On the other hand, magnetic graphene oxide (Fe 3 O 4 @GOs) was used as the magnetic SERS substrate, which not only can enhance Raman signal but also have good dispersibility.
Then, this SERS-based immunoassay was applied on both protein standards and real serum samples.
The results demonstrated that this method could accurately and sensitively detect Aβ1-42 and P-Tau-181 in human serum samples, which provided a promising tool for early diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease.

Materials and Methods

Materials and Instruments
Silver nitrate (AgNO 3 ), chlorauric acid (HAuCl 4 ), trisodium citrate, tannic acid, hydrogen peroxide (
hydrochloride (EDC), Aβ-amyloid (1-42), P-Tau (181) protein, phosphate buffer saline (PBS) buffer, bovine serum albumin (BSA), magnetic graphene oxide dispersion (Fe 3 O 4 @GOs, Jiangsu Xianfeng Nano Material Technology Co., Ltd.).
ELISA kit, anti-Aβ-amyloid antibody and anti-tau antibody were purchased from Shenzhen Anqun Biological Engineering Co., Ltd.
The morphologies of the as-prepared samples were detected on a Tecnai T12 transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) (FEI, America).
UV-vis spectra were acquired on a UVvis spectrometer (AOE, Shanghai).
The Raman and SERS spectra were obtained on Renishaw inVia Raman spectrometer using 532 nm laser at room temperature in the range of 400-2000 cm -1 .
Spectra were accumulated 1 scan with an exposure time of 10 s.
The beam diameter was approximately 1 mm on the sample surface.
The reaction solutions were thoroughly stirred on a Heating magnetic stirrer (IKA, Germany).

Methods
The sample for SEM was prepared by adding 20μL Fe 3 O 4 @GOs solution on tin foil and was observed by SEM after drying, while the sample for TEM was prepared by adding

Preparation of Immune Probes
We have applied different metal materials as immunoprobes to make a comparison.
The synthesis methods were as follows: Tannin-capped Ag probe: 0.17 g silver nitrate was dissolved in 100 mL deionized water, stirring on a magnetic stirrer.
After that, 0.05 g tannic acid was added and kept stirring for some seconds.
Next, 1.2 mL H 2 O 2 and 1.2 mL N 2 H 4 • H 2 O was added to the solution and the mixture was continued to react for 20 min under vigorous stirring.
The prepared solution was stored at 4°C in the dark.
Au probe: To develop a nano-gold probe,
Next, 4 mL of sodium citrate solution (0.01 g mL -1 ) was immediately added to the boiling solution with vigorous stirring.
The mixture was then heated for a further 10 minutes until the reaction solution turned wine red.
Finally, stop heating and continue stirring for 15 minutes.
The prepared solution was allowed to cool to room temperature and refrigerated at 4°C for later use.
Au@Ag probe: We synthesized the gold-silver alloy nanoprobe by hydrothermal method.
At first, 16 mL deionized water, 3 mL of absolute ethanol, and 0.5 mL of (3-aminopropyl) triethoxysilane (APS) were mixed together in an autoclave and kept stirring for 30 min.
Next, 3 mL HAuCl 4 (10 mg mL -1 ) was dropped into the autoclave.
After stirring for 5 min, 10 mg AgNO 3 was added into the reaction solution and stirred for another 5 min.
Finally, the solution was reacted at 100°C for 6 hours.
The prepared nanoparticles were collected by centrifugation.
After the supernatant had been removed, the particles were dispersed again in deionized water for further use.
Synthesis of 4-MBA labeled probes: In order to obtain 4-MBA-labeled nanoprobes, first, 4 mL as-prepared Ag (or Au or Ag@Ag) probe solutions (3.25 mg mL -1 ) was washed by centrifugation at 14,000 rpm for 20 min and redispersed into 1 mL of deionized water.
Next, 200 µL of 4-MBA ethanol solution (1 mM) was added to the solution under vigorous stirring for 7 h.
Then, washing twice with water to remove unbound 4-MBA molecules, and the sediment of the 4MBA-labelled probe was dissolved in 1 mL PBS solution finally.
Developing antibody-attached immune probes: First, 50 µL EDC (100 mM) and 80 µL NHS (100 mM) was added to the 4-MBA-labeled probe dispersion, and then stirred at room temperature for 30 min.
Secondly, the solution was washed twice with 0.01 mol L -1 PBS, and redispersed in 1 mL PBS.
After that, 200 µL 100 µg mL -1 anti-Aβ-amyloid antibody (or anti-tau antibody) was added to the dispersion and incubated at 4°C for 12 h.
To avoid the unspecific absorption of antigens, 100 µL 3% BSA was added to the above mixed solution as a blocking solution.
The mixture was left at 4°C for 6 h and dispersed in 1 mL PBS after being centrifuged.

Preparation of Immune Fe 3 O 4 @GO Substrate
In order to obtain an antibody-conjugated immune substrate, we have utilized the covalent conjugate between -COOH of graphene oxide and -NH 2 of antibodies.
100 µL 5 mg mL -1 magnetic graphene oxide dispersion was dispersed in 1 mL of PBS solution.
Next, 200 µL 100 µg mL -1 anti-Aβ-amyloid antibody (or anti-tau antibody) was added to the solution and then for ultrasonic dispersion.
The solution was incubated at 4°C for more than 12 h.
Then, 50 µL 3% BSA was added into the mixture and was left at 4°C for 6 h.
Finally, the immune Fe 3 O 4 @GO substrate was collected through magnetic separation and re-suspended in 1 mL PBS.

Developing Sandwich Immunoassays for SERS Measurements
As shown in Scheme 1, the immunoassays were conducted by a typical sandwich-type structure.
Firstly, 150 µL asprepared SERS substrate was dropped into a 2 mL EP tube and then 40 µL of Aβ-142 (or P-Tau-181) protein solutions

DovePress
with different concentrations (or diluted serum) were added into the tube.
After being incubated for 3 h at room temperature, the mixture was washed with PBS by magnetic separation, which aimed to remove the unbound antigen.
After that, 200 µL of the as-prepared probe was dropped into the above acquisition and incubated for 2 h at room temperature.
After magnetic separation and wash twice with PBS, the precipitate was dispersed in 100 µL deionized water for SERS detection.

Statistics
The protein content differences of Aβ1-42 and P-Tau-181 were analyzed by the Student's t-test.
All statistical analyses were performed using the SPSS 20.0 software.
P<0.05 for the difference was considered to be statistically significant.

Results

Optimization of the Immunoassay Optimization of Probes
The synthetic method of Au, Ag, and Au@Ag nano-probes was as described above.
TEM images of these probes were shown in Fig.
The mono-dispersed Au and Au-Ag nanoparticles can be found in Figure
Electron microscope energy spectrum analysis was carried out for the further characterization Au@Ag (Figure
Different from Au and Au-Ag nanoparticles, a coating layer on the surface of Ag nanoparticles can be observed in Figure
Obviously, tannin or tannin-based compounds were formed on the surface of Ag nanoparticles, which can benefit the stability and selectivity of Ag nanoparticles and enhance the sensitivity and accuracy of the SERS results.
Synthesis parameters are important for the formation of tannin-coated Ag nanoparticles. Figure
It can be found that 1.2 mL H 2 O 2 , 1.2 mL N 2 H 4 •H 2 O, and 0.05 g tannic acid were the ideal parameters for the preparation of nano-silver probe.
The absorption spectra of the above five Ag probes were shown in Figure
It is clear that obvious peaks were observed near 400 nm, which is the characteristic peak of silver nanoparticles.
And the peak was slightly shifted when tannin was coated on the surface of Ag.
The Raman enhancement effect of these probes (tannincapped Ag, Au, and Au@Ag) was also investigated with the same protein concentration.
It is clear that the tannin-capped Ag probe had the best Raman enhancement effect and a large discrimination to differ concentrations of antigen (Figure
Furthermore, there was little change of the SERS intensity on Ag probe in 30 days, which proved the protection against oxidation of Ag nanoparticle by tannin coating layer (Figure
Obviously, tannin-capped Ag probe is an ideal probe for the detection of protein in this work.

Optimal Concentration of 4-MBA
Tannin-capped silver probe was chosen for further SERS optimization.
Different concentrations (0.001 mM, 0.01 mM, 0.1 mM, 1 mM) of 4-MBA ethanol solution were added to the silver probe solution.
The following step of 4-MBA labeled probe preparation was as described above.
It can be seen that
The Raman intensities were relatively weaker when concentrations of 4-MBA are 0.001 mM, 0.01 mM, 0.1 mM.
However, the Raman intensity became stronger when the concentrations of 4-MBA increased to 1 mM.
Further increasing the concentration of 4-MBA, the Raman intensity enhanced little.
Hence, 1 mM is a good choice concentration for following SERS detection.

Optimization of Sandwich Immunoassays
In order to determine the optimal amounts of antibody and probe for the immunoassay, the experimental conditions were further optimized.
Figure
It can be clearly observed that the Raman signal was gradually enhanced by increasing the amounts of antibody or probe from 2 µL to 200 µL.
The intensity of the Raman signal was significantly enhanced may be due to the antigenantibody binding.
However, the Raman signal was not much different with the addition of 200 µL, 400 µL antibody or probe, which may be attributed to the saturated concentration of antibody or probe.
Based on this, the optimal amount of antibody and probe in this work was adopted as 200 µL, respectively.
Optimization of sandwich immunoassays was shown in Table

Specificity of the Immunoassay
The specificity of the prepared immunoassay was verified by adding different antigens to the immune system.
First, 100 pg mL -1 Aβ-amyloid protein and 100 pg mL -1 Tau-181 protein were added into the Aβ-amyloid antibodyconjugated immune systems for detection, respectively.
In addition, we further tested the specificity by adding 100 fg mL -1 Aβ-amyloid protein and the mixture of 100 fg mL -1 Aβ-amyloid protein and 100 pg mL -1 Tau-181

Dovepress
Yu et al protein, respectively.
The red bar graph plotted in Figure
It can be seen from the figure that the Aβ-amyloid antibodyconjugated detection system had a strong Raman signal on the detection of β-protein, while the Raman intensity of other proteins was very weak.
Furthermore, a much lower concentration of β-protein can be caught by our immunoassay even when there were amounts of other proteins in the buffer.
These results illustrated that the proposed immunoassay can specifically and effectively detect the target protein.
The same method was used to verify the specificity of Tau-181 antibody-conjugated immunoassay, and the results are plotted in Figure

Characterization of Ag Probe
The prepared silver probe was characterized further by X-ray diffraction (XRD).
Figure
All the diffraction peaks of the crystal planes (111), (

Characterization of the Fe 3 O 4 @GO Substrate
SEM image presented in Figure
It can be seen from the figure that the layered structure of the gray sheet was graphene oxide, and the small particles supported on it were Fe 3 O 4 .
The good magnetic properties of Fe 3 O 4 @GO dispersion are shown in Figure

Calibration Curve and Limit Detection of Immunoassays
In order to find the detection limit in buffer, standard protein solutions with different concentrations were measured by the suggested SERS-based immunoassay.
Figure
From the spectra, two strong Raman peaks (1585 cm -1 and 1076 cm -1 ) of the labeled molecule (4-MBA) were observed.
In addition, it was observed that the SERS intensity considerably declined with the dilution of antigens.
And the SERS peaks of 4-MBA at 1585 cm -1 and 1076 cm -1 became very weak when the concentration of Aβ-amyloid or Tau-181 down to 10 fg mL -1 or 1 fg mL -1 , respectively.
Figure
The linear regression equations for antigens were obtained, which were Y = 5990*X-4232 (Aβ-amyloid) and Y = 5181*X-1181 (Tau-181), respectively.
The correlation coefficient (R 2 ) was calculated to be 0.974 and 0.993.
As a result, the detection of limits could reach 1.62 fg mL -1 (Aβ-amyloid) and 5.74 fg mL -1 (Tau-181), respectively (Table
The above two obtained linear regression equations were then served as standard equations used for the calculation of antigens with unknown concentrations in the serum of patients.

Application on Serum Samples
To validate the potential diagnostic value of this immunoassay, two real serum samples were diluted 10-10 3 times with PBS ) and the SERS spectra of these different dilution ratios from patient's serum samples showed a distinct and gradually decreasing intensity.
Then, the concentration of proteins was calculated via the above obtained standard linear regression equations.
The results were as presented in Table
Next, the proposed SERS method and ELISA were applied to the patient's serum samples.
Pearson analysis was then applied to describe the correlation of detection results for the two methods above, P<0.05 was considered statistically significant.
As illustrated in Table
Similar results were obtained on Tau protein, which showed a moderate correlation with the correlation coefficient was 0.565 (P=0.000).
Afterwards, a total of 63 serum samples were detected which consisted of 21 patients with AD, 20 non-AD dementia patients (13 patients with vascular dementia, 4 patients with Parkinson's Disease, and 3 cases of senile dementia) and 22 normal controls.
After that, t-test was used to analyze the general data of the three groups.
As shown in Table
After that, differences between groups were investigated by a twosample independent t-test.
The results indicated that the proposed method was sensitive to detect proteins in serum samples.
Histograms of Aβ1-42 and Tau-181 protein between groups are shown in Figure
The concentration (mean with SD) of Aβ1-42 (58.56±23.32
pg mL -1 , 95% CI) in AD patients was lower than that of NADD patients (96.96 ±70.48 pg mL -1 , 95% CI, p <0.05) and normal control (72.24 ±40.12 pg mL -1 , 95% CI, p >0.05).
While the concentration (mean with SD) of P-Tau-181 was found to be significantly higher in the case of AD (29.00±9.10
pg mL -1 , 95% CI) than that of NADD (24.30±14.22
pg mL -1 , 95% CI, p <0.05) and normal control (18.31±5.53
pg mL -1 , 95% CI, p <0.01).
The diagnostic values to discriminate AD from NADD of the biomarkers are presented in Figure
As can be seen from Figure
Therefore, P-Tau-181 can be served as a sensitive serum biomarker for early diagnosis and differential diagnosis of AD.

Discussion
The pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease has been investigated by many scholars, Aβ1-42 and P-Tau-181 are considered to be two main causes.
Therefore, the diagnostic value of Aβ1-42 and P-Tau-181 has gradually increased.
Cerebrospinal fluid is often used for detection,
Since then, serum or plasma has been proved to be a new medium for the detection of Alzheimer's disease biomarkers.
Although the problem of sample collection is solved, the detection method has the drawbacks of low sensitivity and specificity.
Since a new method with high sensitivity and specificity is in urgent.
Fortunately, SERS is proved to be an ultra-sensitive detection method that has been widely applied for detection.
Table
Demeritte et al have developed a hybrid graphene oxidebased multifunctional nanoplatform with a magnetic core-plasma shell attachment.
The platform allows for highly selective isolation of β-amyloid and tau protein from whole blood samples.
Direct capture has been applied on the antibody-conjugated nanoplatforms, which can be used for the identification of AD biomarkers even at a level of 100 fg mL -1 .
Direct capture may induce more non-specific adsorption, and the reaction between antigen and antibody could gradually weaken with time.
In this study, we designed a novel SERS-based method for the detection of AD biomarkers.
The stability of Ag nanoparticles was significantly enhanced by tannic acid encapsulation, which enabled strong Raman signal intensity within 30 days.
In addition, sandwich immunoassay could contribute to more specific target capture.
A dual-functional SERS platform has been developed for adiponectin and leptin detection by Wang et al.
The detection limits of adiponectin and leptin could lead to 25 pg mL -1 and 20 pg mL -1 , respectively.
In our design, we screened Ag as an SERS probe with the best Raman signal enhancement.
After capturing the antigen, the distance between immune-silver probes and GO substrates will be smaller, which could further enhance the Raman scattering intensity of 4-MBA, thus achieving the ultra-sensitive quantitative detection of proteins with detection limits of 1.62 fg mL -1 and 5.74 fg mL -1 .
Several studies
However, patients with non-AD dementia have higher levels of Aβ1-42, while P-tau-181 were slightly higher in patients with AD.
The area under the ROC curve is greater than 0.6.
The results examined in this paper were basically consistent with previous findings.
ROC analysis revealed that P-tau-181 performs better in distinguishing AD from non-AD dementia with an AUC of 0.770, which indicates that Aβ1-42 and P-tau-181 can serve as sensitive biomarkers for differential diagnosis of AD and non-AD dementia.
However, the diagnostic value of Aβ1-42 was weak which may be due to the insufficient sample size.

Conclusion
In summary, we proposed a novel SERS-based immunoassay with specific antibodies attaching to Fe 3 O 4 @GOs and MBAlabeled silver probes.
Target proteins were captured by the sandwich assay.
The obtained SERS spectrum of 4-MBA represented the capture of target proteins.
Such a method was first applied to protein standards and was then verified and applied on serum samples.
Its detection limit in serum samples could reach the order of femtograms.
Overall, the proposed SERS-based immunoassay is a specific and sensitive method that could provide new possibilities for the detection of clinical biomarkers.
P-tau-181 could serve as a potential biomarker for early diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease and differential diagnosis of AD and NADD.



Scheme 1
Scheme 1 Schematic illustration of the preparation and application of SERS-based immunoassay for detection of Alzheimer' s disease biomarkers.



Figure 1 (
Figure 1 (A) Raman spectra of nano silver probes with different concentrations (0.001 mM, 0.01 mM, 0.1 mM, 1 mM) of 4-MBA.
(B) Raman spectra of different amount of specific antibodies ranging from 2 µL to 400 µL.
(C) Raman spectra of different amount of silver probe ranging from 2 µL to 400 µL.



Figure 2
Figure 2 Specificity verification chart of proposed immunoassay.
(A) Aβ-amyloid antibody-conjugated immunoassay.
(B) Tau-181 antibody-conjugated immunoassay.



Figure 3 ( 1907 Figure 5
Figure 3 (A) XRD patterns of the as-prepared Ag probe.
(B) SEM image of the Fe 3 O 4 @GO substrates.
(C) Good magnetic properties of Fe 3 O 4 @GO dispersion.



Figure 4
Figure 4 SERS spectra of 4-MBA for (A) Aβ-amyloid and (B) Tau-181 with different concentration and the calibration curves of the peak intensity at 1585 cm -1 changed with the lg value of protein concentration of (C) Aβ-amyloid and (D) Tau-181.



Figure 6 (
Figure 6 (A) Histogram of Aβ-amyloid (red) and Tau-181 (yellow) protein comparison between groups.
(B) ROC curves of Aβ1-42 (green) and Tau-181 (blue) to discriminate between AD and NADD patients.



submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com DovePress International Journal of Nanomedicine 2021:16 1902 coated
with thin films of carbon.
All the procedures were conducted on filter paper.