PET measurement of longitudinal amyloid load identifies the earliest stages of amyloid-beta accumulation during Alzheimer's disease progression in Down syndrome
Introduction: Adults with Down syndrome (DS) are predisposed to Alzheimer's disease (AD) and reveal early amyloid beta (A ) pathology in the brain.
Positron emission tomography (PET) provides an in vivo measure of A  throughout the AD continuum.
Due to the high prevalence of AD in DS, there is need for longitudinal imaging studies of A  to better characterize the natural history of A  accumulation, which will aid in the staging of this population for clinical trials aimed at AD treatment and prevention.
Methods: Adults with DS ( N = 79; Mean age (SD) = 42.7 (7.28) years) underwent longitudinal
Global A  burden was quantified using the amyloid load metric (A  L ).
Modeled PiB images were generated from the longitudinal A  L data to visualize which regions are most susceptible to A  accumulation in DS.
A  L change was evaluated across A (-), A -converter, and A ( + ) groups to assess longitudinal A  trajectories during different stages of AD-pathology progression.
A  L change values were used to identify A accumulators within the A (-) group prior to reaching the A ( + ) threshold (previously reported as 20 A  L ) which would have resulted in an A -converter classification.
With knowledge of trajectories of A (-) accumulators, a new cutoff of A ( + ) was derived to better identify subthreshold A  accumulation in DS.
Estimated sample sizes necessary to detect a 25% reduction in annual A  change with 80% power (alpha 0.01) were determined for different groups of A -status.
Results: Modeled PiB images revealed the striatum, parietal cortex and precuneus as the regions with earliest detected A  accumulation in DS.
The A (-) group had a mean A  L change of 0.38 (0.58) A  L /year, while the A -converter and A ( + ) groups had change of 2.26 (0.66) and 3.16 (1.34)
A  L /year, respectively.
Within the A (-) group, A -accumulators showed no significant difference in A  L change values when compared to A converter and A ( + ) groups.
An A ( + ) cutoff for subthreshold A  accumulation was derived as 13.3
A  L .
The estimated sample size necessary to detect a 25% reduction in A  was 79 for A (-) accumulators and 59 for the A -converter/A ( + ) group in DS.

Conclusion:
Longitudinal A  L changes were capable of distinguishing A  accumulators from non-accumulators in DS.
Longitudinal imaging allowed for identification of subthreshold A  accumulation in DS during the earliest stages of AD-pathology progression.
Detection of active A  deposition evidenced by subthreshold accumulation with longitudinal imaging can identify DS individuals at risk for AD development at an earlier stage.

Introduction
Down syndrome (DS) is characterized by triplication of chromosome 21, which results in overexpression of the gene encoding amyloid precursor protein (APP) production and early amyloid- (A ) plaque accumulation
A  plaques are a hallmark of Alzheimer's disease (AD) and adults with DS reveal a sharp increase in AD dementia after age 50
It is estimated that the lifetime risk of developing AD in DS is ~90%
An in vivo measure of A  burden can be achieved through positron emission tomography (PET)
PET studies in DS have revealed a pattern of early and prominent A  retention in the striatum
When evaluating cortical A  retention, the patterns observed in DS closely resemble late-onset AD
Longitudinal studies of AD commonly implement PET imaging to evaluate A  change, utilizing the standardized uptake value ratio (SUVr) as the PET outcome measure.
The SUVr is calculated as the quotient of the PET-measured signal from both a target region and an off-target region, and has been validated as an estimate of the distribution volume ratio (DVR) to provide an index of region of interest A  plaque concentration
Longitudinal studies in late-onset AD, such as the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative, report annual increases of 0.03 SUVr/year (~2%/year) when measured with fluorbetapir PET
Using PiB PET, the Harvard Aging Brain Study reports that individuals with high PiB retention accumulate A  at a rate of 0.03 SUVr/year (~2%/year)
The Australian Imaging, Biomarkers, and Lifestyle study shows A  change of 0.043 PiB SUVr/year (~3%/year) in individuals with mild cognitive impairment (MCI)
As a metric, SUVr can be prone to high within-subject variability when assessed longitudinally
This variability results in lower statistical power to detect meaningful A  accumulation across time
To reduce the high longitudinal variability and improve upon the sensitivity of SUVr at detecting A  change, the PET metric of amyloid load (A  L ) was developed as a global (whole brain) outcome measure of A  burden.
The A  L is calculated by the linear least squares method between the SUVr image and population-derived template images of specific radioligand binding and nonspecific/off-target binding
When compared against SUVr, A  L improved sensitivity to detect A  change due to the suppression of nonspecific binding signal in both late-onset AD populations
The Alzheimer's Biomarker Consortium -Down Syndrome (ABC-DS) is an ongoing longitudinal study with a large DS cohort aimed at characterizing the progression of AD-related biomarker change
The objective of the current study was to characterize longitudinal rates of A  accumulation throughout the different stages of the AD continuum in DS.
Utilizing the A  L metric, changes in A  PET signal at typical subthreshold levels were assessed to characterize the earliest stages of A  accumulation in DS.
Given the A  L data, modeled PiB SUVr images were generated at the different stages of AD progression to visu-alize the regional spread of A  in DS.
Using the longitudinal data from the A (-) accumulators, a new cutoff of A ( + ) was derived to better identify early subthreshold A  change.
Finally, estimated sample sizes necessary to detect a 25% reduction in annual A  change was determined for DS participants in early and late A  accumulation phases.

Methods

Participants
The current sample included 79 adults with DS (mean age (SD) = 42.7 (7.28) years) recruited for an initial project studying the natural history of A  deposition in DS by the University of Wisconsin-Madison Waisman Center and the University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, which has since expanded to eight sites and transitioned into the ABC-DS study
The University of Wisconsin-Madison and University of Pittsburgh sites have entered web-based data through the Alzheimer's Therapeutic Research Institute (ATRI) as part of the ABC-DS study.
Data from the ABC-DS study and research methodology is currently available to the scientific community through the LONI database.
Consent was obtained during enrollment into the study by the participant or legally designated caregiver.
Inclusion criteria included age â‰¥ 25 years and having a receptive language mental age of at least three years, based upon the Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test Fourth Edition (PPVT)
Genetic testing was performed to confirm DS (trisomy 21, mosaicism, or partial translocation).
Exclusion criteria included having a prior diagnosis of dementia, an unstable psychiatric condition (e.g.
untreated) that impaired cognitive functioning, or a medical condition that was contraindicative of brain imaging scans (e.g.
metallic implants).

Imaging
T1-weighted magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans were acquired on a 3T GE Discovery MR750 (Wisconsin) and a Siemens Trio or Prisma (Pittsburgh) for anatomical reference in the analysis.
Positron emission tomography (PET) scans were performed on a Siemens ECAT HR + scanner (Wisconsin/Pittsburgh) or a Siemens 4-ring Biograph mCT (Pittsburgh).
A target dose of 15 mCi of
Of the 79 participants, 24 underwent two PiB scans (2.80 (0.49) years apart), while 30 underwent three scans (2.66 (0.84) years apart) and 25 underwent four scans (2.57
(0.66) years apart).
In total, 238 PiB scans were acquired for this study.
Using the Statistical Parametric Mapping 12 software (SPM12; The Wellcome centre for Human Neuroimaging, UCL Queen Square Institute of Neurology, London, UK), PET frames were re-aligned to correct for motion, averaged, and spatially normalized to the Montreal Neurological Institute 152 space (MNI152) via a DS-specific PET template for PiB as previously described
For all images, spatial normalization was required to calculate the amyloid load (A  L ); a global measure of A  burden calculated from the linear least squares method between the PET image and images of specific and nonspecific PiB binding defined in MNI152 space.
Standardized uptake value ratio (SUVr) images were generated by voxel normalization to cerebellar gray matter, and the global A  L was calculated following methodology specific to DS PiB images as previously described
Using a cutoff of 20 A  L , participants were classified as A (-) (A  L < 20 for all longitudinal scans), A -converter (A  L < 20 at baseline and A  L â‰¥ 20 at the most recent follow-up visit), or A ( + ) (A  L â‰¥ 20 for all longitudinal scans).
No corrections for the partial volume effect were performed, so estimates of longitudinal increase in A ( + ) individuals with substantial A  L that present atrophy may be conservative.
Participant demographics and imaging information are outlined in Table

Visualization of longitudinal A ð›½ change
A modeled SUVr image was generated using a participant's A  L , nonspecific binding coefficient (ns), and DS population-derived image templates of PiB specific binding (K) and nonspecific binding (NS) as follows
where i represents the i th voxel of the image.
From the longitudinal data, the average baseline A  L and most recent A  L were calculated across all participants in the A (-), A -converter and A ( + ) groups.
Additionally, the average nonspecific binding coefficient was calculated.
Using these values, Eq. (
Difference images were generated by subtracting the baseline SUVr image from the most recent SUVr image and visualized as a 3D surface projection using MANGO (Research Imaging Institute, UT Health Science Center at San Antonio, TX, USA).
SUVr change values (SUVr/year) were calculated separately for the anterior cingulate, frontal cortex, parietal cortex, precuneus, striatum and temporal cortex.

A ð›½ L change trajectories
Using the baseline and most recently acquired scan, an A  L change value (A  L /year) was calculated for each participant.
A  L change was evaluated with respect to age and with respect to global A  L independently using Pearson's partial correlation coefficients while correcting for imaging site.
Participant age and A  L change were then independently compared across A (-), A -converter, and A ( + ) groups using analysis of covariance (ANCOVA) while correcting for imaging site.
Post hoc Student's t-tests were performed for individual group comparisons while adjusting for Bonferroni correction.
Models were not adjusted for APOE  4 carrier status due to the low percentage of carriers present in the sample and our previous work showing no association between APOE  4 status, A  and cognition in DS
All statistical analyses were performed using SAS v9.4.

Identifying subthreshold A ð›½ accumulation
Longitudinal A  L change values were used to classify subthreshold A  accumulators from non-accumulators in the A (-) group using two separate classifiers.
First, using a k-means clustering algorithm with resampling ( k = 2 clusters; n = 1000 iterations), a cutoff (C K ) for A  accumulation was derived as the midpoint between cluster centers of the A  L change values from all participants.
A second cutoff (C 2SD ) was derived by taking the mean change + 2 * SD of the A (-) group.
To evaluate the most recent change in A , A  L change values (A  L /year) were calculated from the two most recent PiB scans for each participant.
If the A  L change value exceeded the A  L change cutoffs C K or C 2SD , the participant was classified as having an A  L trajectory distinguishable from non-accumulators within the A (-) group.
For each cutoff, the A  L change values from the most recent pair of longitudinal scans were compared between the A (-) non-accumulator, A (-) accumulator, A -converter and A ( + ) groups using ANCOVA while correcting for imaging site.
Post hoc Student's t-tests were then performed to assess individual group comparisons while adjusting for Bonferroni correction.
A new cutoff of A ( + ) to better characterize subthreshold A  accumulation, indicating the initiation of detectable pathology, given a single PET scan was derived following methodology outlined in
Briefly, a range of possible A ( + ) cutoffs (i.e.
10-25 A  L with increments of 0.1 A  L ) were compared against C K and C 2SD using the Youden's J Index (YI; sum of the sensitivity and specificity)
The YI and OPA response curves were minimally smoothed using the weighted linear least squares method, and the optimal A ( + ) cutoff was chosen as the value that maximized both YI and OPA.

Sample size estimations
Estimated sample sizes necessary to detect a 25% reduction in the annual rate of A  accumulation were computed, as described elsewhere
Briefly, given the A  L change values from the most recent pair of longitudinal scans in DS, groups of A (-) accumulators and A -converter/A ( + ) individuals were independently assessed to determine the sample sizes needed to detect a 25% reduction in A  change with 80% power at alpha 0.01 using two-sample t -test comparisons (two-tailed).

Results

Visualization of longitudinal A ð›½ change
From the study sample, 36.7% of participants were classified as either an A -converter or A ( + ).
The average time between the baseline and most recent scan for the A (-), A -converter and A ( + ) groups were 5.01 (2.10), 6.33 (2.31) and 5.18 (1.64) years, respectively.
The average baseline A  L in the A (-), A -converter, and A ( + ) groups were 8.22 (2.32), 11.0 (2.72) and 31.6 (9.06), respectively.
The most recent A  L in the A (-), A -converter, and A ( + ) groups were 10.4 (3.17), 24.9 (3.53) and 48.2 (14.84), respectively.
The average nonspecific binding component (ns) was calculated as 1.00 (0.05) for all groups.
Given these values and the DS-specific templates of PiB carrying capacity (K) and nonspecific binding (NS), modeled SUVr images were generated to illustrate the spatial patterns of longitudinal A  accumulation in DS ( Fig.
While A  L represents a single global index, it is also possible to examine changes in specific brain regions with the modeled SUVr images.
Regional SUVr difference values (SUVr/year) for each group are displayed in Table
Between the baseline and most recent scans, SUVr change from the modeled images was greatest in the striatum (0.060 SUVr/year)  for the A -converter group, followed by the precuneus (0.052), parietal cortex (0.047), anterior cingulate (0.043), frontal cortex (0.038) and temporal cortex (0.030).
The regional pattern of A  accumulation in the A ( + ) group was similar to the A -converters.

A ð›½ L change trajectories
Between the baseline and most recent scan, the A (-) group displayed a mean A  L change of 0.38 (0.58) A  L /year, while the A -converter and A ( + ) groups displayed a change of 2.26 (0.66) and 3.16 (1.34)
A  L /year, respectively.
Fig.
A positive association with a large magnitude effect size (Cohen's d)
A  groups were distinguishable when evaluated with respect to A  L change (ANCOVA F (df) = 78.5 (2), p < .0001).
From the post hoc analysis, differences between A  L change for the A (-), A -converter and A ( + ) groups were statistically significant across all pairings ( p < .05
adjusted for Bonferroni correction).
Age and A  L change displayed a positive association with a large magnitude effect size (Pearson's R = 0.54 [0.36, 0.68], p < .00001)
( Fig.
The mean age (SD) of the A (-) group was 39.1 (4.95) years, and the A -converter and A ( + ) group ages were 46.4 (6.93) and 51.9 (4.04) years, respectively.
The A  groups significantly differed in age (ANCOVA F (df) = 33.8
(2), p < .0001),
with post hoc analysis indicating that the A (-) group was significantly younger than the A -converter and A ( + ) groups, and the A -converter group significantly younger than the A ( + ) group ( p < .05
adjusted for Bonferroni correction).
For all associations, imaging site did not influence the model outcomes.

Identifying subthreshold A ð›½ accumulation
To identify subthreshold A  accumulation, A  L change cutoffs were calculated using the k-means clustering with resampling (C K ) and the mean + 2 * SD (C 2SD ) methods.
The cutoffs were defined as C K = 1.46
A  L /year and C 2SD = 1.54
A  L /year.
Using the A  L change values from the two most recent longitudinal time points, 11 (22%) A (-) participants were classified as A (-) accumulators using C K compared to the 9 (18%) A (-) accumulators using C 2SD .
Using C K , A (-) accumulators displayed a mean A  L change value of 2.40 (1.09)
A  L /year compared to 0.26 (0.62) A  L /year for A (-) non-accumulators, while  Using the cutoffs C K and C 2SD as reference, a new cutoff of A ( + ) was derived to better classify subthreshold accumulation given a single PET scan by maximizing the Youden's J Index (YI) and the overall percentage agreement (OPA).
With C K as the reference, the optimal cutoff was determined as 13.0
A  L , having YI of 0.77, OPA of 0.89 and an AUC of 0.91.
With C 2SD as the reference, the optimal cutoff was determined as 13.3
A  L , having YI of 0.79, OPA of 0.90 and an AUC of 0.91.
YI and OPA response curves for each cutoff are displayed in Fig.

Sample size estimations
With knowledge of the A  L change values for the A (-) accumulators and A -converter/A ( + ) individuals, the sample sizes necessary to detect a 25% reduction in annual A  accumulation with 80% power at alpha 0.01 (two-tailed) when compared to a hypothetical control group were determined.
The estimated sample size per group was 79 for the A (-) accumulators and 59 for the A -converter/A ( + ) group.
The change of 2.40 (1.09)
A  L /year for the A (-) accumulators and a corresponding 25% reduction was computed translating to a medium effect size (Cohen's d [95% CI]) of 0.55 [0.23, 0.87] difference between groups (i.e.
slightly over a half standard deviation difference between the means).
Similarly, the change for the A -converter/A ( + ) group was 3.22 (1.26)
A  L /year which translates to an effect size of 0.64 [0.27, 1.01] using a 25% reduction.
This represents a medium-high effect size of mean differences.

Discussion
Due to the high prevalence of AD in DS, it is important to understand the natural history of A  accumulation in the DS population to facilitate their inclusion in clinical trials aimed at A  plaque clearance, analogous to the Dominantly Inherited Alzheimer's Network -Trials Unit (DIAN-TU) project
Our previous longitudinal research found that nondemented adults with DS evidence faster striatal A  accumulation, but slower A  accumulation  The A  L value with maximum YI and OPA was selected as the optimal cutoff for subthreshold A ( + ).
in the frontal cortex and precuneus compared to nondemented elderly without DS who are at risk for late-onset AD, suggesting that early A  increases in DS are most prominent in the striatum
When classifying the DS population into A (-), A -converter, and A ( + ) groups, rates of striatal A  accumulation were also found to be greatest in the A -converters, however, striatal and cortical A  accumulation were indistinguishable in the A ( + ) group
Together, this previous work suggests that the rate of A  accumulation is approximately the same across all brain regions in DS, with the striatum starting the accumulation process earlier than other regions in the preclinical AD phase.
The current study builds on these previous findings by showing the striatum to have the greatest change in the A -converters based on the modeled PiB images.
In the A ( + ) group, the striatum continued to show the greatest SUVr change, and the cortical SUVr change was similar to the striatal rate of change in the A -converters.
Our previous work evaluating A  L change in DS revealed longitudinal increases of ~3 A  L /year in A ( + ) individuals
In the current study, further classifying participants by A -status revealed that both A ( + ) individuals and individuals that converted from A (-) to A ( + ) at the most recent scan showed longitudinal increases of ~3 A  L /year, while A (-) individuals on an A -accumulating trajectory showed increase of ~2 A  L /year.
In our sample, the typical age of conversion to A ( + ) when considering global A  in DS was ~46 years, with the youngest observed case of A -conversion at age 33 years.
Since A  is uniformly detected in DS much earlier than late-onset AD with similar global rates of longitudinal increase, DS as a population is well suited for inclusion in anti-A  clinical trials.
To better characterize the earliest stages of A  progression in DS, A  L change was used to distinguish A (-) participants that were evidencing increases in A  accumulation compared to those that were not yet accumulating A .
To identify A  accumulation, two separate classifier methods were performed and compared using the A  L change data.
The first cutoff (C K ) was generated by performing k-means clustering with resampling across all change values, and a second, more conservative cutoff (C 2SD ) was derived by taking the mean + 2 * SD of the change from the A (-) group.
A  L change values between the two most recent longitudinal scans for each participant were then calculated, and A (-) participants were classified as A (-) accumulators if their change value exceeded either of the two cutoffs.
The two most recent scans were chosen for this analysis since the majority of A (-) individuals who eventually turned out to be accumulators were on non-accumulating trajectories prior to the most recent scan.
Thus, evaluating the A  L change value between the two most recent scans provides a better representation of A  L change in the actual A  accumulation phase of A (-) accumulators than if several points during the non-accumulating phase were included as well.
For both cutoff methods, A (-) accumulators displayed A  L change values distinguishable from A (-) non-accumulators.
Additionally, no significant difference was observed between the A  L change values of the A (-) accumulator, A -converter and A ( + ) groups.
This finding suggests that A (-) accumulators follow a similar trajectory of A  L change to that of A ( + ) individuals, highlighting the usefulness of longitudinal imaging for detecting the very earliest stages of A  progression in DS detected with PET amyloid imaging.
Given the A (-) accumulators and the A -converter/A ( + ) group, estimated sample sizes necessary to detect a 25% reduction in annual A  change with 80% power (alpha 0.01) were determined.
The estimated sample size was smallest in the A -converter/A ( + ) group (59), followed by larger sample size for the A (-) accumulators (79).
This analysis was repeated for an alpha of 0.05, in which the sample sizes for the A -converter/A ( + ) and A (-) accumulator groups reduced to 39 and 53, respectively, suggesting that relatively small sample sizes would be needed to monitor treatment effects in both early and late intervention studies.
While A ( + ) status is used to confirm the presence of AD-related pathology when cognitive impairments have been observed, an under-standing of how subthreshold A  accumulation can predict future ADrelated cognitive decline is less understood.
Some longitudinal studies have attempted to relate cognitive change with subthreshold A  accumulation in non-DS populations measured with SUVr but found no observable relation
However, a larger study with longer durations between baseline and follow-up scans revealed subtle associations between subthreshold A  SUVr and cognitive change
The authors of that study note that removal of participants with fewer than three time points improved the statistical significance of the associations, suggesting the change calculated from participants with only two time points were primarily influenced by SUVr variability
Another longitudinal study in late-onset AD found that individuals with subthreshold A  accumulation demonstrated tau increase that correlated with worsening cognitive performance, emphasizing the importance of longitudinal imaging to better characterize early A  change
Furthermore,
In the current study, we highlight the capability of measuring subthreshold A  change with longitudinal imaging to better characterize the earliest stages within the natural history of A  progression in DS.
All of the DS participants in the current study that were classified as A (-) accumulators underwent at least three time points of image collection spanning five to eight years following the baseline visit, suggesting that longitudinal imaging studies will require several follow-up visits over a fairly long duration in order to capture both the A (-) and A  accumulation phases necessary to accurately characterize early A  accumulation.
Our analysis of A  L change revealed that A  accumulation at subthreshold detection levels (i.e., prior to being A ( + )) is comparable to that observed for individuals who are A ( + ), suggesting that longitudinal imaging can help lead to the underlying factors causing early accumulation.
A recent study evaluating longitudinal cognitive change in DS identified cognitive decline up to 20 years prior to the typical age of dementia diagnosis (~55 years), suggesting that the optimal recruitment age for clinical trials falls between 36 and 45 years
With the mean age of A ( + ) in our cohort of ~46 years and the identification of subthreshold A  accumulators through longitudinal imaging, our findings suggest that the current cutoff for A ( + ) of 20.0
A  L may be too conservative to identify the earliest A  accumulators for clinical trial recruitment.
Therefore, knowledge of these early A  accumulators in DS through longitudinal imaging was used to inform a more sensitive A ( + ) cutoff to identify the beginning of A  detection using a single PET scan.
With the A  L change cutoffs of C K and C 2SD as reference, a range of potential A ( + ) cutoffs (i.e.
10-25 A  L with increments of 0.1 A  L ) were explored.
The A  L value that maximized both the Youden's J Index (YI) and overall percentage agreement (OPA) with C K or C 2SD was selected as the most optimal A ( + ) cutoff for early A  deposition.
The most optimal A ( + ) cutoff was 13.0 A  L using C K as reference, and 13.3
A  L using C 2SD as reference.
The cutoff of 13.3
A  L showed slightly higher YI and OPA with the A  L change cutoff at identifying early A  accumulators when compared to the cutoff of 13.0 A  L .
Similar work has been performed in late-onset AD to identify subthreshold A ( + ) cutoffs using Centiloids as the outcome measure to match both changes in cognition and increases in longitudinal A  slopes
The authors report several cutoffs in the range of 15.0-18.5 Centiloids that accurately identify early A  retention
Another study derived a PET cutoff of 12 Centiloids in late-onset AD to match a previously established cerebrospinal fluid A  42 cutoff for A ( + ), suggesting that fluid biomarkers can be used in conjunction with PET amyloid imaging to better define the earliest stages of A  accumulation
To match our findings in DS to the cutoffs determined in late-onset AD, Centiloid values were calculated in our DS cohort following previously described methodology
The value of 13.3
A  L corresponds to 18.0 Centiloids, falling within the range of optimal A ( + ) cutoffs for determining early A  change in late-onset AD.
Due to the substantial number of participants that completed only two PiB scans to date, the current study was limited to analysis based on A  change between the baseline and most recent scans.
As more scans are obtained for these participants, future work in this population will involve longitudinal modeling to better characterize the earliest stages of A  accumulation.
Additionally, future studies will explore the relationship between A  accumulation and neuropsychological measures of cognition to match A  change with cognitive decline in DS.
Another limitation to the current study involved classifying A (-) accumulators using cutoffs derived from the same sample.
This framework of A (-) accumulator classification and the new A ( + ) cutoff for early A  retention should be validated by applying them prospectively to new cases or by applying them to the non-DS population in future longitudinal studies.
Additionally, longitudinal imaging in DS should be used in conjunction with plasma or cerebrospinal fluid measures of A  to better predict membership in an A (-) accumulator group given a single PET scan.

Conclusion
Using the A  L metric, modeled PiB images generated at different stages of AD progression present a method of visualizing regional longitudinal A  change in DS.
Longitudinal A  L trajectories were capable of distinguishing A  accumulators from non-accumulators in DS, and A  L change was strongly associated with age, with the mean age at A ( + ) conversion of ~46 years.
Similar to late-onset AD, the annual rate of global A  change in DS was ~3 A  L /year.
Longitudinal imaging allowed for identification of subthreshold A  accumulation during the earliest stages of AD progression in which A (-) accumulators with DS revealed similar rates of A  change to those that were A ( + ), suggesting that longitudinal imaging can inform the identification of very early A  accumulators for clinical intervention studies.
Using knowledge of these early A  accumulators, a new A ( + ) cutoff of 13.3
A  L was derived to better identify early A  retention given a single PET scan.



Fig. 1 .
Fig. 1.
Modeled PiB SUVr and SUVr difference images (units of SUVr/year) for the A (-), A -converter and A ( + ) groups generated from Eq. (1) .
SUVr images are overlaid with an MRI surface projection from a healthy DS brain (no A  and no MCI/AD consensus).



Fig. 2 .
Fig. 2. Longitudinal A  L with respect to age for A (-), A -converter and A ( + ) groups (left).
Longitudinal A  L with respect to age displayed as linear trajectories centered on the mean age and mean A  L for each participant (right).



Fig. 3 .
Fig. 3. Positive association between A  L change values (A  L /year) and age for each participant with Down syndrome.



Fig. 4 .
Fig. 4. A  L change values (A  L /year) between the two most recent longitudinal time points for A (-) non-accumulator, A (-) accumulator, A -converter and A ( + ) groups categorized by the A  L change cutoffs using the k-means clustering (C K ; top) and mean + 2 * SD methods (C 2SD ; bottom).



Fig. 5 .
Fig. 5. Youden's J Index (YI) and overall percentage agreement (OPA) response curves with respect to A  L using the cutoffs C K (left) and C 2SD (right) as reference.The
A  L value with maximum YI and OPA was selected as the optimal cutoff for subthreshold A ( + ).



Table 1
Down syndrome participant demographics categorized by the number of longitudinal PiB scans performed.



Table 2
Regional SUVr differences (SUVr/year) from the modeled SUVr images for each A  group.