Sex differences in the development of mild cognitive impairment and probable Alzheimer’s disease as predicted by hippocampal volume or white matter hyperintensities
This study examined biological sex differences in the development of mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and probable Alzheimer's disease (AD) development as predicted by changes in the hippocampus or white matter hyperintensities.
A secondary data analysis of the National Alzheimer's Coordinating Center Uniform Data Set was conducted.
We selected samples of participants with normal cognition at baseline who progressed to MCI (n = 483) and those who progressed to probable AD (n = 211) to determine if hippocampal volume or white matter hyperintensities (WMH) at baseline predicted progression to probable AD or MCI and whether the rate of progression differed between men and women.
The survival analyses indicated that changes in hippocampal volumes affected the progression to probable AD (HR = 0.535, 95% CI [0.300-0.953])
only among women.
White men had an increased rate of progression to AD (HR = 4.396,; HR = 4.665, 95% ) compared to men in other race and ethnic groups.
Among women, increases in hippocampal volume ratio led to decreased rates of progressing to MCI (HR = 0.386, 95% CI [0.166-0.901]).
Increased WMH among men led to faster progression to MCI (HR = 1.048.
95% CI [1.011-1.086]).
Women and men who were older at baseline were more likely to progress to MCI.
In addition, results from longitudinal analyses showed that women with a higher CDR global score, older age at baseline, or more disinhibition

Introduction
Currently 5.3 million people over the age of 65 are diagnosed with Alzheimer's disease dementia in the United States
Of those living with Alzheimer's disease today, two-thirds are women
This recognition has led to emergent research that seeks to understand the causes and risk across the spectrum of dementia development
Despite the fact that calls for including women in clinical research and the study of sex differences in disease development have been ongoing
In fact, some researchers maintain that sex differences in dementia development do not exist, that the risk is equal between sexes within age cohorts, and that the difference in prevalence is only attributable to life expectancy rather than sex differences
Others attribute the difference in prevalence to survival bias, citing better cardiac health for men living past the age of 65, thereby decreasing their risk of dementia development
We hypothesize that there are biological sex differences in the development of and progression to mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and probable Alzheimer's disease (AD) development when using white matter hyperintensities (WMH) or hippocampal volume as predictors of progression.
Research regarding sex differences in dementia development typically points to the longer life expectancy generally experienced by women as the rationale for a higher occurrence in women
Even still, current research suggests that there are significant sex differences in advanced aging populations.
For instance, in one study men diagnosed with MCI were more likely to have diabetes, history of a stroke, and a higher body mass index, while women reported increased instances of sleep disturbance, social isolation, comorbid disabilities, and rated their health poorly.
As such, men and women displayed differing risk profiles
Findings indicated that 81.7% of women and 24% of men, 90 years of age, were diagnosed with AD, while sex differences were not found with regard to vascular dementia.
Further, 65-year-old women had a cumulative risk for developing dementia that was twice that of men studied
Sex and gender are both important considerations when exploring differences in chronic disease development.
Sex differences are biological variances between men and women, including chromosomal differences (XX versus XY chromosomes), gonadal differences, and hormonal differences.
This article explores sex differences solely, though gender differences that develop through cultural customs, rearing, roles, and access to educational and employment opportunities may also influence the etiology and progression of chronic diseases
Furthermore, biological factors influence other aspects of development over the life course, such as neurological development and degeneration.
Accordingly, neurological differences between women and men must be fully explored to understand these differences, though a complete explanatory theoretical framework for sex differences in dementia development remains to be seen.
Sex-determining genes along with fetal hormones contribute to sex-based differences in brain development, composition, and function
These differences inform variances in the development, onset, and the prevalence of neurological diseases
Levels of sex steroids naturally change and decrease with age
For instance, decreased testosterone and altered dehydroepiandrosterone sulphate (DHEAS) levels were found to be correlated in men patients with AD
Other researchers, focusing on women's twofold risk of developing a number of affective disorders, as well as dementia (but not Parkinson's disease), identify estradiol fluctuations as a potential culprit
These hormonal changes are thought to lead to deteriorating cognition in women with declining estrogen levels, though introducing transdermal estradiol or unopposed conjugated estrogen have not demonstrated a statistically significant ability to improve memory scores nor stop or slow cognitive decline
Research in this area is ongoing.
Loss of hippocampal volume is often correlated with neurodegeneration and memory loss, ultimately resulting in dementia (see Figure
The hippocampus is a brain structure in the medial temporal lobe that plays an important role in memory binding, encoding, and retrieval
Hippocampal atrophy has also been found in individuals who have been diagnosed with posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), with volume differences up to 10% reported between those with and without PTSD
Glucocorticoids, which are adrenal steroids that are released during times of stress, have also been implicated in hippocampal atrophy in rodent models
In older adults, neurofibrillary-associated degeneration starts in the hippocampus and entorhinal cortex and proceeds throughout the brain
Atrophy of the hippocampus early in the disease manifestation makes this brain structure an important biomarker of neurodegeneration.
A myriad of investigations target the role of this brain structure in subcortical ischemic vascular disease leading to dementia
Studies have confirmed that the hippocampus displays volume loss, which correlates with cognitive status, such that individuals with AD experienced the highest annual rates of atrophy, followed by individuals with MCI transiting to AD, individuals with MCI but not declining, individuals with normal cognition but declining to MCI, and healthy controls
A study examining patients with amnestic MCI (aMCI)
Hippocampal volumes were significantly reduced among those with aMCI, but the sex differences were not related to degree of atrophy.
Even though there was equivalent atrophy among men and women with aMCI, women demonstrated an increase in impaired cognitive function as compared to men, suggesting that women were more vulnerable to impairment at an earlier stage in the disease spectrum
White matter hyperintensities (WMH) are the consequences of cerebral disease impacting small vessels
These changes in brain white matter are studied via neuroimaging and neuropathological testing and are indicative of dementia development in patients who have cerebrovascular diseases
These brain lesions, observed during magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), are found to be more severe and in larger quantity in older subjects and can be associated with poor medication response in patients
Studies have indicated that there is an association between WMH and executive dysfunction
Previous studies have found equivalent coherence of WMH in the brains of men and women and found the effects of WMH coherence to be equally distributed between the sexes with respect to measures of gait and balance
Other researchers have found that women accumulated twice the amount of deep WMH than men, though the progression of periventricular WMH was equal between the sexes in a 3-year follow-up period
Although information regarding the impact of hippocampal volume, WMH, and dementia onset and development is available in the literature, sparse information exists regarding sex differences in this process.
This study seeks to examine sex differences in the development of and progression to MCI and AD using hippocampal volume and WMH as predictors.

Methods
A secondary data analysis was conducted of data obtained from September 2005 to March 2017 from the National Alzheimer's Coordinating Center (NACC) Uniform Data Set (UDS).
Specifically, a subset of participants with MRI information, specifically white matter hyperintensities and hippocampal volume, was utilized for the current study.
UDS data was based on 35 past and present Alzheimer's Disease Centers (ADCs) and includes data collected at a baseline visit and subsequent annual evaluations.
At each visit, clinicians obtain information regarding a variety of demographic and social history data, as well as medical history and use of medications by the participant.
At the discretion of the individual ADCs, laboratory and imaging tests are conducted with participants to aid in diagnostic determinations and provide information about a medical illness when completing UDS forms.
Some participants also agree to donate their brain tissue for analysis postmortem, and data obtained from autopsied brain samples are included in the data set.
In accordance with the National Institute on Aging-Alzheimer's Association workgroups on diagnostic guidelines for Alzheimer's disease
Using the version 3 forms, neuropsychologists assess participants using the following tests: Montreal Cognitive Assessment
The CDR
The Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR) has been shown to be able to distinguish between participants with AD and those with normal cognition when comparing English and Spanish speakers.
Even in the presence of education, age, and cultural differences, the CDR performed as intended in similar cohorts
The clinician's diagnosis (either a single clinician or a consensus) is based upon the participant's cognitive and behavioral status, biomarkers, imaging, genetics, and etiological diagnoses.
Normal cognition is defined as a CDR
All-cause dementia requires all of the following criteria to be met: cognitive or behavioral symptoms that interfere with the ability to function at work or with usual activities; a decline from previous levels of functioning that is not due to, or better explained by, cognitive impairment or a major psychiatric disorder; and the detection of cognitive impairment through history taking and objective cognitive assessment.
In addition, the participant has to be impaired in one of the following domains: the ability to acquire and remember new information, impaired reasoning and handling of complex tasks and/or poor judgment, impaired visuospatial abilities, impaired language functions, or changes in personality or behavior.
If the participant does not have dementia nor normal cognition, MCI is considered based on a change in cognition from a previous level, impairment in one or more cognitive domains (these include memory, language, executive function, attention, and visuospatial skills), and the preservation of independence in functional abilities.
Radiologists and other imaging specialists at 13 distinct ADCs voluntarily provide data from MRI scans, which NACC stores in a repository.
MRIs at NACC are best characterized as a convenience sample of images.
Imaging data collection and acquisition protocols vary by ADC.
As a result, the MRI files analyzed herein may include T1-weighted, fluid attenuation inversion recovery (FLAIR), diffusion tensor imaging (DTI), T2-weighted, or other magnetic resonance series (and any combination thereof).
Hippocampal (range: 1.00000-12.00000
cm 3 ) and WMH (range: 0.00000-300.00000
cm 3 ) volume was calculated by the IDEA lab at UC Davis following Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) protocols.
The specific protocol for WMH quantification has been described in detail previously
Hippocampal volumetric quantification was conducted using a semiautomated approach utilizing a commercially available highdimensional brain mapping tool (Medtronic Surgical Navigation Technologies, Louisville, CO), which has been validated through the manual tracing of the hippocampus
This method of hippocampal volumetric quantification demonstrates an intraclass coefficient of at least .94,
which is comparable to manual tracing, which has a coefficient of .
99
Participants eligible for this study were those with complete hippocampal volume and WMH data (n = 1174).
We further selected those who have had MCI diagnoses at a visit (treating that visit as the baseline) for the analysis of progression to probable AD and those who are cognitively normal at the baseline for the analysis of progression to MCI.
After excluding participants with missing race/ethnicity, CDR global score, and/or neuropsychiatric symptom data, the number of participants included in the analytic sample was 483 for the analysis of progression to MCI and 211 for the analysis of progression to probable AD.
Univariate analysis was conducted to determine the frequencies and distributions of all possible demographic and cognitive variables, including age, education level (0-12 years, 12-16 years, and beyond 17 years), race and ethnicity (White non-Hispanic, Black non-Hispanic, Hispanic, and other race non-Hispanic group), APOE ε4 allele type (no ε4 allele, 1 ε 4 allele, two ε 4 alleles), CDR global score, all neuropsychiatric symptoms, comorbidities (diabetes, hypertension, and hypercholesterolemia), hippocampal volume, WMH, number of participants, and number of follow-up days between men and women.
The measures of WMH and hippocampal volume were standardized by dividing by the total brain volume then multiplying by 100 in all analyses
Survival analysis
A failure event was defined as a participant's progression to MCI or probable AD.
These two diagnoses were treated as separate endpoints in separate analyses.
Right censoring was used to account for participants whose diagnoses at the last visit had not progressed to probable AD (or MCI), though progression may occur in future visits but are unaccounted for at present.
Time zero was equal to the participant's baseline visit, and time was measured in days since the first visit.
Outcomes are displayed as hazard ratios.
Survival analyses were conducted using the Cox proportional hazards model
The variable of interest was WMH or hippocampal volume in separate analyses.
The hypotheses were that women would experience a greater hazard of progression to probable AD (or MCI) compared to men given the same level of increase in the WMH or hippocampal volume, while adjusting for other covariates.
The Cox proportional hazard method allows observations to be made based on the risk of any given event-in this case, the rate of progression to probable AD (or MCI) from baseline levels of covariates.
Effects of each risk factor on progression to probable AD (or MCI) was followed for a 10-year period of time to draw conclusions on individual effects and additive effects.
Previous studies have used this method in the determination of the effects of sex or APOE-related risk of the development of AD
We adjusted for variables that were significant in the log rank test for the progression to MCI or probable AD.
For probable AD, the covariates included White non-Hispanic race and CDR global score.
For MCI, the covariates were age, CDR global score, and neuropsychiatric symptoms (disinhibition, irritability, night-time behavior, and appetite).
Additionally, we used the generalized linear mixed model (GLMM;
We performed the GLMM for women and men separately with hippocampal volumes or WMH as a covariate in the model.
We also included other covariates used in the Cox model.
Results are displayed as odds ratios.
The statistical programs STATA

Results
Baseline characteristics are summarized separately for women and men for the progression to probable AD (Table
There were 106 women and 105 men for the analysis of progression to probable AD.
Among those participants, 26 women and 23 men progressed to probable AD by the end of the observation period.
The average follow-up days were not statistically significantly different between women and men (1108.76 vs. 1021.10,
P = .39).
However, women were less likely to have a postgraduate degree (13.21% vs. 32.38%,
P = .00),
be White (55.66% vs. 73.33%,
P = .01),
and have diabetes (16.98% vs. 33.77%,
P = .02)
compared to men at the baseline.
Women also had greater percentage of hippocampal volume relative to the total brain volume (0.60% vs. 0.57%, P = .00)
compared to men.
There were 316 women and 167 men in the analysis of progression to MCI.
Among those participants, 21 women and 24 men progressed to MCI at the end of the observation period.
The average follow-up days were not statistically significantly different between women and men (1268.46 vs. 1170.30
days, P = .22).
However, women were more likely to be younger (70.44 vs. 72.98,
P = .02),
college educated (47.15% vs. 35.33%,
P = .01),
Black non-Hispanic (16.77% vs. 8.98%, P = .02),
and have a CDR global score of 0 (87.97% vs. 77.25%,
P = .00)
compared to men at the baseline.
The proportion of women with more than 17 years of education (comparable to undergraduate education) was significantly lower than the proportion of men (29.11% vs. 39.52%,
P = .02).
There was also a lower percentage of women who had a CDR global score of 0.5 (12.03% vs. 22.75%, P = .00),
delusions (0.00% vs. 1.20%,
P = .05),
and irritability (9.49% vs. 20.96%,
P = .00)
compared to men.
Women also had a significantly greater percentage of hippocampal volume relative to total brain volume (0.64% vs. 0.61%, P = .00)
at baseline.
Survival analyses were performed to identify main effects of MRI-derived indicators.
Only covariates that were significant in the log-rank test were included to predict the hazard ratio of progression to probable AD (or MCI).
Results are summarized in Table
Among women, a 1% increase in hippocampal volume ratio (relative to total brain volume), resulted in a 46.5% reduction in the rate of progressing to AD.
We did not find significant impact of hippocampal volume on the progression to AD among men.
White men had an increased rate of progression to AD (HR = 4.396, 95% CI [1.012-19.08]).
We did not find a significant impact of WMH ratio (relative to the total brain volume) on progression to probable AD among either men or women (column 3-4 of Table
However, we again found that White men had an increased rate of progression to AD (HR = 4.665, 95% CI [1.072-20.29])
compared to men in other racial groups.
For the progression to MCI, among women, a 1% increase in hippocampal volume ratio (relative to total brain volume), decreased the rate of progressing to MCI by 61.4% (Column 5 of Table
We did not find significant impact of hippocampal volume on the progression to MCI among men (Column 6 of Table
Women (HR = 1.092, 95% CI [1.035-1.151])
and men (HR = 1.101, 95% CI [1.037-1.169])
who were older at the baseline visit were also more likely to progress to MCI.
For the progression to MCI, among women, we did not find the impact of WMH to be significant (Column 7 of Table
However, among men, the rate of progressing to MCI increased by 4.8% (Column 8 of Table
Women (HR = 1.084, 95% CI [1.028-1.143])
and men (HR = 1.075, 95% CI [1.008-1.146])
who were older at the baseline visit were also more likely to progress to MCI.
Results from GLMM analyses (Table
Higher hippocampal volume (or less hippocampal atrophy) also significantly decreased the odds of AD development for women (OR = 0.403, 95% CI [0.231-0.701])
more than men (OR = 0.468, 95% CI [0.263-0.832]).
Higher hippocampal volume also significantly decreased the odds of MCI development for women (OR < 0.01, 95% CI [0-0.026]), but not significantly for men.
White men showed higher odds of probable AD development than men from other race and ethnicity groups when adjusting by hippocampal volume (OR = 5.297, 95% ) or WMH
Women with a higher CDR global score, older age at baseline, and/or higher levels of disinhibition symptoms showed significantly higher odds of MCI development, but there was no significant difference for men.

Discussion
Our results indicate that there are sex differences in the development of probable AD and MCI as predicted by MRI indicators.
These findings add to the mixed literature on sex differences in AD development.
While previous researchers have found that women may be more susceptible to AD development, and that women are overrepresented among AD patients, these results indicate that women experienced a slightly slower odds of progressing to probable AD (or MCI) given higher levels of hippocampal volume.
We did not observe similar impact of hippocampal on progression to AD or MCI among men.
Women also experienced a lower hazard of progressing to MCI given a higher level of hippocampal volume compared to men.
These results are in line with that from previous studies in terms of the role of hippocampal volume as a predictive tool, despite the fact that previous studies may not have analyzed differences by sex.
The results were similar between the two statistical techniques utilized.
The change in the significance for some variables is probably due to the different outcomes used in the different models.
The survival analyses were performed using the Cox proportional hazard model and the sample was constructed using (a) the progression time from normal cognition to the diagnoses of MCI or censored, or (b) the progression time from the diagnoses of MCI to the diagnoses of probable AD or censored as the outcome.
The longitudinal analyses were performed using GLMM, which analyzed the trajectory change of the odds of probable AD or MCI.
The outcomes were the status of probable AD or MCI (yes/no) at each visit.
Participants with older age at baseline were more likely to progress to MCI, which is consistent with current knowledge regarding neuropathological processes of AD, in that advancing age is one of the greatest risk factors
Despite the fact that AD is not a normative part of brain aging, age is a risk factor nonetheless, as prevalence estimates indicate that 3% of 65-74-year-olds, 17% of 75-84year-olds, and 32% of individuals over the age of 85 are diagnosed with AD dementia
One of the main findings of the current study is that changes in hippocampal volumes affected the progression to or odds of probable AD and MCI further among women rather than men.
Increased hippocampal volume (or less hippocampal atrophy) decreased the odds of AD development for women (OR = 0.403, 95% CI [0.231-0.701])
compared to men (OR = 0.468, 95% CI [0.263-0.832]),
and it also decreased the odds of MCI development for women (OR < 0.01, 95% CI [0-0.026]), but not significantly for men.
Previous findings identify women age 65 or older to have a 38% higher risk of AD development than men of the same age cohort
This is in line with previous research in which hippocampal volumes predicted differences in "novel associative memory" for women, though the same was not true for men
In addition, lower standardized hippocampal volume (< 0.005) has been associated with poorer performance on verbal memory assessments in women under the age of 70 (but not men) compared to those with greater hippocampal volumes, confirming the importance of hippocampal volume in predicting functional memory in women
We also found that men experienced an increased hazard for progressing to MCI from normal cognition given increases in the WMH; however, we did not observe a similar impact of WMH on progression to MCI among women.
We did not find a significant impact of WMH ratio (relative to the total brain volume) on progression to probable AD among either men or women.
Interestingly, neither WMH in other brain regions nor cortical thickness predicted progression to AD.
The results presented by
The current study did not examine regional accumulations of WMH, so we are unable to determine the regional effects of WMH, which may account for differences in our results versus those of Brickman et al..
In other studies that examined sex differences in WMH, researchers hypothesized that sex differences in vascular risk factors and outcomes, wherein men experience a higher incidence of cardiovascular disease and hypertension, explain differences in WMH by sex
Other studies demonstrate results indicating that WMH were more common and severe in their sample of women, but there were not any consequent differences in cognitive functioning by sex
One recent study found there to be differences related to WMH between sexes.
In the Clinical Research Center for Dementia of South Korea study, sex-specific risk factors were explored in relation to future AD development in patients with mild cognitive impairment.
Men experienced significant risk factors that included severe periventricular WMH and poorer global cognitive function, while risk in women was associated with APOE e4 alleles and depressive symptoms at baseline
In both the Washington Heights-Inwood Columbia Aging Project and in the Etude Santé Psychologique Prévalence Risques et Traitement study, APOE ε4 carriers displayed higher WMH volume, and WMH was associated with an increased risk of dementia
Unexpectedly, APOE ε4 did not differentially play a role in increasing or hastening the progression to MCI or AD among men and women, though previous studies have also found that APOE was not correlated with hippocampal volume in relation to the progression to AD
Previous literature has noted that the link between APOE and Alzheimer's disease is purportedly stronger in women than in men (HR = 1.81 for women; HR = 1.27 for men)
An examination of APOE ε4 in an ADNI cohort of 339 participants showed that ε4/ ε4 carriers experienced WMH accumulation at a rate of 22.5% a year compared to a 10% per year accumulation for ε3/ε4 carriers
Some studies have suggested that estrogen therapy may lead to less risk of cognitive decline, while others have not supported the protective effect of estradiol but have noted an improvement in global cognition among estrogen replacement users post menopause
In one study, the use of estrogen replacement therapy in women without APOE ε4 resulted in less cognitive decline than women ε4 carriers
Given that APOE is a lipoprotein, researchers also found that women ε4 carriers had increased carotid wall thickness than women without ε4, and while oral estrogen use was significantly associated with less carotid wall thickness in women without ε4, the same was not true for women ε4 carriers.
Given that carotid atherosclerosis and APOE are associated with a greater risk of AD, these findings support a mechanism by which APOE and estrogen interact to produce a higher risk in women ε4 carriers
In contrast to the results from
This suggests a reduction in the deposition of amyloid-β among women who used transdermal 17βestradiol therapy within 3 years of the beginning of menopause.
While not considered in the current study, estrogen may have an explanatory role in the sex differences found in the progression to and development of MCI and AD, though the literature is mixed and not conclusive.
Consideration of the interactions between environmental and biological factors stand to move the field forward and provide a more contextualized and complete understanding of the ways in which biological sex differences and gendered life experiences interact to form risk and protective factors relevant for healthy and pathological aging.
Research has established that adversity in childhood is related to a plethora of negative health outcomes, including dementia
Yet it remains unclear how these psychosocial factors operate jointly with biological factors to influence the progression of AD.
Recent research suggests that environmental factors and life stressors across the life span, such as adversity and psychological reactions to events, can negatively affect one's physical health, biological characteristics, especially hormones, and neurobiology
The landmark Adverse Childhood Experiences (ACE) Study was among the first to find this striking correlation between negative life events in childhood (e.g., abuse, neglect, parent with addiction, poverty) and a person's physical and mental health later in adulthood
Researchers found a graded relation between adversity and health outcomes; the more ACEs people experienced, the more likely they were to have serious disease in adulthood, including ischemic heart disease, cancer, chronic lung disease, and liver disease.
In addition, individuals experiencing four or more ACEs had an increased risk of alcoholism, drug addiction, depression, and attempted suicide compared to individuals reporting no ACEs
Some recent research has highlighted specific association between ACEs and outcomes later in life.
For example, one's socioeconomic status as a child was found to be correlated to the burden of WMH in late life
Although ACEs are common in the general population, there is some research to suggest sex differences in the prevalence of certain ACEs.
However, evidence is equivocal with respect to sex differences related to the manifestation of ACEs
Research has also evidenced that life stressors later in life can influence one's health, including neuroendocrine functioning
Additionally, these impacts can vary between women and men.
For example,
That is, while women in the control group (i.e., no bereavement) evidenced increasing levels of cortisol, it was men in the bereaved group who demonstrated increasing levels of cortisol.
These researchers also found that the direction of these associations depended on context of the death (e.g., prolonged death, caregiving, sudden death), highlighting the importance of fully understanding psychosocial and biological factors.
Furthermore, certain genes, such as APOE, are thought to increase the brain's vulnerability to life stress, such that carriers may have a stronger response to stress
Psychosocial stress and cumulative childhood adversity have also been associated with shorter telomeres, which are protein complexes at the ends of chromosomes
Our results bring to light neuropathological differences between men and women, which future researchers may investigate further and identify sex-specific treatment options.
These results suggest the necessity of assessing ways to limit neurodegenerative progression and to consider different approaches for men and women.
Increased knowledge regarding sex-specific risk factor interaction effects will allow scientists and physicians to begin directing patients to proper preventive treatment, potentially decreasing the manifestation of AD.
There remain additional sex-specific disparities that must be addressed in future research, which may impact the way in which pharmaceutical and other therapies are chosen for individuals affected by AD.
For example,
Their results indicated that progression among women is best predicted by the loss of instrumental activities of daily living and the presence of depression, whereas the APOE ε4 allele and a history of stroke predicted progression among men.
Another study found a higher incidence of WMH in women and noted that estrogen use and APOE ε4 did not account for this difference.
In a meta-analysis of 15 studies (n = 828 men and 1,238 women with AD), Irvine, Laws, Gale, and Kondel (2012) found that men with AD consistently performed better on verbal and visuospatial tasks and tests of episodic and semantic memory.
This phenomenon was not better explained by age, education, or severity of AD.
These researchers speculated that this could be explained by "reduction of estrogen in postmenopausal women, sex differences in AD pathology, and greater cognitive reserve in men"
Researchers have attempted to illustrate these differences in neuropsychological performance using connectivity studies and diffusion tensor imaging (DTI)
While utilizing DTI, researchers have found that brains in men appear to be structured in such a way as to "facilitate connectivity between perception and coordinated action," and brains in women were structured to "facilitate communication between analytical and intuitive processing modes"
Future studies replicating these findings can provide information on tailoring preventative and responsive treatment to target sex-specific risk factors.
The strengths of this study include the examination of individuals with similar hippocampal volume and WMH at baseline followed longitudinally over 10 years, whereas many studies only examine data for 5-year follow-up.
Our overall sample size is in line with other extant literature, though the NACC sample is not considered to be nationally representative.
Additionally, this sample was predominately White non-Hispanic.
A more culturally diverse sample may generate interesting results with more generalizable findings.
In addition, given that this is a secondary data analysis, with virtually no exposure history except that which can be inferred from the one to 10 years of observation per participant, it is not possible to imply or assume causality.
In addition, though causes of hippocampal atrophy and WMH may stem from a variety of endogenous and exogenous sources, a lack of exposure history prohibits an analysis including history prior to the participants' first observation.
Given that we were interested in examining differences in brain structures in men and women as these regions impacted progression from normal cognition to MCI to AD, each participant acted as his/her own control as "factors that vary between individuals remain constant within the same individual"
This article was limited to the exploration of sex differences through the examination of two brain regions of interest.
Future studies should additionally explore the effect of gender differences in addition to biological sex differences.
In addition, future studies should account for the use of estradiol therapy in postmenopausal participants given that this may influence cognitive decline and may also interact with APOE.
The current study does not offer or recommend potential treatment for AD-it only addresses the issue that there are sex differences in health outcomes among women versus men.
Future research must determine the proper courses of therapeutic treatment to better address these physiological differences.
Currently, there is limited treatment available for AD.
Therapies effective in delaying the progression of AD, and designed to treat the disease once it has manifested, must be discovered to fight the symptoms and causes of the disease, while also taking into account sex-related differences in disease development.
In conclusion, future neurobiological studies should identify the specific sex differences in neuropathology and the mechanism leading to sex differences in neurodegenerative decline.
Conceptual frameworks exist that may inform research design, sample selection, and the theoretical underpinnings of the hypothesized sex differences.
Data representing decades of exposure, neuropsychological assessments, and life history are necessary to provide a comprehensive understanding of how differences in neurodegeneration may occur by sex and to properly control for all relevant explanatory factors.
Other contributing factors should be examined, such as the presence of anxiety and depression among women and how that may affect the disease process and progression to AD.
It is known that anxiety and depression are more prevalent among women across the life span
Additionally, psychiatric factors affect cognitive performance and decline.
Identifying sex differences among psychiatric factors in MCI and AD patients, both premorbidly and after diagnosis, can help identify how the presence of these symptoms moderates disease progression.
Careful consideration of one's life experiences across the life span, but especially adverse childhood events, should also be considered in future research and included, even retrospectively, in assessments of older adults participating in both cross-sectional and longitudinal studies.
The interaction between environmental and biological factors should not be overlooked, as it stands to significantly influence individuals' health.
Other factors such as sex differences in cardiovascular risk factors, quality of life, or caregiver burden should also be investigated in relation to progression from MCI to AD. Understanding sex differences will help aid in developing sex-specific treatments that may be more beneficial for women diagnosed with AD and/or in preventing the onset of AD.
Cox regression analyses examining the hazard of progression to Alzheimer's disease or mild cognitive impairment given hippocampal volume or white matter hyperintensities.

Table 3
Generalized linear mixed model analyses examining the odds of Alzheimer's disease or mild cognitive impairment given hippocampal volume or white matter hyperintensities.


Researchers utilized version 2 of the Uniform Data Set from 2005 to 2015, and version 3 of the UDS, which corresponds to the McKhann et al. (2011) guidelines, from 2015-2017.



Figure 1 .
Figure 1.
Coronal T1-weighted MRI scans of control (left) and patient with AD (right).
The patient with AD shows atrophy of the hippocampus.
Both subjects are 75 years old.
The patient with AD shows clear atrophy of the hippocampus.
Modified from Dialogues in Clinical Neuroscience with permission of the publisher (Les Laboratories Servier©, Suresnes, France).
Original source: Scheltens, P. (2009).
Imaging in Alzheimer's disease.
Dialogues in Clinical Neuroscience, 11, 191-199.



Figure 2 .
Figure 2. White matter hyperintensities on magnetic resonance imaging (axial fluid attenuated inversion recovery sequence) in two 80-year-old patients: (left) minor white matter hyperintensities; (right) extensive white matter hyperintensities predominating in periventricular region.
White matter lesions are considered present if hyperintense on T2 weighted, fluid attenuated inversion recovery, and proton density images, without prominent hypointensity on T1 weighted images.
Reprinted with permission from: Debette and Markus (2010).


, the Benson Complex Figure Copy, Number Span Test Forward and Backward, category fluency, Trail Making Test, Multilingual Naming Test



Table 1
Baseline characteristics of the participants overall and by sex.



to probable AD Progression to MCI Variables Women Men P value of t or X 2 Women Men P value of t test or X 2



Table 2