The Promises and Challenges of Erythropoietin for Treatment of Alzheimer’s Disease
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the most prevalent neurodegenerative disorder in the world, and intracellular neurofibrillary tangles and extracellular amyloid-beta protein deposits represent the major pathological hallmarks of the disease.
Currently available treatments provide some symptomatic relief but fail to modify primary pathological processes that underlie the disease.
Erythropoietin (EPO), a hematopoietic growth factor, acts primarily to stimulate erythroid cell production, and is clinically used to treat anemia.
EPO has evolved as a therapeutic agent for neurodegeneration and has improved neurological outcomes and AD pathology in rodents.
However, penetration of the blood-brain barrier (BBB) and negative hematopoietic effects are the two major challenges for the therapeutic development of EPO for chronic neurodegenerative diseases like AD.
The transferrin receptors at the BBB, which are responsible for transporting transferrin-bound iron from the blood into the brain parenchyma, can be used to shuttle therapeutic molecules across the BBB.
In this review, we discuss the role of EPO as a potential neurotherapeutic for AD, challenges associated with EPO development for AD, and targeting the BBB transferrin receptor for EPO brain delivery.

(I) Pathological mechanisms and recent insights of Alzheimer's disease
Alzheimer's disease (AD), a neurodegenerative disorder accounting for more than 60% of the 36.5 million dementia cases worldwide, is characterized by progressive memory loss,

Pathogenesis
Many hypotheses have been developed to elucidate AD pathogenesis; however, the amyloid cascade, cholinergic, and inflammatory hypotheses remain among the most heavily studied (J.
An infectious origin of the disease has also gained traction in recent years

The Amyloid Cascade Hypothesis
The leading model for AD progression is the amyloid cascade hypothesis, which posits that the deposition of β-amyloid (Aβ) is the initial pathological event in AD leading to the formation of senile plaques followed by neurofibrillary tangles (NFT).
This leads to downstream neuronal cell death and ultimately dementia due to central nervous system (CNS) dysfunction (J. A.
Aβ is a protein consisting of 38-43 amino acids; it is formed proteolytically when amyloid precursor protein (APP) is cleaved by βand γ-secretases via the amyloidogenic pathway
The role of APP in synaptic transmission helps explain its endogenous abundance within the brain
Two forms of Aβ that are abundantly found in the AD brain are Aβ 40 and Aβ 42, the latter being more abundant and exhibiting greater CNS toxicity
As Aβ accumulates within the brain, it forms insoluble neuritic plaques, which contain a central amyloid core surrounded by activated microglia
Furthermore, Aβ plaque accumulation induces hyperphosphorylation of tau protein resulting in further toxicity to the CNS
Hyperphosphorylated tau is unable to bind and stabilize microtubules, and instead aggregates to form NFT, leading to downstream synaptic loss and impaired neuroregeneration (Z.
In concurrence with their involvement in AD pathology, Aβ and tau are often measured in the cerebrospinal fluid of patients for disease staging and prognostication

Neurotransmitter Dysfunction and Synaptic Loss
Aβ and NFT disrupt normal synaptic transmission to neighboring cerebral areas
Neurotransmitters are often seen in abnormal amounts in AD patients
For example, choline acetyltransferase, which is involved in the synthesis of acetylcholine, one of the most studied neurotransmitters in AD pathogenesis, is decreased in post-mortem AD brains
The excitatory neurotransmitter, glutamate, accumulates in AD brains, leading to increased N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor activation
Furthermore, Aβ plaque formation weakens synaptic inhibition via downregulation of gamma-Aminobutyric acid receptors, causing increased excitotoxicity in the CNS
Serotonin receptors, which are involved in cognitive processing, are also downregulated in the cortical and hippocampal areas, contributing to cognitive decline in AD brains
Histamine, another neurotransmitter important in cognitive functioning, also plays a crucial role in the pathogenesis of AD
Overall, improper synaptic communication has been linked to an imbalance in neurotransmitter levels, causing downstream synaptic loss and cognitive decline.
Thus, drugs that work to replenish normal neurotransmitter levels have been developed for AD

Mitochondrial Dysfunction and Oxidative Stress
Mitochondrial dysfunction, a naturally occurring part of the aging process, is an early finding in AD pathogenesis.
Aβ and tau aggregates impair mitochondrial function, causing oxidative stress within the cell that results in free radical damage
This oxidative stress induces further Aβ accumulation and tau phosphorylation, causing a selfperpetuating cycle of mitochondrial dysfunction, oxidative damage, and plaque formation

Microglial Activation and Inflammation
The role of neuroinflammation in AD pathogenesis is now widely recognized.
In the CNS, microglia are involved in synaptic remodeling and tissue surveillance.
However, pathologic stimuli, including Aβ plaque accumulation, can result in sustained microglial activation, and in the AD brain, Aβ plaques and NFT are often found surrounded by activated microglia
Activated microglia are involved in Aβ plaque clearance; however, sustained microglial activation can perturb this clearance process.
Activated microglia secrete pro-inflammatory cytokines like tumor necrosis factor α (TNF-α), and chemokines that further propagate an inflammatory response and neuronal degeneration in AD
Astrocytes, T-cells, complement proteins, and other acute phase reactants are also recruited to the sites of inflammation, causing an inflammatory storm that results in tissue damage.
Moreover, widespread inflammation encourages free radical formation, inciting further damage
Besides accelerating the progression of AD, growing evidence shows that inflammatory processes may drive AD pathology, thus providing a long window of opportunity for therapeutic intervention
Therapeutic strategies to mitigate neuroinflammation in AD, including the development of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR)-γ agonists and cytokine inhibitors have been/or are under investigation

Genetic Risk Factors
Many genes play a role in the development of AD; however, the most heavily associated is the gene encoding apolipoprotein-E (Apo-E), a protein involved in cholesterol transport
The Apo-E ε4 allele contributes to poor Aβ clearance from the brain and is a strong genetic risk factor for late-onset, sporadic AD.
On the other hand, the Apo-E ε2 allele confers AD protective effects and is associated with increased age at onset
Apart from Apo-E, increased APP expression greatly contributes to disease progression.
Encoded by a gene on chromosome 21q21.3-22.05,
higher levels of APP cause familial early-onset AD in patients with Down syndrome, owing to their extra copy of chromosome 21
Lastly, mutations in the genes encoding presenilins, neuronal proteins widely expressed in the CNS, are also associated with familial early-onset AD.
Presenilin 1 and presenilin 2 found on chromosome 14q24.3
and 1q31-42 respectively, are critical components of the ɣ-secretase complex and are involved in the amyloidogenic cleavage of APP
Other emerging genes associated with AD risk include genes involved in synapse turnover, clathrin-mediated endocytosis, amyloid clearance, and inflammation cascades

Current Treatment Options
Currently, there is no pharmacologic cure for AD, and drugs are prescribed to enhance cognition and treat AD symptoms.
FDA-approved drugs for AD belong to two classes: acetylcholinesterase inhibitors and NMDA receptor antagonists.
Acetylcholinesterase inhibitors currently approved for AD are donepezil, rivastigmine, and galantamine.
These drugs act by increasing the amount of acetylcholine in the brain to reestablish proper synaptic communication
However, these drugs only perform with modest efficacy and are approved for mild-to-moderate AD.
The NMDA receptor antagonist memantine, on the other hand, works by blocking NMDA receptors to regulate glutamatergic neurotransmission and prevent synaptic loss, which is thought to improve cognition in AD
AD patients taking memantine show improved functioning and decreased rate of decline upon cognition testing (van Marum 2009).
Apart from symptomatic treatment for AD, there are a number of anti-Aβ and anti-tau therapies in different stages of clinical development
AN1792 was the first active immunotherapy against Aβ 42 , however was discontinued due to reports of meningoencephalitis
Passive forms of immunotherapy against Aβ, including bapineuzumab and solanezumab, which act on soluble Aβ, performed poorly in Phase III clinical trials
Other anti-Aβ agents under development include antibodies that target aggregated Aβ, including aducanumab and gantenerumab.
Aducanumab slowed cognitive decline and reduced Aβ plaques in patients with early-stage AD, and is currently being tested in Phase III trials of early-onset AD.
Gantenerumab is currently in phase III trials for prodromal AD.
Additionally, βand γ-secretase inhibitors that prevent the cleavage of APP to pathogenic Aβ, like verubecestat and semagacestat, have been investigated to reduce the burden of Aβ plaques in the brain; however, clinical trials were largely unsuccessful
Meanwhile, tau-based immunotherapies are currently in early stages of clinical development.
RG7345, which is a humanized monoclonal antibody targeting the tau phosphoepitope pS422, caused an improvement in a transgenic mouse AD model but was discontinued after Phase I clinical trials
Besides these approaches, drug candidates that target different neuronal receptors (e.g.
serotonin receptor ligands), enzyme inhibitors (e.g.
lipoprotein-associated phospholipase A2 inhibitor), neurotrophic drugs, and anti-inflammatory (e.g.
etanercept) approaches, are currently under development

(II) Erythropoietin and AD
Erythropoietin (EPO), a 30.4 kDa hematopoietic growth factor produced in the kidney, acts primarily to stimulate erythroid cell production by supporting the survival, proliferation and differentiation of erythroid progenitor cells
Recombinant human EPO is FDA approved and clinically used to treat anemia
In the past decade, over 60 studies have demonstrated the neuroprotective role of EPO in neurodegenerative conditions
As shown in Figure
Overall, EPO has evolved as a therapeutic agent for CNS disorders given its robust non-hematopoietic neuroprotective effects.

Expression of EPO and EPO receptor in the CNS
The EPO receptor (EPOR) is a highly conserved member of the cytokine receptor superfamily.
EPOR expression in the brain is observed during development and adulthood in humans and other mammals
EPO expression is detected in neurons, astrocytes and pericytes, while EPOR is expressed in neurons, astrocytes and microglia
EPOR is prominently expressed in astrocytes, oligodendrocytes and certain neuronal populations in fetal brain during gestation
The expression of EPO and EPOR is controlled by hypoxia inducible factor-1 (HIF-1).
This hypoxia-dependent transcription of EPO is regulated via the hypoxia response element in the 3'-flanking region of EPO gene that specifically binds to HIF-1 under hypoxic conditions
Neuronal production of EPO is related to the oxygen tension of the medium in vitro, which is enhanced by hypoxia
Further, astrocytic EPO expression is increased by more than 100-fold under hypoxic conditions
Radio-iodinated EPO studies in rats indicate that EPOR expression is localized to the hippocampal and cortical areas, which are most vulnerable to AD pathology and ischemic insult
EPOR expression is also observed on the endothelial cells forming the blood-brain barrier (BBB), and EPOR is upregulated in the temporal cortex and hippocampus of patients with mild cognitive impairment and AD

Effect of EPO on AD pathology Amyloid Toxicity
AD is pathologically characterized by the accumulation of Aβ and tau hyperphosphorylation in the hippocampus and cortex.
Therefore, it is important for therapeutic AD agents to act on toxic Aβ buildup, association of newly cleaved Aβ fragments into oligomers and plaques, and tau phosphorylation.
Intraperitoneal injections of EPO induce a 20% reduction of total Aβ load and a 59% reduction of Aβ 40 protein level in mice; however, no significant decrease in Aβ 42 load is observed after EPO treatment
Tg2576 mice also exhibit a reduced amount of amyloid plaque after daily intraperitoneal injection of EPO for 5 days (S.
T.
Similarly, EPO reduces hippocampal Aβ accumulation in an intracerebroventricular streptozotocin-induced AD rat model
Intranasaladministration of EPO also decreases Aβ deposits in an APP/PS1 transgenic AD mouse model (Rodriguez
In vitro, EPO is reported to attenuate Aβ 25-35 -induced rat pheochromocytoma cell death by regulating anti-apoptotic protein expression
Further, EPO protects microglia mediated neuronal regeneration and Aβ clearance, in vitro
A recent study reported that EPO alleviates tau hyperphosphorylation via regulation of glycosynthase kinase-3β in a rodent AD model (Y.
P.

Mitochondrial Dysfunction and Oxidative Stress
Oxidative stress is linked to mitochondrial dysfunction in AD
In vitro, EPO treatment prior to Aβ 25-35 exposure significantly elevates cell viability, decreases ROS production, and stabilizes mitochondrial membrane potential (G.
EPO further attenuates nitric oxide and staurosporine-induced oxidative toxicity in neonatal rat astrocytes by promoting the expression of heme oxygenase-1
A massive release of synaptic glutamate in brain regions susceptible to Aβ-toxicity leads to excitotoxicity and oxidative stress, resulting in neurotoxicity.
EPO prevents glutamate-induced excitotoxicity and cell death by inhibiting mitochondrial calcium overload in cultured rat neurons
EPO activates several kinase cascades to confer resistance against oxidative stress-induced apoptosis (G.
It has also been demonstrated that EPO inhibits Bax/Bcl complex-mediated apoptosis induced by Aβ (Rodriguez

Neurotrophic Effects
The role of EPO as a neurotrophin and in neurogenesis has been well documented.
Intracerebroventricular administration of EPO significantly increases brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) expression in the brain.
EPO also induces BDNF production and long-term activation of its specific receptor, tyrosine receptor kinase B, resulting in EPO mediated neuroprotection against neurotoxin trimethyltin
Notably, BDNF levels are reduced in AD, and exogenous BDNF offers protection against Aβ-and tau-related neurodegeneration
The role of EPO-derived BDNF in AD, however, needs further investigation.
EPO augments choline acetyltransferase activity in mouse embryonic primary septal neurons and a cholinergic hybridoma cell line.
Moreover, EPO promotes survival of septal cholinergic neurons in adult rats which have undergone fimbria-fornix transections
Intraperitoneal administration of EPO spurs significant neurogenesis in the dentate gyrus in the streptozotocin-induced AD rat model; however, EPO does not change neurogenesis in the dentate gyrus of intact animals
Tg2576 mice treated with EPO show increased hippocampal and cortical neurogenesis identified by 5bromo-2-deoxyuridine fluorescent labeling, and increased synaptophysin expression.
Further, EPO enhances endothelial proliferation in the brains of Tg2576 mice, indicating the positive role of EPO in angiogenesis (S.
T.
Overall, these studies indicate that EPO acts as a potent neurotrophic factor to influence differentiation, maintenance and regeneration in the CNS.

Neuroinflammation
Increasing evidence suggests that neuroinflammation in AD is implicated as a significant contributor to disease pathogenesis and progression.
With respect to neuroinflammation, EPO prevents the Aβ 25-35 -induced increase in TNF-α and interleukin (IL) production in a rodent AD model
Besides its effect in AD rodent models, EPO has been reported to decrease production of TNF-α, IL-6, and monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 in an ischemic stroke model
Moreover, EPO also diminishes inflammation and glial activation in a model of brain inflammation
These data collectively suggest that EPO act as a protective cytokine in inflammatory pathologies of neurodegeneration, including AD.
The effect of immunomodulatory peptides on EPO expression in cultured human neurons, microglia, astrocytes, and oligodendrocytes has also been investigated.
EPO expression in human astrocytes was reduced by pro-inflammatory cytokines including IL-1β, IL-6 and TNF-α, whereas, EPOR expression was markedly increased in human neuronal cells by TNF-α
EPOR and EPO expression may thus be regulated by proinflammatory cytokines in the CNS.

Cognitive Function
AD is the most common cause of senile dementia and is characterized by a progressive decline in cognitive function.
Behavioral tests commonly used in animal AD studies attempt to mimic deficits in memory and cognition of AD patients.
In a contextual fear-conditioning test, EPO improves associative learning memory in aged transgenic AD mice (S.
T.
In a step-down inhibitory avoidance test, which measures short-term retention of an aversive stimulus, intraperitoneal EPO treatment restores Aβ 42 -induced loss of step-down latency (Y.
P.
Intranasal EPO alleviates place learning and spontaneous alteration deficits in the Morris Water Maze, which is used to measure spatial and long-term memory by recording escape latency, distance and velocity (Rodriguez
EPO administration also prevents deficits in alternation behavior in Y-maze and novel object recognition procedures in Aβ 25-35 injected mice (Rodriguez
Non-spatial long-term memory function deficits, tested by the passive avoidance procedure, are observed in AD and stroke models, and these are improved by EPO treatment
Using place learning in water maze, hippocampus-dependent spatial memory is improved by EPO
Similarly, bilateral injection of Aβ into the rat cortex leads to memory loss and synaptic plasticity defect, which are recovered by

(III) Limitation of EPO as a CNS-penetrating drug
Though EPO and EPOR have a role as an "endogenous neuroprotective system" in the brain, BBB penetration and negative hematopoietic effects are the two major challenges that have to be addressed before EPO can be developed as a neurotherapeutic.
EPO is a 30.4 kDa polar macromolecule and is larger than the molecular weight cut-off for lipid mediated free diffusion across the BBB
The finding that the EPOR is expressed at the brain capillaries suggested that peripheral EPO may cross the BBB to produce therapeutic effects in the brain
Further, systemically administered biotinylated-EPO was detected surrounding the brain capillaries, and this transport of biotinylated-EPO was eliminated by co-administration of unlabeled EPO
Based on these findings, it was suggested that EPO is transported across the BBB via a specific receptor-mediated transport system, however, the origin of the biotin label detected in these studies (biotin conjugated to EPO or free biotin) was not confirmed.
The presumption that EPO enters the CNS is also largely based on measurement of systemically administered EPO in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)
It should be noted that movement from blood into the CSF is controlled by the blood-CSFbarrier, and all molecules present in the blood enter the CSF at a rate that is inversely related to their molecular weight
Follow-up brain uptake studies using radiolabeled EPO in rodents and primates showed that the rate of EPO entry into the brain was very slow and that EPO entry into the brain was via a non-specific mechanism
Using the capillary depletion technique, which separates the brain homogenate into vascular pellet and postvascular supernatant, the rate of EPO entry into the brain was found to be comparable to that of a marker of brain blood volume (human IgG1) showing the limited transport of EPO across the BBB
EPO is administered systemically or intranasally in experimental AD
Systemic routes, though less invasive than the intracranial or intracerebroventricular routes used to bypass the BBB, require high dosage to infiltrate the brain and therefore result in heightened peripheral toxicity risk.
As a red blood cell growth factor, high systemic EPO doses induce negative hematopoietic side effects including increased hematocrit, arterial hypertension, cerebral convulsion, thromboembolism, iron deficiency, and influenza-like syndrome
Such hematopoietic side-effects associated with high systemic doses limit the applicability of the systemic route of administration for EPO delivery for chronic diseases like AD that require long term treatment.
EPO analogs with reduced erythropoietic activity and associated vascular complications are currently under investigation
Asialo-EPO, which is produced by the removal of sialic acid residues from EPO to yield a molecule with enhanced clearance has no effect on erythropoiesis but exerts neuroprotective effects in animal models of neural diseases
Another non-erythropoietic EPO derivative, carbamylated-EPO (CEPO), which is produced by the modification of lysine residues to homocitrulline, produces its protective effects through the EPOR/β common receptor, and not the classical EPOR.
In an AD mouse model, CEPO treatment improved memory and modulated the expression of molecules involved in neurotransmission.
However, compared to EPO, CEPO did not decrease Aβ plaque burden and soluble Aβ 40
The CEPO-Fc variant, which is engineered to prolong the halflife of CEPO, was also found to be protective in a rodent AD model
Notably, these non-erythropoietic variants of EPO are also macromolecules with limited BBB penetrability across the BBB, comparable to that of EPO
Another variant of EPO, neuro-EPO, which contains low sialic acid, has been designed.
Neuro-EPO is devoid of hematopoietic effects and is administered intranasally.
Neuro-EPO prevents oxidative damage, neuroinflammation, apoptosis and cognitive deficit in an AD animal model
Even though intranasal administration is advantageous over systemic administration with respect to systemic side effects, the efficacy of intranasal drug delivery decreases as molecular weight and hydrophilicity of the drug increase
Moreover, intranasal delivery relies on widespread drug diffusion from the olfactory CSF to brain entry sites, and drug diffusion decreases exponentially with distance
Large diffusion distances in human brains compared with smaller rodent brains may limit the efficacy of the intranasal route of administration in humans.
This is in contrast to the transvascular route across the BBB that results in widespread drug delivery throughout the brain because of the density and ubiquity of the cerebral vasculature
Hence, modifying EPO for direct and specific penetration of the BBB via the transvascular route and minimal hematopoietic effects is needed for AD.

(IV) BBB Receptor Mediated Transport of EPO
Molecular Trojan horse (MTH) technology holds promise for efficiently transporting neurotherapeutics across the BBB
MTH technology harnesses endogenous receptor mediated transcytosis (RMT) systems to ferry macromolecules into the brain.
For this, a fusion protein of the neurotherapeutic and a MTH, which is an antibody against an endogenous receptor expressed on the luminal side of brain endothelial cells, is engineered.
Systemic injection of the neurotherapeutic-MTH complex triggers its binding to the endogenous RMT receptor on the luminal side of the BBB, followed by subsequent endocytosis and release of the complex on the abluminal side
This approach can therefore be used to shuttle therapeutic molecules across the BBB noninvasively to treat CNS pathology
The two widely studied MTH vehicles are antibodies against the human insulin receptor and transferrin receptor (TfR)
The TfR system is responsible for transporting transferrin-bound iron from blood across the brain endothelium into the brain parenchyma
TfR is a type II transmembrane protein and is expressed at both the luminal and abluminal surface of brain endothelial cells
There are two TfR isoforms, TfR1 and TfR2, and the primary TfR isoform expressed at the BBB is TfR1 (J.
Y.
Upon binding of the iron-transferrin complex on the luminal surface, TfR enters the brain endothelial cells via endocytosis.
Once inside the brain endothelial cells, the remaining mechanism for iron entry into the brain is debatable.
One proposed mechanism is transport of the iron-transferrin-TfR complex from the luminal to the abluminal membrane of brain endothelial cells followed by release of iron and transferrin into the brain interstitium with subsequent reverse transcytosis of iron-free transferrin into the blood; while another is dissociation of the iron from the transferrin-TfR complex within the acidified endosomes in the brain endothelial cells and transcytosis of the iron across the abluminal membrane to enter the brain
The common mechanism of transcytosis of varying MTHs across the abluminal membrane is also debated, and it is clear that antibodies against the TfR may differ based on their affinity for the TfR.
Both high-and low-affinity, as well as monovalent and bivalent TfR antibodies have been engineered, and these different antibodies for the same TfR may warrant different success rates of entry into the brain parenchyma
Some studies suggest that TfR antibodies with high affinity can be trapped within the brain vasculature due to their high affinity, which prevents their transportation across the abluminal side of brain capillaries
Reducing the affinity of the TfR antibody to enhance RMT across the BBB has been suggested as an alternative.
It should however be noted that high injection doses are needed to produce a therapeutic effect while using low-affinity TfR antibodies, and such high doses result in effector function associated toxicity (acute-clinical signs and reticulocyte suppression)
Low therapeutic doses of highaffinity TfR antibodies on the other hand do not produce an immune-response or reticulocyte suppression
Overall, as the second most abundant protein on the brain endothelial cells compared to other RMT systems, TfR is considered an ideal candidate for MTH drug-delivery of therapeutics across the BBB
To facilitate non-invasive transvascular EPO delivery into the brain, human EPO was reengineered as a TfR antibody-EPO fusion protein, designated as cTfRMAb-EPO (Figure
The cTfRMAb domain of the fusion protein that enables BBB penetration is a rat/mouse chimeric antibody that is specific to the mouse TfR and binds to the mouse TfR with high affinity (K D of 2.6 ± 0.3 nM) in a bivalent configuration
The EPO domain of the fusion protein binds to the mouse EPOR with an ED 50 = 0.33 ± 0.04 nM to produce neuroprotection in brain behind the intact BBB
Intravenous injection of radiolabeled cTfRMAb-EPO in mice results in a brain uptake of 2.0 ± 0.1% injected dose/g of brain and ~70% of the fusion protein is transcytosed across the BBB into the brain parenchyma measured using the capillary depletion technique
The plasma clearance of the cTfRMAb-EPO fusion protein is > 10-fold higher than that of EPO due to the rapid peripheral TfR mediated clearance of the fusion protein
Such a pharmacokinetic profile of the cTfRMAb-EPO is desirable given that increased plasma clearance lowers the potential for peripheral hematopoietic side effects associated with the EPO domain of the fusion protein.
In fact, desialylated variants of EPO have a reduced half-life and increased clearance, and offer the possibility to uncouple stimulation of erythropoiesis from tissue-protective effects of EPO
Chronic 3 days a week intravenous treatment with the cTfRMAb-EPO fusion protein for 3 weeks offered neuroprotection in a mouse model of neural disease and resulted only in a 10% increase in hematocrit after 2 weeks of treatment with no further hematocrit increase
The dose of the cTfRMAb-EPO fusion protein in the aforementioned study was 1mg/kg which is equivalent to an EPO dose of 200 μg/kg, since the cTfRMAb-EPO fusion protein is 20% EPO based on the amino-acid sequence of the fusion protein.
Since the clearance of the cTfRMAb-EPO is > 10-fold faster than EPO, the equivalent EPO dose is 20 μg/kg per dose or 60 μg/kg per week.
This is lower than the doses of EPO that are therapeutic in experimental models of AD (S. T.
In a recent study, chronic treatment with the cTfRMAb-EPO fusion protein for 8 weeks reduced Aβ pathology, microglial activation and synaptic loss in a transgenic mouse model of AD. cTfRMAb-EPO further improved performance in the modified Y-maze, showing that treatment with the BBB-penetrable EPO improved spatial memory in experimental AD
High-affinity humanized TfR antibodies targeting the human TfR have been engineered and their ability to act as efficient MTHs has been confirmed in primates
Species-specific TfR antibody-EPO fusion proteins can thus be engineered to translate these effects of the BBB-penetrable-EPO into other species.
Overall, engineering EPO variants that target the BBB TfR to enable BBB penetration may provide a promising approach to further the development of EPO for chronic neurodegenerative conditions including AD.
In experimental AD, EPO reduces Aβ toxicity, neuroinflammation and oxidative stress, and enhances neurogenesis and neurotrophic factor expression.
Penetration of the BBB is a major challenge of EPO administration for CNS diseases including AD.
One hypothesis is the existence of EPOR on the luminal side of the brain capillaries that is presumed to provide a route for circulating EPO to enter the brain.
This route of EPO entry remains debatable.
In the absence of such a receptor, brain delivery of EPO requires compromised BBB permeability.
Alternatively, endogenous transferrin receptors (TfR), which are receptor-mediated transcytosis systems, and are highly expressed at the BBB can be harnessed to ferry EPO into the brain.
A fusion protein of EPO and a chimeric monoclonal antibody against TfR has been engineered and designated, cTfRMAb-EPO.
Upon binding to the BBB TfR, the cTfRMAb-EPO fusion protein is ferried into the brain to enable EPO delivery into the brain across the BBB.



Fig 1 .
Fig 1.
The neuroprotective effect of EPO in AD.



Fig 2 .
Fig 2. Schematic of routes of EPO brain delivery.