Unique regional patterns of amyloid burden predict progression to prodromal and clinical stages of Alzheimer's disease
Although beta-amyloid (A β) positivity has shown to be associated with higher risk of progression to Alzheimer's disease (AD) in mild cognitive impairment (MCI), information on the time to conversion to manifest dementia cannot be readily deduced from this binary classification.
Here, we assessed if regional patterns of A β deposition measured with 18 F-florbetapir may serve as biomarker for progression risk in A β-positive cognitively normal (CN) and MCI patients, including clinical follow-up data and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) biomarkers.
Voxel-wise group comparisons between age and sex-matched A β-positive groups (i.e., CN-stables [n = 38] vs. CN-to-MCI/AD progressors [n = 38], MCI-stables [n = 104] versus MCI-to-
AD progressors [n = 104]) revealed higher A β burden in precuneus, subcortical, and parietal regions in CN-to-MCI/AD progressors and cingulate, temporal, and frontal regions in MCI-to-AD progressors.
Importantly, these regional patterns predicted progression to advanced stages on the AD spectrum in the short and the long-term beyond global A β burden and CSF biomarkers.
These results suggest that distinct regional patterns of A β burden are a valuable biomarker for risk of disease progression in CN and MCI.

Background
The earliest pathological hallmark of Alzheimer's disease
Even though A β accumulation may be evident in individuals more than 20 years before progression to clinical dementia
Since clinical trials targeting A β accumulation at clinical stages of the disease have mostly failed so far, the need for new treatment approaches and diagnostic tools to identify individuals at an early, preclinical stage of the disease trajectory is high.
Positron emission tomography (PET) A β-tracers selectively bind to A β plaques, allowing the visualization and quantification of A β burden in the brain non-invasively.
The clinical standard currently progression to manifest dementia cannot be deduced from this binary classification or global measurement, so far.
Nonetheless, this information would be essential from a clinical point of view, but also for the arrangement of patient's and care-taker's healthrelated matters.
We hypothesize that that specific regional patterns of A β deposition may constitute a predictive value for both A β-positive cognitively normal (CN) individuals and individuals with mild cognitive impairment (MCI) who subsequently advance on the continuum of clinical Alzheimer's disease
Additionally, we propose that the regional susceptibility of A β to predict progression is different depending on the baseline diagnosis (i.e., CN or MCI).
Lastly, we hypothesize that this potential identified pattern of regional A β may constitute a more predictive biomarker than global A β or CSF measures, and that they may be unique for disease progression stage.

Methods

Participants
Data used for this study were derived from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) (
Key screening criteria for inclusion were: (1) A β-positivity from baseline until follow-up (standardized uptake value ratio (SUVR) > 1.1, see
The clinical diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease was based on the recommended diagnostic National Institute on Aging and Alzheimer's Association (NIA-AA) guidelines from 2011
This resulted in 284 participants, 168 males and 116 females (mean age 74.7 ± 6.5 years), out of which 4 groups were defined: (1) individuals who were cognitively normal at baseline and remained stable over a period of at least 6 months (CN-CN), (2) individuals who were cognitively normal and progressed to MCI or AD (CN-MCI/AD), (3) individuals with a baseline diagnosis of MCI, who remained stable over a time period of at least 6 months (MCI-MCI), and (4) individuals with a baseline diagnosis of MCI who progressed to AD (MCI-AD).
The CN-CN and CN-MCI/AD groups and the MCI-MCI and MCI-AD groups were matched on age and sex, respectively.
Furthermore, it was ensured that each progressed participant was matched with a participant who remained stable for at least the same amount of time their matched progressor stayed stable.

Positron emission tomography (PET)
All participants underwent a PET-scan with the 18 F-florbetapir PET tracer.
Participants received an average dosage of 370 MBq (10 mCi) of 18 F-florbetapir with 20 minutes (4 × 5 minutes frames) acquisition at 50-70 minutes post-injection (for more information see

CSF measures
Most participants underwent a lumbar puncture to measure baseline amyloid-beta 1-42 peptide (CSF A β), total tau (CSF t-tau), and tau phosphorylated at the threonine 181 (CSF p-tau).
Out of 286 participants, 228 had a CSF A β measure and 233 had a CSF t-tau as well as aCSF p-tau measure.
Lumbar puncture was performed with a 20-24-gauge spinal needle as described in the ADNI procedures manual (

Imaging data pre-processing
PET data was pre-processed with Statistical Parametric
All PET images were aligned to the anterior-posterior commissure and spatially normalized to the tissue probability map implemented in SPM12.
Then, all images were smoothed with an 8 mm FWHM Gaussian filter, as this has been found to be an appropriate value to use
Lastly, SUVRs for the images were computed by using the whole cerebellum as reference region.
A global A β score, previously published (details for preprocessing see
All MRI images were skullstripped, segmented, and delineated into cortical and subcortical regions. 18
F-florbetapir SUVr means were extracted from grey matter in each subregion within 4 cortical regions (frontal, anterior/posterior cingulate, lateral parietal, and lateral temporal regions) using the whole cerebellum as reference region.
Finally, a composite global A β SUVr score was computed based on the 4 cortical regions.

Statistical analysis
Non-parametric (i.e., Mann-Whitney-U-tests; Pearson-Chi-Square-tests) tests were performed to compare the groups on age, sex, years of education, Apolipoprotein E4 (APOE4) carriership, and baseline values of global A β burden, CSF A β, CSF t-tau, and CSF p-tau.
To assess regional differences in A β burden between the stable and progressor groups, 2-sample t-tests were performed in SPM12 comparing the CN-CN group against the CN-MCI/AD group and the MCI-MCI group against the MCI-AD group, respectively.
APOE4 carriership was entered as covariate.
To reduce the number of voxel-wise comparisons, a brain mask with all regions of the AAL atlas, except for the cerebellum, was included in the analyses.
Subsequently, significant regions were extracted and saved in a binarized format in MNI space.
SUVRs of all participants were extracted from these regions and the overall mean across regions was computed.
Binary logistic regression analyses were performed to quantify the effect of regional A β burden over all other variables of interest (age, sex, education, APOE4 carriership, global A β burden, and all 3 CSF measures) in the prediction of progression.
For this, all predictor variables were entered simultaneously into the regression model together with regional A β burden.
To assess whether regional A β burden extracted from one of the respective groups (CN or MCI) is predictive of progression in the other group, additional logistic regression analyses were performed, including the mean regional SUVRs from the other respective groups and all other predictors from the previous analyses.
Again, all predictor variables were entered in the regression model simultaneously.
For the CN-CN versus CN-MCI/AD groups, 27 progressors and 28 stables were included in the analyses due to missing data points for some variables, while for the MCI-MCI versus MCI-AD groups, 74 progressors and 99 stables were included.
Finally, multinomial logistic regression analyses were performed comparing fast against slow progressors in both the CN-MCI/AD group and the MCI-AD group, respectively ( Appendix A1 , Tables
All analyses were performed using SPSS 25.0.

Sensitivity analysis
To investigate whether the matching procedure based on follow-up timepoints (i.e., MCI-MCI with 2 years follow-up was matched to MCI-AD with 2 years follow-up) might have influenced our analyses, a sensitivity analysis was performed.
For this, participants in the stable groups (CN-CN and MCI-MCI) were selected if they were stable for at least 4 years, while participants in the progressor groups (CN-MCI/AD and MCI-MCI) were selected if they progressed within 3 years of the 18 F-Florpetapir PET baseline scan.
The follow-up time periods were chosen to maximize time and group size.
The approach mimicked the analysis described in 2.5 ( Appendix B1 , Table

Results

Group characteristics
Mean and standard deviations are reported ( Table
At baseline, the CN-CN and CN-MCI/AD groups were of similar age, years of education, ratio of females to males, CSF A β, CSF t-tau, and CSF p-tau.
The MCI-MCI and MCI-AD groups were of similar age, years of education, and ratio of females to males.
The CN-MCI/AD group showed a higher global A β burden at baseline than the CN-CN group ( p = 0.009).
The CN-CN group showed an increased number of months of clinical stability ( M CN-CN = 60.32,
M CN-MCI/AD = 28.84,
p < 0.001) and included more APOE4negative individuals ( p = 0.002) than the CN-MCI/AD group.
Similarly, the MCI-MCI group included more APOE-negative individuals than the MCI-AD group ( p = 0.026).
The MCI-AD group showed a reduced number of months of clinical stability ( M MCI-MCI = 43.15,
M MCI-AD = 27.75, p < 0.001), a larger global A β burden ( p < 0.001), CSF A β ( p < 0.001), CSF t-tau ( p < 0.001), and CSF p-tau ( p < 0.001) than the MCI-MCI group ( Table

Regional differences in A β burden
The voxel-wise whole-brain analysis yielded higher regional A β burden in the left and right precuneus, right lingual and angular gyrus, putamen, caudate, pallidum, middle temporal gyrus, and superior temporal gyrus for the CN-MCI/AD group compared to the CN-CN group ( p < 0.001, uncorrected, Fig.
None of the clusters in this comparison survived correction for multiple comparisons.
Regional A β burden was also higher in the left and right anterior cingulate gyrus, medial frontal cortex, precuneus, right transverse temporal gyrus, left middle and superior temporal gyrus, posterior and anterior insula, central operculum, and medial segment of the superior frontal gyrus for the MCI-AD group compared to the MCI-MCI group (FWE-corrected, Fig.
Upon visual assessment, hemispheric asymmetry was observed, shifting from right (higher A β burden in the right hemisphere in CN) to left (higher A β burden in the left hemisphere in MCI) depending on the disease stage (i.e., CN or MCI).

Predictive factors of progression
Results indicated that regional A β was predictive for progression from CN to MCI and AD, whereas all other predictors, including global A β burden, were not ( X 2 (9) = 21.029,
p = 0.013).
APOE4 carriership was trend significant in the model ( p = 0.051).
The model explained 42.4% of the variance and correctly classified 80.0% of cases ( Table
For the full results table see Appendix C .
Regional A β and increased age were particularly sensitive to predict progression in fast ( ≤ 36 months) compared to slow ( > 36 months) progressors.
APOE4 carriership, on the other hand, was particularly sensitive to predict progression in slow compared to fast progressors ( Appendix A1 ).
For the MCI-MCI versus MCI-AD comparison, the CSF A β score and the mean regional SUVR were significant in the model ( X 2 (9) = 51.686,
p < 0.0 0 0), indicating that a higher CSF A β score and higher A β burden in the identified regions are predictive for progression from MCI to AD.
The model explained 34.7% of variance and correctly classified 74.6% of cases ( Table
Regional A β predicted conversion within 12 months after established A β-positivity, together with sex and APOE4 carriership ( X 2 (18) = 57.095,
p < 0.001).
None of the variables predicted slow conversion ( Appendix A1 ).

Analyzing the unique regional pattern of A β burden as a predictor of disease progression
We evaluated if the mean SUVRs in the regional cluster identified in the CN-CN versus CN-MCI/AD comparison was also sensitive in the regression model to predict MCI-AD progression.
This model only yielded a significant effect of CSF A β ( X 2 (9) = 43.022,
p < 0.001), while all other predictors were not significant.
When the reverse analysis was performed including the CN-CN and CN-MCI/AD groups with the mean SUVR of the identified regions from the MCI-MCI versus MCI-AD analysis, none of the variables were significant in the model.
Results indicate that the identified regions of the 2 comparisons are both unique for predicting progression from and to specific disease stages.
The sensitivity analysis only including individuals with at least 4 years of follow-up revealed a similar regional pattern, but the variance explained by this model increased by 20% ( Appendix B1 ).

Discussion
The main results of this study showed that specific regional A β deposition patterns predict progression from CN to MCI or AD, as well as progression from MCI to AD.
In addition to known predictors such as APOE4 carriership and age, the regional pattern of A β burden was predictive for more rapid progression from CN to MCI or AD within 3 years after established A β-positivity.
Similarly, regional A β burden was predictive for fast conversion from MCI to AD within one year after established A β-positivity, together with sex and APOE4 carriership.
Finally, A β regions identified in each group comparison were unique for the prediction of progression within each progressor group (i.e., CN to MCI/AD or MCI to AD) and were confirmed with an additional sensitivity analysis.
Results demonstrate that regional A β constitutes a valuable predictor for progression to prodromal and clinical AD in A β-positive individuals, which had more predictive value than global A β or single CSF biomarkers.
Findings are discussed in more detail in the context of (1) regional A β staging, (2) hemispheric asymmetry, and (3) the contribution of APOE4 carriership and CSF biomarkers.

Regional A β staging: Unique regional patterns of A β predict progression
Recent studies investigating regional A β burden explored its topographical pattern in vivo using A β-PET
Here, we demonstrate that beyond global A β burden, A β accumulation in precuneus, lingual and angular gyrus, medial and superior temporal gyrus as well as subcortical regions was predictive of progression from a cognitively normal state to prodromal or clinical AD.
Most of these regions are comprised in stage 1 of the staging model proposed by Mattsson and colleagues
The identified regions and higher age were especially predictive for fast progression from CN to MCI or AD, that is, progression within the first 36 months after A β-positivity.
The observed age effect is in line with previous studies reporting an increased risk of progression with advanced age
Furthermore, age-associated slowing of clearance mechanisms of A β has been suggested to be a factor of increased progression
As our analyses have shown, the identified regions are unique for disease progression stage, despite some regional overlap (i.e., in the precuneus).
The MCI-AD group showed a more widespread pattern of A β accumulation compared to the CN-MCI/AD group, demonstrating that regions such as the precuneus accumulate A β early and late during the disease progression, while regions such as the medial frontal cortex or anterior insula show increased A β accumulation only in advanced disease stages.
However, not all of the identified regions in our analyses matched the regional stage phase 1 reported by
These differences might be explained by different methodological approaches between the current study and the staging approach
Whereas
Overall, our study demonstrates the utility of regional A β deposition in the prediction of disease progression, similar to these previously presented staging approaches
A study by
In line with this, we were able to demonstrate that the striatum is a sensitive region for differentiating A β-positive CN-stables from CN-MCI/AD progressors.
In later stages of the disease, other regions (i.e., anterior cingulate gyrus, medial frontal cortex, precuneus, transverse temporal gyrus, middle and superior temporal gyrus, posterior and anterior insula) seem to be more sensitive in differentiating A β-positive MCI-stables from MCI-AD progressors.
Our results suggest that a binary distinction in A β-positives and negatives might not be sufficient to inform on differential disease trajectories and therefore underscores the importance of considering additional regional susceptibilities in the clinical setting.
Given our results, we propose that different magnitudes of A β burden in specific regions, as recently suggested
Furthermore, our sensitivity analysis revealed mostly similar regional patterns of A β burden with our main analysis, indicating that the variability in follow-up length between progressors and non-progressors did not significantly influence the results.
Our results may have consequences for the clinical reading of A β-PET.
In addition to assessing global A β burden visually, a regional reading approach using the identified cluster here, could potentially assist the clinician in evaluating a clinical prognosis for the patient.
From a clinical point of view, prognosis and disease trajectories are the most frequent questions posed by caregivers and patients, therefore replicating these results is crucial from many perspectives.

Hemispheric asymmetry of A β deposition
Interestingly, when assessing the regional A β distribution patterns, a particular hemispheric dominance was observed dependent on progression type (i.e., CN-MCI/AD or MCI-AD).
Here we showed that A β deposition appears to preferentially start in the right hemisphere in prodromal stages of the disease, ultimately spreading to regions in the left hemisphere with disease progression, suggesting that left-hemispheric A β accumulation is associated with cognitive decline.
Most people show a left-hemispheric dominance, meaning that right-hemispheric pathology remains unnoticed for a longer time due to compensatory mechanisms of the left hemisphere.
However, pathology does not have to start in the right hemisphere nor does right-hemispheric pathology reflect early disease stages.
Left-hemispheric dominance of A β deposition may become symptomatic faster than right-hemispheric dominance.
With this, it appears that left-hemispheric dominance of A β deposition is associated with advanced disease progression.
A β deposition follows a specific pattern of spread over time
To our knowledge, only few studies have reported a hemispheric asymmetry of A β deposition, among which a study by Frings and colleagues
They observed a leftward asymmetry of A β associated with more severe cognitive impairment in language performance, while there was a rightward asymmetry of A β associated with decline in tasks involving visuospatial perception.
The previous inability to detect this relationship has often been ascribed to a plateau of A β deposition, which has been reached while degeneration and the progression of cognitive deficits.
This is mostly true for studies using post-mortem A β pathology and in vivo cognition, while the current study investigated both in vivo A β pathology and cognition.
Our results on hemispheric asymmetry of A β deposition specifically highlight the advantage of in vivo studies and suggest that hemispheric asymmetry of A β may be a valuable biomarker in the future that needs further validation.

Contribution of APOE4 carriership and CSF biomarkers
Even though APOE4 carriership was only trend significant in the CN-CN versus CN-MCI/AD analysis, it was a significant predictor for progression after 3 years of A β-positivity.
It is thought that APOE4 carriership is particularly associated with the accumulation and initial spread of A β across cortical regions
However, once A β has accumulated across the brain, APOE4 carriership may be less relevant for cognitive decline, and tau pathology or neurodegeneration subsequently become more prevalent
Accordingly, APOE4 carriership predicted slow progression from CN to MCI/AD, hence progression after 36 months of A β-positivity.
Since APOE4 carriership is a long-life risk factor for AD, potential compensatory mechanisms to A β accumulation may have developed earlier in life in APOE4-carriers compared to non-carriers, thus explaining the generally slower trajectories to advanced disease stages in this cohort.
Current evidence on the relationship of differential trajectories of cognitive decline and APOE4 carriership is mixed.
Some studies suggest APOE4 carriership accelerates cognitive decline
Yet, others report no significant effect of APOE4 carriership on cognitive trajectories
However, most of the studies investigating this relationship showed different methodological approaches or included different populations (i.e., early vs. late-onset AD patients), which could explain the mixed result pattern.
Notably, our results suggest that processes leading to the onset of AD may differ from those that determine its clinical onset.
APOE4 carriers may have a greater risk for AD but show a different effect on processes determining the rate of progression than APOE4 noncarriers.
Interestingly, none of the CSF variables was significant in predicting progression from CN to MCI or AD.
However, among the CSF biomarkers, CSF A β predicted progression from MCI to AD in both our main and sensitivity analyses.
This suggests that in vivo assessments of regional A β may be a better predictor for particularly short-term progression than single CSF measures of A β or tau, once individuals have reached A β-positivity.
CSF markers turn positive earlier in the disease cascade than in vivo PET imaging, limiting their value for short-term prediction of clinical progression
In contrast, ratios of specific CSF biomarkers (i.e., A β42/A β40 or A β42/p-tau) were successful in predicting progression from prodromal to clinical AD, potentially suggesting that ratio information rather than single parameters derived from CSF have more predictive value, specifically in A β-positive individuals
Despite CSF measures being more easily available than in vivo PET imaging, our results have shown that A β PET is a more informative measure for the prognostic prediction of progression to MCI or AD than single CSF measures, especially in already A β-positive individuals.

Limitations and future directions
Some limitations of this study need to be mentioned.
First, due to the use of publicly available data from the ADNI database, the analyses were limited to patients for whom a complete dataset for all the assessed predictive variables were available.
Nevertheless, for the longitudinal design of our approach, and the holistic biomarker model we interrogated, the number of subjects is sufficient, but warrants replication in a different cohort, as well as using different fluorine labelled tracers for A β quantification.
Nevertheless, we had the privilege to use this unique dataset, containing a variety of longitudinal data, whereas other datasets still need to advance to show a comparable sample size.
Secondly, we used the same cohort for the extraction of regional A β patterns and the investigation of the utility of these regions in predicting progression to advanced disease stages.
Therefore, future studies may want to use these findings to validate the predictive value of the identified regions in a different cohort.
Also, we only included single CSF measures instead of ratio information due to missing data from the ADNI database.
Inclusion of these could have resulted in more conclusive results on the contribution of CSF biomarker and should be addressed in future work.
Thirdly, results regarding the asymmetry pattern observed when comparing Fig.
Even though our study points towards this hemispheric asymmetry, more longitudinal studies are needed to validate these results.
Lastly, ADNI represents a trial population, including primarily amnestic MCI patients, rather than a clinical heterogeneous cohort.
Thus, constructing models for A β PET in ADNI might have resulted in an overestimation of the effect of A β PET as found in amnestic MCI patients.
However, especially amnestic MCI patients may benefit from these results, as clinicians may be able to provide disease prognoses by evaluation of A β burden in the identified regions.
The current recommendation of A β-PET imaging does not suggest a clinical value for A β-positivity in asymptomatic individuals.
However, our results have shown that A β-PET imaging is able to provide information on the imminent cognitive decline and trajectory in the short-and long run in even asymptomatic individuals (i.e., CN).
Results may aid in identifying those A β-positive healthy individuals who are at an increased risk for progression and could potentially lead to a revision of the current diagnostic guidelines of A β-PET imaging.

Conclusion
Regional A β burden appears to be the most sensitive prognostic biomarker of progression in comparison to multiple other biomarkers in both A β-positive CNs and MCIs.
These findings suggest that regional A β burden may aid in the future to assess the short-term prognostic trajectories for imminent cognitive decline in preclinical and prodromal patients on the AD continuum.
Especially A βpositive healthy individuals may benefit from these results, as current A β-PET guidelines do not include this cohort as a target population.

Verification
As corresponding author, I take full responsibility for the data, the analyses and interpretation, and the conduct of the research.
I had full access to all of the data and have the right to publish any data.
All co-authors have seen and agreed to conditions noted on the Author Agreement Form.
As per ADNI protocols, all procedures performed in studies involving human participants were in accordance with the ethical standards of the institutional and/or na-tional research committee and with the 1964 Helsinki declaration and its later amendments or comparable ethical standards.
More details can be found at adni.loni.usc.edu .
(This manuscript does not contain any studies with human participants performed by any of the authors).
The manuscript has not been previously published and is not under consideration for publication elsewhere.
No submissions overlapping with the current work have previously been published.

Disclosure statement
The authors declare the following financial interests/personal relationships which may be considered as potential competing interests: JP, MCH, ED and GNB report no conflict of interest.
TvE reports having received consulting and lecture fees from Lundbeck A/S, Lilly Germany, Shire Germany and research funding from the German Research Foundation (DFG), the Leibniz Association and the EU-joint program for neurodegenerative disease research (JPND).
AD reports having received research support and speaker honoraria by Life Molecular Imaging, AVID/Lilly Radiopharmaceuticals, Siemens Healthineers, GE Healthcare.

Ethical approval
As per ADNI protocols, all procedures performed in studies involving human participants were in accordance with the ethical standards of the institutional and/or national research committee and with the 1964 Helsinki declaration and its later amendments or comparable ethical standards.
More details can be found at adni.loni.usc.edu .
(This article does not contain any studies with human participants performed by any of the authors).

Availability of data and material
Data used in preparation of this article were obtained from the Alzheimer's disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) database (
Thus, the investigators within the ADNI contributed to the design and implementation of ADNI and/or provided data but did not participate in this analysis or the writing of this report.
A complete listing of ADNI investigators can be found at

Appendix A

A1. Fast versus slow progressor analyses
Since participant's time to progression varied from 6 up to 84 months, a post-hoc analysis was performed to determine differences in time to progression.
For this, both the CN-MCI/AD group and the MCI-AD group were divided into a "fast" and a "slow" progressor group by a median split of the time being stable until progression, which yielded 36 months as median for the CN-MCI/AD group and 24 months as median for the MCI-AD group.
Thus, participants progressing ≤36 months were included in the fast progressor group, while those progressing > 36 months were included in the slow progressor group for the CN-MCI/AD analysis.
Similarly, participants progressing < 24 months were included in the fast progressor group, while those progressing > 24 months were included in the slow progressor group for the MCI-AD analysis.
This yielded a final dataset of 21 fast CN-MCI/AD progressors, 17 slow CN-MCI/AD progressors, and the initial 38 stables from the CN-CN group, as well as 35 fast MCI-AD progressors, 35 slow posterior cingulate gyrus, angular gyrus, central operculum, inferior occipital gyrus, middle and inferior occipital gyrus, basal forebrain and frontal pole, as well as right medial frontal cortex for the MCI-AD group compared to the MCI-MCI group (FWE-corrected, Figure
The binary logistic regression analysis for the CN-CN and CN-MCI/AD groups showed that the mean regional SUVR was significant in the model together with age, ( X 2 (9) = 23.652,
p < 0.005).
The model explained 61.8% of variance and correctly classified 87.2% of cases ( Table
Similarly, the mean regional SUVR was also significant in the binary logistic regression analysis of the MCI-MCI and MCI-AD groups together with CSF A β, ( X 2 (9) = 52.746,
p < 0.0 0 0).
The model explained 62.9% of variance and correctly classified 86.7% of cases ( Table



Fig. 1 .
Fig. 1.
Regional differences in A β burden.
(A) Regional differences in A β burden for CN-MCI/AD (N = 38) > CN-CN (N = 38), and (B) MCI-AD (N = 104) > MCI-MCI (N = 104).
Results are color-coded according to the t-value statistics and illustrated on an inflated representation of the brain using CAT12 toolbox.



Table 1
Mean and standard deviations per group and variable



Table 3
Binary logistic regression analysis for variables predicting progression from CN to MCI or AD and from MCI to AD