Exercise as Potential Therapeutic Target to Modulate Alzheimer’s Disease Pathology in APOE ε4 Carriers: A Systematic Review
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a progressive neurodegenerative disease for which no effective treatment exists at present.
Previous research has found that exercise reduces the risk of AD.
Since the apolipoprotein E (APOE) e4 allele increases the risk of AD and is associated with faster disease progression than the other isoforms, we aimed to highlight the impact of exercise on AD pathology in APOE e4 carriers.
This review focuses on the effect of exercise on cognitive function, dementia risk, amyloid-b (Ab) metabolism, lipid metabolism, neuroinflammation, neurotrophic factors and vascularization in APOE e4 carriers.
We searched the literature in the PubMed electronic database using the following search terms: physical activity, exercise, aerobic fitness, training, sport, APOE4, Alzheimer's disease, AD and dementia.
By cross-referencing, additional publications were identified.
Selected studies required older adults to take part in an exercise intervention or to make use of self-reported physical activity questionnaires.
All included studies were written and published in English between 2000 and 2020.
From these studies, we conclude that exercise is a non-pharmacological treatment option for high-risk APOE e4 carriers to ameliorate the AD pathological processes including reducing Ab load, protecting against hippocampal atrophy, improving cognitive function, stabilizing cholesterol levels and lowering pro-inflammatory signals.
Variation in study design related to age, cognitive outcomes and the type of intervention explained the differences in study outcomes.
However, exercise seems to be effective in delaying the onset of AD and may improve the quality of life of AD patients.

INTRODUCTION
Alzheimer's Disease (AD) is a progressive neurodegenerative disease affecting cognitive function.
This cognitive decline manifests as deficits including memory loss, communication problems, agnosia, apraxia and executive function impairment
AD is the most common form of dementia.
Quality of life is impaired in patients with dementia due to the reduced ability of daily-life functioning.
The best known molecular mechanisms behind AD are amyloid plaque deposition and hyperphosphorylated tau proteins forming neurofibrillary tangles in the brain.
Neuronal connections within the brain are disrupted by these protein aggregates, leading to regional atrophy.
The blood circulation system may have a protective role in preventing aggregation by clearance of these proteins.
However, the clearance of protein aggregates is deficient in AD due to cellular, molecular and genetic imbalances.
AD can be divided into an early-onset (age \ 60) and the more common late-onset form.
Genetic, clinical and lifestyle-related risk factors play a role in the development of AD.
Early-onset AD is mainly caused by genetic variations in the APP gene encoding amyloid-b precursor protein, or PSEN1 and PSEN2 genes encoding presenilins I and II, respectively.
These three genes have been found to play an important role in amyloid-b (Ab) production.
Cleavages of APP via b-secretase and c-secretase secrete Ab of several lengths, of which the most common forms are the 40-and 42-amino acid Ab (Ab40 and Ab42, respectively).
The latter isoform has a more hydrophobic structure, making it more susceptible to deposition in the brain.
Both PSEN1 and PSEN2 proteins constitute the catalytic part of the c-secretase complex
Mutations in PSEN affect the Ab42/40 ratio, resulting in elevated Ab42
The late-onset form of AD is also genetically determined, albeit to a lesser extent.
Genomewide association studies have revealed the important role of the apolipoprotein E (APOE) gene encoding the ApoE protein on chromosome 19 in late-onset AD
The ApoE protein is involved in the transport and metabolism of lipids, and it exists in three common isoforms: ApoE2, ApoE3 and ApoE4, encoded by APOE e2, e3 and e4, respectively.
They vary at amino acid residues 112 or 158, which results in significant differences in their functioning
The APOE e2 allele is protective against AD, whereas the e3 allele has a neutral effect
The risk of late-onset AD increases with the presence of one or two APOE e4 alleles
Furthermore, the age of onset will decrease in a dose-dependent relation with the APOE e4 allele
Besides the risk of AD, APOE e4 homozygotes also demonstrate neuropathological characteristics of the disease such as increased Ab deposition
Previous studies have reported Ab accumulation in an isoform-dependent fashion as ApoE4 [ ApoE3 [ ApoE2
Since APOE e4 carriers have lower cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and plasma ApoE protein levels
The ApoE4 protein is implicated in many other processes that may influence AD, including lipid metabolism, tau phosphorylation, cholesterol homeostasis, mitochondrial function, neuroinflammation, vascular function and synaptic plasticity
To date, pharmacological agents only provide symptomatic treatment by targeting, for example, the synaptic dysfunction, Ab accumulation and phosphorylation signalling pathways
However, reversing a multimodal disease such as AD still remains a challenge.
The risk of AD is also influenced by lifestyle factors such as blood pressure, smoking, physical activity and cholesterol
Much research is focused on non-pharmacological approaches including exercise.
Previous studies have found positive effects of exercise on cognition in AD
Furthermore, aerobic exercise in early AD was associated with reduced hippocampal atrophy and improved memory performance
It was suggested that lifestyle intervention in APOE e4 carriers may modify dementia risk, since the risk of dementia in these individuals was found to increase with adverse lifestyle factors such as physical inactivity
Previous systematic reviews have focused on exercise and AD, but the association with the APOE4 genotype has received limited attention.
The objective of this review is to highlight the modulatory role of exercise on AD pathology in APOE e4 carriers.
We will review the effect on several mechanisms contributing to AD including cognitive function, Ab metabolism, lipid metabolism, neuroinflammation, neurotrophic factors and vascularization.
We will discuss both human and animal studies.
This article is based on previously conducted studies and does not contain any new studies with human participants or animals performed by either of the authors.

PHYSICAL ACTIVITY IN APOE e4 CARRIERS

Cognitive Function
Cognitive decline in AD dementia affects most daily life activities.
Thus, a growing need arises to ameliorate progressive cognitive symptoms.
There is some evidence supporting the effectiveness of exercise as therapy (Table
Jensen et al. found that AD patients carrying the APOE e4 gene and who were engaged in an exercise intervention showed an improvement of neuropsychiatric symptoms and stabilized cognition as assessed by the symbol digit modalities test (SDMT) in comparison to non-carriers and controls
The exercise intervention consisted of supervised aerobic exercise three times a week for 16 weeks.
Results showed that these carriers improved the physical, cognitive and neuropsychiatric outcomes compared to noncarriers.
Similarly, APOE e4 mice engaged in aerobic exercise demonstrated improved cognition and hippocampal function
Cognition in these transgenic mice was tested by object and place recognition tests.
A study by Etnier et al. supported the protective effect of aerobic exercise on cognition in cognitively normal older women carrying the APOE4 e4 allele
Lautenschlager et al. studied the effect of a 24-week home-based physical activity intervention on cognitive function in adults with subjective memory impairment
Physical activity was assessed with a survey in combination with data obtained from a pedometer to avoid bias.
This study demonstrated that
Smith et al. found that high physical activity promoted cortical semantic processing activity on the name discrimination task among APOE e4 carriers who were older cognitively intact adults
Greater cortical semantic activation may protect older adults against future cognitive decline
A follow-up study revealed that reduced predicted probability of cognitive decline in APOE e4 carriers was associated with high physical activity
Furthermore, APOE e4 carriers with low physical activity in daily life had decreased hippocampal volume after 18 months, whereas the high physical activity group remained stable over time
Physical activity could have a protective effect against hippocampal atrophy in APOE e4 carriers, which in turn may reduce cognitive decline.
A magnetoencephalography (MEG) study of participants aged between 50 and 70 found that highly active APOE e4 carriers had a faster processing speed in working memory executive function
In addition, carriers with low levels of physically activity showed decreased right temporal lobe activation.
Another study on working memory revealed higher glucose uptake in core regions involved in working memory such as frontal, parietal, temporal and cerebellar regions in highly active e4 carriers with a mean age of 63.67 ± 6.37 years
However, a recent multi-cohort study by Stringa et al., consisting of older adults with a mean age of 67.8 years at baseline, indicated that physical activity did not moderate cognitive decline in APOE e4 carriers
For each cohort, a different self-reported questionnaire was used to assess the physical activity, which was classified into three categories including inactive, light and moderate-high activity based on walking, cycling, diverse sports and hobbies.
Cognitive function was assessed with the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE).

AD Dementia Risk
Midlife or late-life exercise influences dementia risk.
Some studies examined the effect of midlife exercise on dementia risk in adults aged younger than 65.
APOE e4 carriers showed a significant inverse association between midlife physical activity and dementia risk compared to non-carriers
The combination of physical activity and the presence of an APOE e4 allele may modify the risk of developing AD dementia later in life, but more replication is required.
On the contrary, late-life physical activity seems to be effective in reducing dementia risk.
The beneficial effect of late-life physical activity on the risk of cognitive decline was more pronounced in APOE e4 carriers
In addition, physical activity in late life may be beneficial in APOE e4 carriers by reducing the risk of AD dementia and delaying its onset
One of the studies that did not find any significant interaction between physical activity and the APOE4 genotype is the Cardiovascular Health Cognition Study, wherein a significant association between physical activity and dementia was observed in non-carriers, but not in APOE e4 carriers, after a follow-up period of approximately 5 years
However, only 28 APOE e4 carriers showed cognitive decline in this period, making the interaction with physical activity subject to variability.
In addition, the Framingham study showed increased risk of dementia in sedentary non-carriers aged 60 years and older, suggesting an inverse association between physical activity and dementia risk
A study of 1646 older adults followed over a 5-year period reported that physical exercise was effective in preventing dementia in non-carriers
No significant differences were observed between active and non-active APOE e4 carriers.
Several findings have been reported about the association between midlife or late-life exercise and AD dementia risk in APOE e4 carriers.
Exercise seems to modify AD dementia risk, but more replication is required to infer whether this is characteristic of APOE e4 carriers.

Ab Metabolism
Aggregation of Ab peptides in the brain is one of the pathological hallmarks of AD.
The most abundant forms are Ab40 and Ab42, with the latter known to be deposited more easily because of its hydrophobic and fibrillogenic composition
In the healthy central nervous system, Ab is rapidly produced and cleared, with a production rate of 7.6% per hour and a clearance rate of 8.3% per hour
Due to molecular, cellular and genetic imbalances, the clearance of Ab via the blood circulation system is deficient in late-onset AD.
Mawuenyega et al. found impaired clearance of both Ab40 and Ab42 in the central nervous system of late-onset AD patients compared with cognitively healthy controls, whereas the production rates did not differ
The effectiveness of Ab clearance depends on APOE isoforms, decreasing from APOE2 to APOE3 to APOE4
This defect in clearance could lead to Ab plaques that aggregate in the cortex.
Transgenic AD mice showed reduced Ab plaques and amyloid angiopathy if they performed aerobic exercise in their enriched housing
This raises the question of whether exercise is associated with cerebral Ab deposition in APOE e4 carriers.
Head et al. suggested that APOE e4 carriers with low exercise levels might have increased risk for cerebral Ab deposition
A recent study by Jeon et al. investigated whether APOE e4 status combined with high midlife physical activity could modify Ab retention
APOE e4 carriers with a mean age of 72 years in a low physical activity state had higher Ab accumulation, and this was absent in highly active carriers.
Furthermore, a study of 546 cognitively healthy elderly individuals with an average age of 69.6 ± 6.8 years revealed decreased cerebral amyloid load in physically active APOE e4 carriers, whereas high physical activity was associated with a reduced plasma Ab42/40 ratio only in non-carriers
A difference between Ab in the brain and the periphery related to the ApoE4 protein seems plausible.
The APOE e4 allele alters the permeability of the blood-brain barrier, which may result in increased levels of Ab in the peripheral system of carriers compared to non-carriers
This could be one explanation why reduced plasma Ab levels were observed only in highly physically active non-carriers.
Ab fibrils in the periphery have an increased affinity for binding erythrocytes that can take up these fibrils, resulting in oxidative stress
Piccarducci et al. confirmed that APOE e4 carriers have higher levels of Ab in erythrocytes than noncarriers
The Ab levels in erythrocytes decreased with physical activity in both carriers and non-carriers, but the decrease in APOE e4 in non-carriers was significantly greater than that in carriers.
Although the reduction in Ab accumulation in erythrocytes related to physical activity seems to be independent of the APOE4 genotype, physical activity may have a beneficial role in relieving oxidative stress in APOE e4 carriers.
Neprilysin (NEP) and insulin-degrading enzyme (IDE) are important enzymes in maintaining the Ab levels in the brain.
NEP, a zinc metalloendopeptidase, is involved in the degradation of Ab in monomeric and oligomeric forms in the brain
IDE, also a zinc metalloendopeptidase, has the ability to degrade extracellular Ab in the brain and to clear cytoplasmic products of APP
Studies have shown that these enzymes are downregulated due to age-dependent genetic mutations which could lead to AD by disrupting cerebral Ab clearance (Fig.
Moore et al. used AD transgenic mice with elevated Ab levels to show the effect of exercise on Ab metabolism
They investigated reduced levels of both soluble Ab40 and Ab42 in the cortex and hippocampus by exercise in a dose-dependent manner.
Exercise may be beneficial for APOE e4 carriers, since the ApoE4 protein can enhance Ab40 and Ab42 aggregation compared to the other two isoforms
NEP and IDE expression were also increased in the exercise groups in a dose-dependent fashion, providing further evidence that exercise may upregulate these Ab degradation enzymes, leading to Ab clearance (Fig.

Lipid Metabolism
Lipids are crucial molecules in the human body.
The central nervous system has the second highest lipid content after the adipose tissue
Signal transduction in the brain depends on lipids as well, since axons are surrounded by a myelin sheath consisting of lipids.
In addition, the ApoE protein is involved in lipid transport by regulating lipoprotein concentrations.
ApoE proteins are attached to the surface of lipoproteins filled with lipids, enabling the binding to receptors on tissue or cells.
In the central nervous system, ApoE released by astrocytes is needed to transport cholesterol inside lipoproteins to neuronal cells
This process starts with the binding of ApoE to highdensity lipoprotein (HDL) filled with cholesterol.
ApoE has high affinity for binding to the low-density lipoprotein (LDL) receptor family at cell surfaces mediating endocytosis, where HDL is degraded and cholesterol is released
Cholesterol is crucial for axonal growth and formation and remodelling of synapses, which are important for learning, memory formation and neuronal repair
Previous studies found lower ApoE levels in the serum, brain and cerebrospinal fluid in both APOE e4-carrying AD patients and cognitively normal persons
A reduction in ApoE can affect cholesterol transport in the brain.
In AD, brain cholesterol levels are commonly reduced in hippocampal neurons and cortical areas.
Furthermore, cholesterol transport to hippocampal neurons occurs in an isoform-dependent manner, where the ApoE3 protein is more efficient than ApoE4
Animal studies have shown consistent results of decreased brain cholesterol in homozygous e4 mice
Cholesterol can be transported by either HDL or LDL in serum; the latter enhances the risk of atherosclerosis, leading to cardiovascular disease, stroke and dementia
It has been widely demonstrated that APOE e4 carriers show lower HDL and higher LDL cholesterol serum levels
ApoE4-knock-in mice also showed increased serum LDL cholesterol
Evidence was found that physical activity may modify the altered lipid profile; for instance, physical activity in older adults was positively associated with HDL cholesterol
Furthermore, highly active APOE e4 carriers consisting of men and women between the ages of 35 and 74 years showed enhanced HDL cholesterol.
Due to the large age range, the groups were divided into \ 55 and 50? years, where the association between high physical activity and the APOE4 genotype was more pronounced among the 50? group.
In particular, in relatively young participants, no change in HDL or LDL cholesterol level was observed after physical training in APOE e4 carriers
These results indicate that age is an important factor in modifying cholesterol levels in APOE e4 carriers by exercise.
High physical activity reduces the high-risk LDL cholesterol in older APOE e4 carriers compared to their younger counterparts.
Taken together, these observations build a strong case supporting the association between exercise and lipid profiles of APOE e4 carriers.

Neuroinflammation
Neuroinflammation is involved in the neurodegenerative process in AD.
Microglia and astrocytes are the central innate immune cells of the central nervous system.
Microglia can be activated by the presence of Ab to induce phagocytosis of Ab plaques.
However, activated microglia are not able to clear Ab aggregation, leading to inflammation and thereby recruitment of more microglia, which can lead to cytotoxicity
Upon activation, microglia release cytokines to regulate neuroinflammation, but these pro-inflammatory cytokines can induce damage to surrounding neurons and even cause neurodegeneration as occurs in later stages of AD.
ApoE is involved in microglia suppression, which has a protective effect on neuroinflammation by inducing anti-inflammatory cytokines.
ApoE-deficient mice showed enhanced levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines including tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNFa), interleukin-1b (IL-1b) and interleukin 6 (IL-6) mRNA by stimulation with lipopolysaccharide
These pro-inflammatory cytokines were significantly increased, especially in APOE4 mice
Administration of an ApoE-mimetic peptide derived from the receptor-binding region of the ApoE holoprotein counteracts this effect, showing its protective role in neuroinflammation.
The innate immune response seems to be influenced by specific APOE isoforms.
Soto et al. demonstrated evidence to support ApoE as a key player in neuroinflammation
Aged mice engaged in exercise showed a reduction in microglia activation and improved neurovascular functioning and behaviour, whereas ApoE-deficient mice did not benefit from the intervention, suggesting the important role of ApoE in neurovascular functioning.
Another animal study revealed that exercise in an enriched housing environment was effective in downregulating pro-inflammatory genes and upregulating anti-inflammatory genes in transgenic AD mice, which may reduce Ab deposition in the brain
They did not find an association between physical activity and TNFa, but lower TNFa and high physical activity levels were both independently associated with reduced regional brain atrophy.
On the contrary, the animal study by Nichol et al. showed that exercise in aged AD mice reduced pro-inflammatory cytokines such as TNFa and IL-1b, thereby activating an adaptive response around Ab plaques leading to decreased Ab
During inflammation, C-reactive protein (CRP) is mainly upregulated in serum.
At the same time, pro-inflammatory cytokines are released.
The study by
Over time, CRP levels were enhanced, which was associated with greater cortical thinning.
Physical activity was not related to CRP levels, which could be due to bias in the self-reports.
The APOE4 genotype showed lower CRP levels and thinner cortex, which is contradictory in terms of inflammation.
Therefore, Corlier et al. suggested that other mechanisms could be responsible for the enhanced AD risk in APOE4 carriers.
The low CRP in APOE e4 carriers was also supported by a previous study
It was suggested that the low CRP levels in e4 carriers are not associated with neuroinflammation, due to contradictory findings of increased inflammation in these carriers and low CRP levels.
It remains unclear, but a possible explanation may be the production of cholesterol by the mevalonate pathway of the liver, because this pathway is known to be downregulated in APOE e4 carriers, leading to low levels of CRP

Neurotrophic Factors
We previously mentioned that exercise can reduce pro-inflammatory cytokines.
Exercise is also indirectly involved in growth factor stimulation.
Insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1) and brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) are growth factors involved in hippocampal function, synaptic functioning and learning.
Exercise may upregulate both growth factors in the brain and periphery directly by increasing the concentrations or indirectly by reducing proinflammatory cytokines, which could alter IGF-1 and BDNF signalling in neurons
IGF-1 has a protective role in AD because of its ability to decrease Ab deposition.
This growth factor is involved in upregulating the transport of Ab carrier proteins to the brain to increase the clearance of Ab plaques
In this way, cognitive functioning is improved.
A recent study by Galle et al. found low IGF-1 levels in homozygous APOE e4 carriers showing increased risk of dementia
Besides the role of IGF-1 in AD, BDNF is important in maintaining the memory function.
The APOE e4 allele reduces BDNF expression, which may induce synaptic loss in the hippocampus, leading to cognitive deficits
Aerobic exercise was found to compensate the hippocampal volume loss in late adulthood that was associated with increased plasma levels of BDNF
In addition, plasma BDNF levels were increased in AD patients due to aerobic exercise
Conversely, BDNF levels were upregulated due to aerobic exercise only in APOE e4 non-carriers and not in carriers
However, this study was restricted to one ethnic group with a higher risk of AD.
An animal model showed increased hippocampal BDNF levels upon exercise in both APOE e4 and APOE e3 transgenic mice
Studies assessing the effects of exercise on neurotrophic factors in APOE e4 carriers are sparse, but the available evidence may support a relation between the two, suggesting more replication is needed.

Vascularization
Vascular risk factors including hypertension, hypercholesterolemia, atrial fibrillation and smoking can affect the incidence and progression of AD
For example, high systolic blood pressure in APOE e4 carriers may lead to cognitive decline
Caselli et al. noted that any of the cerebrovascular risk factors including hypercholesterolemia, hypertension, smoking and diabetes mellitus may potentiate age-dependent memory deficits in APOE e4 homozygotes
These vascular risk factors induce vascular oxidative stress by downregulation of vascular nitric oxide (NO) and endothelial NO synthase (eNOS) pathways, which can impair vascular reactivity in the form of hypercontractility.
Cerebral blood flow (CBF) will decrease due to impaired vasodilation, which mediates oxidative stress and promotes neuronal degeneration.
In addition, Ab plays a role in this process by inhibiting eNOS activity.
This is supported by the finding that hypertensive mice showed increased permeability of the blood-brain barrier in the cortex and hippocampus and Ab deposition
A human study demonstrated that hypertensive APOE e4 carriers aged 49-89 years had greater cortical amyloid burden as quantified by PET imaging compared to hypertensive non-carriers, normotensive carriers and non-carriers
Zhang et al. found decreased eNOS activity, increased Ab in the hippocampus and cortex, and decreased cognition in hypertensive mice
Engagement in exercise led to improved eNOS levels, cognition and AD pathology.
In addition, long-term exercise increased IGF-1 levels in these hypertensive mice, which is important in attenuating Ab clearance.
Reduced CBF is another hallmark of AD.
Older adults carrying the APOE e4 allele showed lower CBF than non-carriers, along with reduced memory
Adult APOE4-mice had reduced CBF in regions susceptible to AD pathology compared to wild-type mice and younger mice with the APOE e4 allele, suggesting an age-dependent interaction
Since APOE e4 carriers have lower levels of the ApoE protein, a complete knock-out of the ApoE protein resulted in lower CBF compared to wildtype mice already at a young age, demonstrating the importance of the ApoE protein.
It has been shown that exercise is effective in increasing CBF.
Aged mice showed increased CBF in the hippocampus with walking
Burdette et al. reported increased hippocampal CBF with a 16-week exercise program in older adults at risk for cognitive decline and with subjective cognitive impairment
Furthermore, greater hippocampal connectivity was observed in the exercise group.
Conversely, a 16-week aerobic program was not sufficient to increase CBF in AD patients
Vascular endothelial-derived growth factor (VEGF) is another important factor involved in vascularization.
VEGF is lower in AD
By increasing the VEGF levels using a viral vector, the AD-related pathology in APOE e4-carrying mice was reversed
Exercise may increase the VEGF plasma levels to improve vascularization
Increased VEGF expression was found to induce angiogenesis in aged mice through exercise engagement
Studies about the association between VEGF levels in APOE e4 carriers and exercise are sparse.

DISCUSSION
This review focused on both human and animal studies that highlighted the role of exercise in APOE e4 carriers with respect to the risk of AD dementia for the following domains: cognitive function, Ab metabolism, lipid metabolism, neuroinflammation and vascularization.
Exercise may modify the association between the APOE e4 allele and AD-related pathology (Table
The APOE e4 allele increases the risk of AD.
Carriers of this allele were shown to have lower levels of the ApoE protein, which is needed in many processes for proper functioning.
Due to this lack of the ApoE protein in APOE e4 carriers, cholesterol transport is affected, which may lead to higher LDL and lower HDL cholesterol transport and increased AD pathology.
Through engagement in exercise, the risk of atherosclerosis may be lowered.
Together with deficits in cholesterol transport, neuroinflammation may be induced by lack of ApoE.
Since ApoE is involved in suppression of microglia to reduce pro-inflammatory cytokines, lower levels of ApoE could reverse this process.
Upregulation of pro-inflammatory cytokines, as shown in APOE e4 carriers, may downregulate IGF-1 and thereby increase Ab pathology.
In addition, BDNF levels may inhibit the induction of hippocampal volume loss.
Lower levels of both IGF-1 and BDNF were observed in APOE e4 carriers.
Exercise is known to be effective in enhancing the levels of these growth factors, but the exact effect in APOE e4 carriers remains unknown.
However, our findings suggest that exercise may play a role in reducing pro-inflammatory cytokines and upregulating IGF-1 and BDNF in APOE e4 carriers, because of the lower levels of the ApoE protein.
The majority of studies showed that Ab metabolism could be improved by exercise.
Exercise was found to reduce the cerebral amyloid load in APOE e4 carriers.
We observed that carriers with low physical activity levels had increased risk of Ab deposition.
In contrast, enzymes involved in the clearance of Ab were upregulated by exercise.
Improvement of Ab metabolism may reduce cognitive deficits in AD.
Low IGF-1 levels in APOE e4 carriers were found to play a role in impaired clearance of Ab deposition.
Since exercise may ameliorate Ab metabolism in APOE e4 carriers and can increase IGF-1 levels in general, we suggest a relation of exercise with IGF-1 levels on the APOE e4 allele.
In terms of cognitive function, exercise seems to be effective reducing cognitive decline in APOE e4 carriers.
Exercise interventions improved cognition and hippocampal function in both human and animal studies
Cognitive function was assessed mainly by neuropsychological tests.
For example, Jensen et al. used the SDMT neuropsychological test, which is sensitive to very early changes in determining dysfunctional aspects of executive function in AD
Intervention studies with contradictory findings related to cognitive function in APOE e4 carriers were limited by participant age or variability in cognitive tests.
A portion of the studies assessed physical activity by survey, increasing the subjectivity of these outcomes.
Most of the studies found positive associations between cognition in the APOE e4 genotype and physical activity.
High physical activity may induce increased semantic processing activity, protection against hippocampal atrophy and faster speed of processing of the working memory.
Physical activity might delay the onset of AD by acting on memory processes in the hippocampus of APOE e4 carriers.
The findings as to whether physical activity can ameliorate cognitive decline in APOE e4 carriers were heterogeneous.
Multiple factors were shown to play a key role, including the type of cognitive test, the type of exercise, the use of exercise intervention versus self-reported questionnaires, the follow-up time, the age of participants and the course of dementia.
We noted that most of the studies with contradictory results used less sensitive outcome variables, such as clinical diagnosis of dementia or MMSE scores, and these kinds of tests are not sensitive to preclinical cognitive ageing
Furthermore, the type of exercise intervention is crucial, because of the differences between aerobic and anaerobic exercise.
Aerobic exercise was proven to be more effective in AD pathology by reducing amyloid angiopathy in transgenic mice
Exercise interventions also avoid the risk of bias, which is more prominent in self-reported assessment of physical activity.
Participant age and the course of dementia are crucial factors in determining the outcomes, because dementia occurs mostly in the elderly and progresses with age: the older the participant, the greater the neural pathology accumulation and the greater the further decline in dementia.
Some studies showed differences between midlife and late-life exercise, suggesting that age plays a crucial role.
There are still questions as to whether a threshold related to age exists in the protective effect of exercise on neural pathology accumulation in APOE e4 carriers
However, since the APOE e4 allele causes deleterious effects in neural protection and repair mechanisms, these carriers may be more influenced by lifestyle-related modifications

CONCLUSION
Exercise could be a potential non-pharmacological therapeutic or prevention option for reducing the risk of AD in APOE e4 carriers (Fig.
By preventing or slowing neurodegeneration, exercise could increase the quality of life of AD patients.
In the future, further research targeting midlife exercise will expand our knowledge about early prevention and therapeutic opportunities to delay the onset of AD in APOE e4 carriers.
Funding.
This publication received no funding or sponsorship.
No Rapid Service Fee was received by the journal for the publication of this article.
Authorship.
All named authors meet the International Committee of Medical Journal Editors (ICMJE) criteria for authorship for this article, take responsibility for the integrity of the work as a whole, and have given their approval for this version to be published.

Disclosures. Sevilay Tokgo ¨z and Jurgen
A.H.R. Claassen have nothing to disclose.
Compliance with Ethics Guidelines.
This article is based on previously conducted studies and does not contain any new studies with human participants or animals performed by any of the authors.
Data Availability.
Data sharing is not applicable to this article as no datasets were generated or analyzed during the current study.
Open Access.
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 International License, which permits any non-commercial use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made.
The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article's Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material.
If material is not included in the article's Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.
To view a copy of this licence, visit



Fig. 1
Fig.1The influence of exercise on Ab accumulation.
In the healthy brain, Ab levels are maintained by autophagy and Ab-degrading enzymes NEP and IDE.
Age-dependent genetic mutations may affect NEP and IDE, leading to Ab



Fig. 2
Fig. 2 Graphical summary of the results.
Physically inactive APOE e4 carriers may have lower cognitive functioning, CBF, HDL cholesterol, BDNF and higher Ab accumulation, LDL cholesterol and neuroinflammation factors such as TNFa, IL-1b and IL-6 compared to physically active APOE e4 carriers.
Physical activity may be involved in the reduction of Ab accumulation, LDL cholesterol, neuroinflammation factors such as TNFa,



Table 1
Studies about physical activity in APOE e4



Table 1 continued