Multi-target design strategies for the improved treatment of Alzheimer's disease
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a multifactorial syndrome resulting in profound misery and poses a substantial burden on human health, economy, and society throughout the world.
Based on the numerous AD-related targets in the disease network, multi-target design strategy is a crucial direction to seek for enhanced therapy, and multi-target drugs have the ability to regulate more targets than single-target drugs, affecting the disease network with more potency.
Herein, we highlight nine major targets associated with AD, which are acetylcholine esterase (AChE), beta-site amyloid precursor protein cleaving enzyme 1 (β-secretase, BACE-1), glycogen synthase kinase 3 beta (GSK-3β), monoamine oxidases (MAOs), metal ions in the brain, N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor, 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT) receptors, the third subtype of histamine receptor (H3 receptor), and phosphodiesterases (PDEs), and their respective relationship to the disease network.
Furthermore, eleven multi-target design strategies classified by the involvement of AChE and related promising compounds for improved therapy of AD in recent years are described based on the nine major targets.

Introduction
AD is an progressive neurodegenerative disorder associated with the appearance of extracellular senile or neuritic plaques and intracellular neurofibrillary tangles in the brain
AD was first reported by Alois Alzheimer in 1907
The nebulous and complicated pathogenesis of AD makes it difficult to develop new drugs, and also leads to failure of many promising drug candidates when tested in clinical trials with the result of unpredictable clinical manifestations.
Despite these challenges, research of AD is still a hot topic, and the efforts and attempts of scientific groups worldwide are continuing, with the aim of finding an effective treatment
Currently, exploration of AD has led to the discovery of many primary targets that influence generation and exacerbation of the disease, such as AChE, BACE-1, GSK-3β, MAOs, metal ions in the brain, NMDA receptor, 5-HT receptors, H3 receptor, and PDEs (Figure
And lots of potent and effective compounds for the treatment of AD are discovered based on these targets, among which donepezil
And all of them are single-target drugs that can notably improve the conditions of patients in cognition deterioration and memory loss, but these drugs cannot completely cure the disease.
It is a unique and intricate feature of AD that relevant targets in different cell signaling pathways can interact with each other and form a disease network, and this results in a poor curative effect of single- target drugs.
Based on the complicated pathogenesis of AD and the imperfect single-target drugs, multi-target strategies are becoming more and more popular for potential treatment of AD because several targets associated with AD could be affected by one multi-target drug, which can have a synergistic effect on the disease network, leading to better improvement on memory and cognition.
Therefore, multi-target design strategy for AD therapy is an important direction in current research compared with single-target drugs, and multi-target drugs will likely be more pivotal and effective in regulating disease progression.

Multi-target strategies involving AChE
Nine related targets in AD are presented in this section, which are AChE, BACE-1, GSK-3β, MAOs, metal ions in the brain, NMDA receptor, 5-HT receptors, H3 receptor, and PDEs.
These nine targets and their respective signaling pathways could influence the disease progression by themselves and interactions among them, also resulting in the complicated and unclear disease network of AD.
Among them, AChE is the most pivotal target of the well-known AD network, and multi-target drugs are designed to involve this target to increase the availability and decrease the failure risk of new chemical entities (NCEs).
In short, AChE is the most popular target in AD-related targets and multi-target design strategy involving AChE is the most popular strategy in AD-related multi-target strategies.
In this section, eight multi-target strategies involving AChE and related targets are reviewed (Figure

AChE
The cholinergic hypothesis, a significant guidance orientation of AD, was first reported by Davies and Maloney in 1976
ACh in the synaptic cleft is secreted by synaptic vesicles to activate muscarinic and nicotinic receptors and is immediately decomposed to choline and acetate
AChE is a highly kinetically efficient enzyme, and each AChE molecule can hydrolyze 5000 ACh molecules per second
Butyrylcholinesterase (BChE) can also hydrolyze ACh, and its levels progressively rise in advancing AD, while AChE activity remains unchanged or declines
BChE is becoming an interesting target because selective BChE inhibitors have displayed amyloid-lowering activity which is a useful effect to improve dementia condition
Highly selective BChE inhibitors or dual AChE and BChE inhibitors represent another new potential approach for AD treatment; however, this multi-target strategy is not discussed in this article because of the unclear theoretical basis of BChE and the close relationship between the two targets
Inhibition of AChE activity to prevent degradation of ACh in synapses is the most primary method in medicinal chemistry, which makes AChE a vital target and leads the inhibition activity of AChE to be a fundamental evaluation criterion.
The present clinical drugs approved by the FDA are principally AChE inhibitors (AChEIs), such as donepezil (1), galantamine (2), and rivastigmine (3)
Tacrine (4) (Figure
Donepezil (1) (Figure
Donepezil (1) is available as disintegrating tablets or oral solutions to be administered at a dose of 5-10 mg once a day due to its long half-life, with a starting dose of 5 mg/day.
Donepezil (1) is a safe and well tolerated drug based on current clinical evidence, it can improve cognition and shows clinical amelioration in overall functioning even for patients with severe AD
Tacrine (4) and donepezil (1) are still subjected to various modifications by research groups
The cholinergic hypothesis and approved drugs make AChE and AChEIs a high profile in AD field, lead single-target strategy aiming at AChE and multi-target strategy involving AChE to become common thoughts in new drug design for the potential treatment of AD.

BACE-1
The amyloid hypothesis, a currently popular theoretical foundation first outlined by Hardy and Higgins in 1992
The degradation of major amyloid precursor protein (APP) occurs through a two-step proteolysis reaction catalyzed by α-secretase and γ-secretase with no physical damage
Aβ40 is the more common metabolite and may actually be anti-amyloidogenic, whereas Aβ42 and longer peptides are highly self-aggregating and lead to profound Aβ deposition
Despite continuing arguments for the amyloid hypothesis
Obviously, BACE-1 is the most suitable target to decrease Aβ production in the APP metabolic pathway by inhibiting its activity, and mice with BACE-1 deficiency showed a healthy and fertile clinical phenotype with abolished Aβ production in the brain
The clinical situation of BACE-1 inhibitors is cruel (Figure
The drug verubecestat
The Phase II/III drug atabecestat
Among these compounds, hybrid 27 (Figure
Further in vivo experiments in APP transgenic mice showed that compound 27 caused a 29% reduction in Aβ1-40 production through intracerebroventricular administration.
Another compound, hybrid 28 (Figure
neuroblastoma cell viability at 40 μM.
Fernandez-Bachiller and co-workers
The most promising compound, hybrid 30 (Figure
A promising compound, hybrid 34 (Figure
Further in vivo experiments in APP-PS1 transgenic mice showed a central soluble Aβ-lowering effect four weeks later after intraperitoneal administration with compound 34.
Replacement of the chlorobenzene ring of the huprine Y (32) moiety of 34 with pyridine led to lower AChE and BACE-1 inhibitory activities but potent antioxidant activity
Another potent tacrine (4)-benzofuran (35) hybrid 36 (Figure
Further in vivo studies confirmed that 36 caused cognitive improvement in scopolamine-treated ICR mice and exhibited no significant hepatotoxicity.
Computer-aided structure-based design is a practical and efficient method to find new active hits.
Dominguez and co-workers
Innovating new compound scaffolds through the self-accumulated effort and knowledge of scientific groups is another classical drug discovery approach.
Belluti and co-workers
μM for AChE, 10.72% inhibition at 3.38 μM for BACE-1).
Recently, a new compound 39 (Figure
showing potent human AChE and BACE-1 inhibition (IC50 = 4.11 nM for AChE, IC50 = 18.3 nM for BACE-1), potential metal chelating capability, low toxicity toward SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma cells, and the ability to permeate the BBB tested by PAMPA.

GSK-3β
The tau protein hypothesis is based on intracellular neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs) in the brain which is another histopathological hallmark of AD just as senile plaques.
NFTs are composed of paired helical filaments and straight filaments which are mainly caused by hyperphosphorylated tau protein
The primary physiological function of tau protein, the most abundant microtubule-associated protein expressed in neurons, is to form microtubules with microtubule proteins, maintain microtubules stabilization, and promote microtubules to concentrate in clusters.
When tau protein is hyperphosphorylated by the highly conserved threonine-serine kinase GSK-3β, primarily at Ser396, Ser199, and Ser413
Not only can GSK-3β phosphorylate tau protein, increased GSK-3β levels could regulate γ-secretase to induce Aβ formation in a unique way, resulting in toxicity to cultured neurons
The three aspects of therapies based on the tau protein hypothesis include inhibiting the phosphorylation, preventing the aggregation of tau protein, and stabilizing microtubules, and GSK-3β is the major and specific target in the upstream tau pathway, making it the most popular target for small molecule compounds.
The GSK-3β
inhibitor tideglusib (10) (Figure
Tideglusib

AChE and GSK-3β multi-target strategy
AChE and GSK-3β, each of which has been frequently adopted in multi-target strategies, are two vital AD-related targets in ACh concentration modulation and tau protein phosphorylation, respectively.
However multi-target-directed ligands (MTDLs) possessing inhibitory potency for both enzymes are rarely reported.
Hui and co-workers
The most promising hybrid 43 (Figure

MAOs
MAOs are metabolic enzymes that exist in two isoforms, MAO-A and MAO-B, distinguished by their difference on specificity of substrates and inhibitors
MAOs can catalyze the oxidative deamination reactions of various biogenic and xenobiotic amines and play an important role in neurodegenerative diseases, such as AD and Parkinson disease (PD).
The bioactivity of MAO-B is significantly increased in the cerebral cortex and the hippocampus regions of AD patients, representing more than 80% of the total MAOs activity in the brain
High levels of MAOs catalyze oxidative deamination and increase the production of hydrogen peroxide and reactive oxygen species (ROS) which are responsible for oxidative injuries and the toxic environment characteristics of neurodegeneration
MAO-A inhibitors are used in the clinic to treat anxiety and depression, which are also common symptoms considered to be risk factors in AD progression
MAOs inhibitors can increase monoaminergic neurotransmission, decrease ROS formation and oxidative stress, and exert pharmacological effects including antioxidation, neuroprotection and cognitive improvement
which are potentially valuable for the treatment of AD.
Rasagiline

AChE and MAOs multi-target strategy
Ladostigil
This drug shows inhibitory activities against AChE, BChE, MAO-A, and MAO-B in the brain
In multi-target strategies involving targets AChE and MAOs for AD therapies, donepezil
(1)-related derivatives and tacrine (4)-related derivatives as MTDLs are still popular.
The Unzeta group
Afterwards, the same group
Later, the same group
Estrada and co-workers
The same group
nM for AChE, IC50 = 33.0
nM for BChE, IC50 = 0.401 μM for MAO-B).
Later, the same group
Indolotacrine analogue 59 (Figure
The Li group
While compound 61 (Figure
was the most promising compound in the second series with a dual functional profile of targeting AChE and MAO-B (IC50 = 32 nM for AChE, IC50 = 2.117 μM for MAO-B), and showed antioxidant ability, good copper chelating capacity in vitro, and the ability to alleviate scopolamine-induced cognitive impairment in mice.

Metal ions in the brain
Bioinorganic chemistry is a significant concept in therapeutic and diagnostic medicine, and the antitumor drug cisplatin (cis-[Pt(NH3)2Cl2]), a profound prototype in the bioinorganic field, is still a widely used chemotherapeutic agent for cancer and improves the survival rates of patients worldwide
Potential bioinorganic chemical agents are metal ions, active metal complexes, and biometal chelators, which are most often used to limit the adverse effects of metal ions overload, inhibit selected metalloenzymes, or facilitate metal ions redistribution
Excess metal levels in the brain are associated with peptide aggregation and oxidative stress, ultimately leading to cell death, and are responsible for neurodegenerative disorders, such as AD, PD, Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
High levels and dysregulation of Cu 2+ , Fe 2+ , Zn 2+ , and Ca 2+ , which are the four most important biometal ions
Cu 2+ and Zn 2+ have been shown to induce the generation of toxic Aβ oligomers by binding to Aβ peptides and influencing the Aβ aggregation pathway
while the redox-active metals, Cu(I/II) and Fe(II/III), have been demonstrated to generate cytotoxic ROS and cause neuronal damage
Thus, biometal chelators which can down-regulate the high levels of biometals might be a potential therapeutic strategy for the treatment of AD.
The approved antifungal drug clioquinol (12) (Figure
PBT-2

AChE and metal ions multi-target strategy
Fernandez-Bachiller and co-workers
The maximum absorption at 242 nm of 62 in Tris buffer suffered a redshift to 248 nm with the addition of CuSO4, indicating the formation of complex 62-Cu(II).
Hybrid 64 (Figure
Xie and co-workers
UV-vis spectrometry with wavelength ranging from 200 to 500 nm was used to test the metal chelating effect of 66, and the increased absorbance of 66 along with increasing Cu 2+ or Fe 2+ concentrations indicated the occuring interactions between 66 and these metals.
Compound 67 (Figure
The Li group
Compound 68 (Figure
Yan and co-workers

NMDA receptor
The glutamatergic hypothesis of AD is based on the NMDA receptor which plays a crucial role in modifying major forms of synaptic plasticity, certain types of learning and memory formation, and consolidation of short-term memory into long-term memory under physiological conditions
The NMDA receptor is a type of ionotropic glutamate receptor composed of two NR1 subunits and two NR2 (NR2A-D) subunits or occasionally NR3 subunit, and can be activated when bound with the excitatory neurotransmitter glutamate or the modulatory agent glycine (Gly).
The NMDA receptor exerts important bio-functions in normal synaptic transmission, meaning it cannot be totally antagonized, whereas glutamate-related excitotoxicity and cell death could be caused when NMDA receptors are overstimulated by excess glutamate
An optimal balance of NMDA receptors between glutamate stimulation and glutamate-related excitotoxicity is crucial to achieve the ideal treatment of AD.
Memantine (14) (Table
Memantine (
Memantine (
It is well absorbed by oral administration with nearly 100% bioavailability, it undergoes partial hepatic metabolism with a half-life of 60-100 h, and 48% of the administered drug is excreted as the original with unchanged structure in the urine
Riluzole (15) (Figure
Riluzole (15) can lower extracellular glutamate levels, inhibit presynaptic glutamate release, and enhance glutamate transporter activity
The withdrawn antihistamine drug dimebon (16) (Figure

AChE and NMDA receptor multi-target strategy
Cholinergic and glutamatergic neuronal systems influence each other through their joint dysfunction, and cholinergic deficits and glutamate-related excitotoxicity are central to AD pathology
Excessive activation of NMDA receptor is implicated in the degenerative process of cholinergic neurons in AD, with the instance that neuronal decline caused by direct injection of NMDA into the rat basal forebrain generates reduced activity of choline acetyltransferase in the cortex
Thus, the AChE and NMDA receptor multi-target strategy can affect the cholinergic and glutamatergic systems and is becoming an important idea because NMDA receptor antagonists can confront neurodegeneration and AChEIs can recover memory and cognition.
Namzaric from Allergan approved in 2015 for the treatment of AD is a once-daily fixed-dose combination drug and comprised of memantine (
In addition, caregivers can sprinkle the drug into food for patients who have difficulty in swallowing.
The Rosini group
Hybrid 72 (Figure
self-induced Aβ aggregation inhibition, 57.7% AChE-induced Aβ aggregation inhibition, and the ability to reduce oxidative stress
Later, compound 73 (Figure
Memagal
Further investigation revealed that hybrid 73 possessed NR2B-containing NMDA receptor inhibition based on a [ 3 H] ifenprodil binding assay (Ki = 4.6 μM, the value was derived from an iterative curve-fitting procedure) and could inhibit NMDA (500 μM) mediated Another interesting compound, hybrid 76 (Figure
was fused with dimebon (
And compound 76 showed dual BChE and NMDA receptor inhibition potency with IC50 = 0.52 μM for BChE, IC50 = 14.6 μM for NMDA receptor in a [ 3 H] MK-801 binding assay, and IC50 = 13.4 μM for NMDA receptor in a [ 3 H] ifenprodil binding assay.

5-HT receptors
The serotonergic neurotransmitter system has crucial physiological functions in emotion and depression, while it is implicated with the cholinergic system in cognitive function of neurodegenerative disease
5-HT, also named serotonin, is considered as an inhibitory neurotransmitter compared with the excitatory neurotransmitter glutamate, while 5-HT has the bio-function to generate feelings of well-being and happiness, suggesting that the concentration of 5-HT should be increased and the serotonergic system should be enhanced in depressive disorder.
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), such as fluoxetine and paroxetine, are primarily approved as antidepressant drugs with the ability to increase 5-HT concentration in the synaptic cleft by inhibiting neuronal reuptake of 5-HT, improving the emotional state of depressive patients.
There are seven subtypes of 5-HT receptors (5-HT1 to 5-HT7 receptors), which are classified by their structural and functional characteristics.
5-HT1A, 5-HT4, 5-HT6, and 5-HT7 receptors in the brain are associated with learning and memory.
5-HT1A receptor plays a significant role in therapeutics for major depressive disorder
5-HT4 receptor is involved in memory processes, and partial agonists of this receptor could be utilized to treat the cognitive symptoms of AD
5-HT6
receptor is expressed primarily in the cortex and the hippocampus areas of the brain and is associated with learning and memory processes, and antagonists of this receptor would be beneficial for ameliorating AD symptoms.
Lecozotan (17) (Figure
PRX-03140 (18) (Figure
Idalopirdine (19) (Figure
Intepirdine (20) (Figure

AChE and 5-HT receptors multi-target strategy
The serotonergic and cholinergic systems have physiological and pathological interactions with each other.
Brain functions mediated by 5-HT4 receptor require a synergistic effect from cholinergic neurotransmission
5-HT4 receptor agonists could promote the nonamyloidogenic cleavage of APP, forming neurotrophic human soluble amyloid precursor protein α (sAPP-α) fragments and decreasing Aβ secretion in primary neurons
Meanwhile, 5-HT6 receptor antagonists are thought to have the ability to enhance cholinergic neurotransmission
Thus, AChE and 5-HT receptors could act synergistically on cognitive deficits, Aβ-mediated damage, and unhealthy emotions, meaning a multi-target strategy targeting these two targets could lead to a potential treatment for AD.
RS67333 (77) (Figure
RS67333
The Dallemagne group
Interestingly, compound 78 was more antagonistic than agonistic toward 5-HT4 receptor, and molecular modeling studies failed to explain the antagonist profile of compound 78.
Later, the same group
(1), showed dual AChE inhibition and 5-HT4 receptor agonist activity (IC50 = 16 nM for AChE, Ki = 6.6 nM for 5-HT4 receptor).
Donecopride (79) stimulated the nonamyloidogenic 5-HT4
receptor-mediated cleavage of APP and had greater potency in promoting neurotrophic sAPP-α release (EC50 = 11.3 nM) compared with RS67333 (77)
Donecopride
Hybrid 81 (Figure
Further investigation showed that compound 81 also possessed good BBB permeability, making it a promising compound for the treatment of depression with cognitive impairment.

Histamine receptors
The histaminergic system is composed of histamine and its receptors, plays an important role in maintaining brain homeostasis function and higher brain functions in the CNS, and participates in smooth muscle contraction, dilatation of capillaries, gastric acid secretion, and inflammation in the periphery.
Histamine is an endogenous biogenic amine distributed throughout the body that acts as a neurotransmitter in nervous centralis and a local mediator in the periphery, and has high concentrations in the lung, skin, and gastrointestinal tract, carrying out its physiological functions with histamine receptors
Histamine receptors, which are also distributed throughout the body, are G protein-coupled receptors with different bio-functions.
There are four histamine receptor subtypes, which are H1 receptor, H2 receptor, H3 receptor, and H4 receptor.
H1 receptor activation mainly promotes allergic symptoms in the periphery and antagonists against this receptor are typically anti-allergic drugs, such as loratadine, while H2 receptor activation primarily stimulates the secretion of gastric acid and antagonists against this receptor can be antiulcer drugs, such as ranitidine.
The interesting H3 receptor is an antoreceptor and heteroreceptor, providing negative feedback on histaminergic system and inhibiting the release of other neurotransmitters when it is activated, and antagonists against this receptor could augment the release of histamine and other neurotransmitters.
H4 receptor is the most recently discovered histamine receptor, found in immunocompetent cells, and the development of anti-inflammatory drugs based on H4 receptor is anticipated
ABT-288 (21) (Figure
GSK-239512
(Figure
suggesting that single H3 receptor antagonists are not sufficiently effective in treating cognitive dysfunction in AD patients.
SUVN-G3031 (structure not disclosed) from Suven Life Sciences is an H3 receptor antagonist in Phase I clinical trials for the treatment of cognitive disorders associated with AD patients.

AChE and H3 receptor multi-target strategy
H3 receptor is considered as a significant target in AD because its activation decreases the presynaptic release of ACh, and its blockade augments the presynaptic release of ACh and improves cholinergic neurotransmission in the cortex.
Thus, a multi-target strategy involving AChE and H3 receptor may exert a synergistic effect on up-regulating synaptic levels of ACh, which is a potential approach for the treatment of AD, but studies exploring this strategy have rarely been reported.
Huang and co-workers
The structure  PDEs are enzymes with the ability to break phosphodiester bonds, and usually referred to cyclic nucleotide phosphodiesterases.
They are a group of enzymes that can hydrolyze and degrade intracellular second messengers, such as cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) and cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP), thus playing a major role in cell signal transduction throughout the brain and the periphery
PDEs are classified into eleven isoenzyme families, from PDE1 to PDE11, of which most have several subtypes, contributing to in total 100 specific human PDEs according to the current estimation
Among these families, PDE4, 7, and 8 are specific enzymes for cAMP hydrolysis, and PDE5, 6, and 9 are specific enzymes for cGMP hydrolysis.
PDE1, 2, 3, 10, and 11 are dual-substrate enzymes that can hydrolyze both cAMP and cGMP
PDEs with the ability to degrade second messengers are important regulators of signal transduction in neuroplasticity and neuroprotection, and thus, PDEs inhibitors with the capacity to up-regulate the concentrations of cAMP and cGMP are receiving increased attention as potential agents to treat cognitive decline in AD.
In addition, the nitric oxide/soluble guanylyl cyclase/cGMP (NO/sGC/cGMP) signaling pathway plays a pivotal role in learning and memory by regulating synaptic transmission and synaptic plasticity in the hippocampus and the cerebral cortex
Vinpocetine from Gedeon Richter is a PDE1 inhibitor for the treatment of dementia and cognitive disorders that was approved in 1980, but it was reported to be ineffective on cognitive impairment in AD patients
Cilostazol from Otsuka Pharma is an oral PDE3 inhibitor for the improvement of various symptoms of chronic arterial obstruction and was originally launched in 1988.
Cilostazol was tested as a co-treatment with the AChEI donepezil (1) for patients with mild-to-moderate AD.
Rolipram from the National Institute of Mental Health is a PDE4D inhibitor in Phase II clinical trials for the treatment of major depression and had beneficial effects in a hippocampal-dependent memory assay, confirming that PDE4D plays a crucial role in memory consolidation
MK-0952 (23) (Figure
PF-04447943 (24) (Figure
BI-409306 (25) (Figure

AChE and PDEs multi-target strategy
PDEs have eleven isoenzyme families with extensive physiological functions, meaing PDEs could be drug targets in many signaling pathways.
Whereas multi-target strategies involving targets of AChE and PDEs are rarely reported, indicating that such potential therapies would need to be explored for the treatment of AD.
As a special cGMP hydrolytic enzyme, PDE5 has only one hypotype, PDE5A, and is distributed in the hippocampus, cortex and cerebellum of the brain
Tadalafil (85) (Figure

AChE and PDEs multi-target strategy
Repurposing or redeveloping existing drugs for new uses is an important drug discovery strategy with effective and quick characteristics.
Through the screening of old drug library, the Li group
μM for AChE, IC50 = 4 nM for PDE5A1).
The long half-life and safety of tadalafil
To further explore this synergistic therapeutic route, a series of novel tadalafil (85) derivatives, as the first-generation of dual-target inhibitors toward AChE and PDE5, were synthesized and biologically evaluated.
The most promising compound 86 (Figure
Further in vivo experiments showed that citrate of 86 could reverse the cognitive dysfunction in scopolamine-induced AD mice with comparable curative effect against donepezil (1), and had effect on enhancing cAMP response element-binding protein (CREB) phosphorylation, a crucial factor in memory formation and synaptic

Multi-target strategies without AChE
Multi-target strategies are not limited to strategies involving AChE, and more diverse structures of hits could be designed based on the specific and multiple protein pockets of AD-associated targets.
In the disease network of AD, several targets involving AChE or not, could implicated with others, and their respective signaling pathways could cross with others, contributing together to the development of AD progression.
The importance of AChE in disease network is prominent, while the potential possibility among other targets should not be neglected for AD therapy.
Thus, seeking the specific relationships in the disease network between targets without AChE is also a significant strategy for the treatment of AD.
In this section, three multi-target strategies without AChE are demonstrated (Figure

BACE-1 and GSK-3β multi-target strategy
The histopathological hallmarks in the brain of AD patients are senile plaques and NFTs, and BACE-1 and GSK-3β are two key targets responsible for each pathological cascade, suggesting that a dual inhibitor against BACE-1 and GSK-3β could produce a downstream synergistic effect
The Cavalli group
Among these derivatives possessing balanced micromolar affinities for both BACE-1 and GSK-3β, compound 87 (Figure
Further in vivo investigation in mice indicated that compound 87 displayed good drug-like properties in oral bioavailability (66%) and BBB penetration (a brain concentration of 0.62 μM of compound 87 was observed 30 min later when a very low dose of 3 mg/kg was administered with compound 87).
The Belluti group
This series of inhibitors was based on the natural product curcumin (69) which possesses efficacy and safety for both prevention and treatment of various disorders
In this study, the curcumin derivative compound 88 (Figure

MAO-B and metal ions multi-target strategy
The Li group
The most promising compound, hybrid 92 (Figure

Conclusion
Currently, AD is an incurable disease with a complicated disease network and brings enormous suffering to patients and their families.
Therefore, there is an urgent need to be met for the society.
Huge efforts have been made by research groups worldwide to conquer this disease, and lots of AD-related targets have been found with the attempt to solve the puzzle caused by the disease network.
Nine major targets were discussed in this overview, among which AChE demonstrates a significant influence on this field, and corresponding single-target drugs or candidates (25 instances) were exhibited.
Moreover, the therapies based on other targets, such as cyclooxygenase (COX) and 5-lipoxygenase (5-LOX)
There are also some NCEs, with multifunction effects and overall cognitive improvement on AD-related animal models, not discussed here in detail because their corresponding binding-targets have not been clearly figured out.
But these NCEs have showed enough and excellent curative effect to be drug candidates for the treatment of AD.
For example, mecripyrine (SCR1693) of Yene Pharma, an AChE inhibitor which was developed based on multi-target design strategy, could remarkably attenuate tau hyperphosphorylation and improve memory deficits, and preserve dendrite morphologies as well as spine density
It is in the Phase I clinical trials in China for the potential treatment of AD
Considering the intricate pathogenesis of AD and the shortcomings of single-target drugs, we think the multi-target design strategies are the frontier scientific research for potential treatment of AD because efficient and synergetic modulation toward several targets could be realized by multi-target inhibitors to better affect the disease network and control AD progression than single-target drugs.
Eleven multi-target design strategies were discussed in this overview and various promising compounds (42 instances) for the potential treatment of AD were presented.
It is deficient for current situation that existing scaffolds are still not sufficient to enrich the compound libraries for AD treatment, and most designed compounds with dual-target activities are hybrids of known structures or drugs.
Nevertheless, natural products
More efforts are needed to make the multi-target compounds eventually developed into new drugs which could be successfully used in the clinic as ideal AD treatments.



Figure 1 .
Figure 1.
Concise relationships between AD and nine major targets, and eleven multi-target design strategies based on the targets.
Red lines: multi-target strategies involving AChE.
Blue lines: multi-target strategies without AChE involvement.



Figure 2 .
Figure 2. Related single-target drugs that are approved or in clinical trials for the treatment of AD.
Red refers to the approved drugs or candidates in clinical trials, and blue refers to the discontinued candidates in clinical trials.



Figure 3 .
Figure 3. AChE and BACE-1 multi-target strategy


phenothiazine which is the key pharmacophore of the tau aggregation inhibitor methylene blue (40) (Figure4), showed AChE inhibitory potency (IC50 = 89 nM).
And tau hyperphosphorylation induced by okadaic acid in N2α cells was markedly prevented by hybrid 41 with 39.5% down-regulation of the tau protein level when 41 was tested at 100 μM.
After initial ADME properties screening using PreADMET (v2.0), molecular docking studies were undertaken using Molegro Virtual Docker 2009 to test the inhibition potency of AChE and GSK-3β among 26 hybrids, and 41 had significant affinity toward AChE, with a MolDock score of -183.585
kJ/mol, and toward GSK-3β, with a MolDock score of -148.821
kJ/mol.
However, enzyme inhibitory activity of compound 41 against GSK-3β was not reported.



Figure 4 .
Figure 4. AChE and GSK-3β multi-target strategy


), was ChEs and MAOs dual inhibitors (IC50 = 1.75 μM for AChE, IC50 = 0.69 μM for BChE, IC50 = 3.5 μM for MAO-A, IC50 = 6.0 μM for MAO-B) and was able to improve the differentiation of adult subgranular zone (SGZ)-derived neural stem cells into a neuronal phenotype in vitro, thus showing antioxidant, cholinergic, neuroprotective and neurogenic properties.
Hybrid 53 (Figure5) reported by the Sang group
Further investigation confirmed that 53 could cross the BBB in vitro and abided by Lipinski's rule of five.



Figure 5 .
Figure 5. AChE and MAOs multi-target strategy


inhibitory potency against rat AChE (IC50 = 70 nM), selective biometal chelating ability with Cu 2+ via UV-vis spectrometry, moderate antioxidative activity, 59.2% self-induced Aβ aggregation inhibition at 25 μM, and 48.3% Cu 2+ -induced Aβ aggregation inhibition at 25 μM.
The electronic spectra of compound 67 were recorded when the salts CuCl2, FeSO4, ZnCl2, or AlCl3



Figure 6 .
Figure 6.
AChE and metal ions multi-target strategy



Figure 7 .
Figure 7. AChE and NMDA receptor multi-target strategy



Figure 8 .
Figure 8. AChE and 5-HT receptors multi-target strategy


of the compounds was first designed to fuse the BACE-1 inhibitor 82 (IC50 = 11 nM) with the AChEI compound 83, named BYYT-25 (IC50 = 50 nM), two compounds reported by the same group.
In addition, the dihydroquinazoline moiety of 82 and benzyl pyrrolidine fragment of 83 were selected to assemble the scaffold of novel H3 receptor inhibitor.
Then, a virtual database consisting of plentiful compounds with novel scaffolds was screened on a pharmacophore model of BACE-1 inhibitor and next filtered by a molecular docking model of AChEI, resulting in the selection of 17 quinoxaline derivatives.
Among these compounds, hybrid 84 (Figure9) showed the most promising profiles, with potent activity toward AChE, H3 receptor, and BACE-1 targets (IC50 = 483 nM for AChE, IC50 = 280 nM for H3 receptor antagonism, IC50 = 189 nM for H3 receptor inverse agonism, 46.64% inhibition for BACE-1 at 20 μM) and high selectivity for H3 receptor over H1, H2 or H4 receptors.
Further receptor-binding studies of hybrid 84 demonstrated that it could achieve several key interactions with AChE and BACE-1, suggesting that quinoxaline derivatives may be a potential therapeutic for AD.



Figure 9 .
Figure 9. AChE and H3 receptor multi-target strategy



Figure 11 .
Figure 11.
BACE-1 and GSK-3β multi-target strategy


), an MAO-B inhibitor (IC50 = 18.5 nM) approved in 1981 for the treatment of PD, and clioquinol
The most promising compound 89 (Figure12) exhibited good inhibitory activity against MAO-B (IC50 = 0.21 μM for MAO-B), good antioxidant activity (oxygen radical absorbance capacity (ORAC) = 4.2), and the ability to permeate the BBB in a PAMPA-BBB study.
UV-vis spectrometry was used to investigate the metal-chelating ability of These results indicated that hybrid 90 could be a promising compound for the treatment of AD.
A novel series of hybrids, reported by the Li group



Figure 13 .
Figure 13.
PDEs and metal ions multi-target strategy



.3. AChE and BACE-1 multi-target strategy
of Johnson & Johnson was discontinued in May 2018 for the increase of hepatic enzyme, and the Phase III drug lanabecestat (7) of Eli Lilly and AstraZeneca was discontinued in June 2018 because no curative endpoint was achieved.
The