Modulation of Neuroin ammation by Low-dose Radiation Therapy in an Animal Model of Alzheimer's Disease
Recently, several studies have reported that low dose radiation therapy (RT) reduces the release of proin ammatory cytokines in in ammatory-degenerative disorders including Alzheimer's disease (AD).
AD is the most common cause of dementia, and neuroin ammation is one of the major contributing factors in AD pathogenesis.
Thus, low dose RT is expected to be used clinically for treating AD.
However, the proper doses, effects, and underlying mechanisms of RT in AD have not been determined.
Therefore, in this study, we aimed to determine the appropriate RT dose and schedule for AD treatment, and to investigate the therapeutic effects and mechanisms of low-dose RT in AD.
We rst determined the proper dose and schedule of RT in late stage AD using 8-9-month old 5x familial AD(5xFAD) mice, a well-known animal model of AD, by comparing the effects of a low total dose with a low dose per fraction (LD-LDRT, 5 × 0.6 Gy) and a low-moderate total dose with a conventional dose per fraction (LMD-CDRT, 5 × 2 Gy).
LD-LDRT and LMD-CDRT were found to reduce the level of pro-in ammatory cytokines, i.e.
CD54, IL-3, CXCL9/10, and CCL2/4 in the hippocampus of 5xFAD mice.
Further, increased microgliosis assessed with Iba-1 was signi cantly reduced by LD-LDRT in the hippocampus of 5xFAD mice.
Moreover, LD-LDRT and LMD-CDRT decreased the amyloid plaque burden in 5xFAD mice and attenuated their cognitive impairment; these effects persisted for nearly one month.
The present study showed that LD-LDRT rescues cognitive impairment and prevents accumulation of amyloid plaques by regulating neuroin ammation in the late stage of AD, with an e cacy equivalent to that of LMD-CDRT.
Furthermore, it suggests that LD-LDRT may facilitate accessible and convenient treatment in clinical trials compared to LMD-CDRT.

Background
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the most prevalent cause of dementia
An estimated 50 million people worldwide were reported to be living with dementia in 2017 and this number is expected to double every 20 years
Despite several efforts in the last decades, no mechanism-based fundamental diseasemodifying therapies have been approved for this destructive disease, and currently used therapeutics such as donepezil, rivastigmine, galantamine, tacrine (acetylcholinesterase inhibitors), and memantine (NMDA antagonist) provide only temporary symptomatic relief
Postmortem analysis of the brains of patients with AD has demonstrated that neuroin ammation is involved in AD pathogenesis, together with other factors
Various neuroin ammation-related factors, such as interleukin (IL)-1 β, IL-6, and transforming growth factor (TGF)-β, have been found to accumulate around the brain amyloid plaques in AD
Therefore, numerous studies have investigated the proin ammatory and anti-in ammatory cytokine levels in patients with AD.
Based on numerous evidences, neuroin ammation has been accepted as an important factor in AD pathogenesis, with studies suggesting various mechanisms including the activation of astrocytes and microglia
Further, epidemiologic studies with low incidence of AD in patients with rheumatoid arthritis under long-term treatment with nonsteroidal anti-in ammatory drugs (NSAIDs) indicate that in ammation is involved in AD development (8).
However, clinical trials based on NSAIDs such as naproxen and celecoxib in patients with AD have not been successful
Though neuroin ammation is responsible for AD pathogenesis, there are no effective treatments for regulating neuroin ammation to date.
Therefore, alternative treatments are needed to target neuroin ammation in AD.
Radiation therapy (RT) is one of the numerous treatments known to have an anti-in ammatory effect.
Interestingly, some countries such as Germany extensively use a low total dose RT with low-dose per fraction (total 3-6 Gy, single dose < 1 Gy) for treating in ammatory-degenerative disorders
The interrelationship between RT and the immune system exhibits dichotomous characteristics and is highly dependent on the dose/quality of radiation.
A high total dose with conventional-dose RT (total 50-70 Gy, single dose 1.8 Gy) that is generally used in cancer treatment, has the effect of exacerbating in ammation
Based on these results, the German Society of Radiation Oncology recommends single fraction doses of 0.5-1.0
Gy and total doses of 3.0-6.0
Gy/series for low-dose RT in painful degenerative skeletal disorders
Surprisingly, patients with AD have been reported to have partially restored cognition, speech, memory, movement and appetite after several brain CT scan exposures
Recently, several preclinical studies have revealed a signi cant reduction of amyloid plaque burden and/or tau staining in mouse models of AD with relatively low-moderate total doses of 9-10 Gy in 5 fractions (16-19) .
The RT dose in these studies was a relatively low total dose of 10 Gy, which was lower than the 60 Gy generally used in cancer treatment, but the dose per fraction remained the same as the conventional dose RT (1.8-2 Gy).
As in the studies on in ammatory-degenerative disorders, it is unclear whether AD shows anti-in ammatory effects and disease improvement by exposure to a low total dose with low single dose RT.
Therefore, we aimed to determine the appropriate RT dose and schedule for AD treatment as well as the therapeutic effects and mechanisms of action for low-dose RT in AD.

Methods

Antibodies and reagents
TRIzol reagent was obtained from Qiagen (Hilden, Germany).
The 6E10 antibody was purchased form from Covance (Princeton, NJ, USA).
PSD-95, TO-PRO-3, and Alexa Fluor® 488 goat anti-mouse IgG were obtained from Thermo Scienti c (Waltham, MA, USA).
Glial brillary acidic protein (GFAP) antibody was purchased from DAKO (Glostrup, Denmark).
Ionized calcium-binding adapter molecule 1(Iba-1) antibody was obtained from Novus Biologicals (Littleton, CO, USA).
Neuronal nuclei (NeuN) antibody was purchased form Merck Millipore (Darmstadt, Germany).

Animals
Animal treatment and maintenance were performed and approved as per the Animal Care and Use Guidelines of Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea (SNU-181005-1-2).
The 5xFAD mouse is a transgenic mouse with 5 mutations (Swedish; K670N/M671L, Florida; I716V, London; V717I in human APP and M146L, L286V in human PS1).
5xFAD mice were purchased from Jackson Laboratories and were maintained by crossing hemizygous transgenic mice with B6SJL F1 mice.
Transgenic mice were identi ed by PCR, and non-transgenic littermates were used as controls.

Radiation therapy
Mice were divided into the sham group without RT, low total dose with low dose per fraction (LD-LDRT) group receiving 3 Gy (5 x 0.6 Gy) radiation, and low-moderate total dose with conventional dose per fraction (LMD-CDRT) group receiving 10 Gy (5 x 2 Gy) radiation.
Mice from the RT groups received wholebrain irradiation with 6 MeV electrons at 100 cm SSD every other day for 10 days (Clinac 21EX ® , Varian, Palo Alto, CA).
A custom made cerrobend block ( eld size: 20 cm × 8 cm) was used to shield all tissues except the brain from the treatment eld.
Mice were anesthetized during the RT process using Zoletil and Rompum.
For quality assurance of RT, tissue-equivalent phantoms mimicking both the material properties and anatomical shape of real mice were manufactured by 3D printing and a dosimetric analysis was performed.
Behavioral tests were performed a week before RT and every week after RT for 4 weeks.
Mice were sacri ced for histological and biochemical analyses after completing the behavior tests (Fig.

Spontaneous Y-maze test
The Y-maze consisted of 3 equal arms (40 × 15 × 9 cm) and was constructed using black acrylic plastic.
The test was performed at Seoul National University.
All mice were placed at the center of the Y-maze at the start of the trial following 20 min of habitation in the room.
Mice were allowed to freely explore the three arms for 8 min.
All movements were recorded using a video camera and were analyzed to determine the alternation ratio by evaluating the number of arm entries, in triplicate.

Immunohistochemistry
Brains were xed with 4% paraformaldehyde for 24h and cut into 30 µm-thick sections, which were then incubated overnight with the 6E10 antibody (1:500) at 4°C.
The sections were then washed with PBS and incubated with the secondary antibody (Alexa Fluor® 488 goat anti-mouse IgG, 1:200).
The sections were then incubated with TO-PRO-3 (1:1000) for 30 min at room temperature.
All samples were mounted on microscope slides in mounting medium.
Confocal microscopic observation was performed using the LSM 510 (Jena, Deutschland, Germany) and all images are showed as combined confocal z-stacks.
The sizes of the amyloid plaques were measured using Image-J and the plaques were then classi ed into 3 categories.

Western blot
Hippocampal extract samples (20-40 µg) were separated on 8-10% sodium dodecyl sulphatepolyacrylamide electrophoresis gels and transferred to a nitrocellulose membrane.
The membranes were then blocked for 1 h at room temperature in 5% skim milk, followed by overnight incubation at 4°C with the following primary antibodies: anti-Postsynaptic density protein 95 (PSD-95, 1:1000), anti-NeuN (1:1000), anti-GFAP (1:1000), anti-Iba-1 (1:1000), and anti-GAPDH
Next, the blots were incubated with the secondary antibody conjugated with horseradish peroxidase for 1 h at room temperature.
The resulting bands were detected by enhanced chemiluminescence (Young-in Frontier, Seoul, Korea).

Cytokine array
A Proteome Pro ler Array (R&D system, MN, USA) was performed as described previously
Brie y, the cerebral cortex was homogenized with PBS and Triton X-100.
The resulting lysate (150 µg) was used for the cytokine array to detect 40 mouse cytokines or chemokines.

RT-qPCR
Total RNA from the hippocampus was isolated using TRIzol reagent.
First-strand cDNA was synthesized from 500 ng of RNA using AccuPower RocketScript RT Premix (Bioneer, South Korea).
RT-qPCR was performed using EvaGreen 2X qPCR Master mix (Applied biological materials, Canada).
The thermal cycler consisted of 40 cycles of 95℃ for 15s, and 60℃ for 30s and gene expression was evaluated using a custom designed primer plate (Bioneer, SM-0000-10).
All data were analyzed using CFX manager software (Bio-Rad laboratories, CA, USA) and normalized to the expression of β-actin or GAPDH.

Statistical analysis
All data were represented as the mean ± standard error of the mean.
Statistical analysis was performed using an independent t-test or one-way ANOVA with LSD post-hoc comparison (IBM SPSS Statistics 20, IL, USA).
A p value < 0.05 was considered statistically signi cant.

Results

Low-dose RT reduced pro-in ammatory cytokine expression and decreased microgliosis in the hippocampus of 5xFAD mice
To determine the effects of low-dose RT on microgliosis the expression of Iba-1, a marker for reactive microglia, was evaluated in the hippocampus from wild type (WT) and 5xFAD mice.
The schematic diagram of the study is brie y shown in Fig.
As shown in Fig.
The enhanced Iba-1 expression in the hippocampus was signi cantly decreased by LMD-CDRT (1.62 ± 0.19, n = 8), and 5xFAD-LD-LDRT mice (2.15 ± 0.18, n = 8) showed only a decreasing tendency compared to 5xFAD-sham mice (Fig.
To determine whether low-dose RT affects the polarization of microglia, the mRNA expression levels of pro-in ammatory and anti-in ammatory cytokines were analyzed.
5xFAD-sham mice showed a signi cant increase in IL-6 (2.83 ± 0.70), CCL6 (3.95 ± 0.54), and IL-1β (1.49 ± 0.10) mRNA expression compared with that in WT-sham mice (Fig.
The elevated IL-6 (1.30 ± 0.19) and CCL6 (2.78 ± 0.37) mRNA expression was signi cantly attenuated in 5xFAD-LD-LDRT (Fig
LMD-CDRT also ameliorated the mRNA expression of CCL6 (1.10 ± 0.21) and IL-1β (0.36 ± 0.10) in 5xFAD mice (Fig.
However, IL-4 mRNA expression was not signi cantly different among all mice groups (Fig.
We also determined the cytokine levels using a proteome pro ler array.
Among 40 cytokines, we identi ed 8 cytokines that were signi cantly increased (CD54, 1.97 ± 0.05; CCL2, 1.63 ± 0.29; CCL4, 1.46 ± 0.21) or showed an increasing tendency (IL-3, 1.24 ± 0.09; IL-16, 1.32 ± 0.18; CXCL9, 1.09 ± 0.13; CXCL10, 1.24 ± 0.17; and CXCL11, 1.25 ± 0.15) in 5xFAD-Sham relative to WT-sham (Fig
After LMD-CDRT, the release of pro-in ammatory cytokines such as IL-3/16 (IL-3, 0.91± 0.09; IL-16, 0.79 ± 0.10), CCL2/4 (CCL2, 1.00 ± 0.09; CCL4, 0.58 ± 0.10), and CXCL9 (1.00 ± 0.09) in 5xFAD mice was signi cantly reduced (Fig.
More interestingly, LD-LDRT diminished the production of in ammatory cytokines such as CD54 (1.35 ± 0.25), IL-3 (1.24 ± 0.09), CXCL9/10 (CXCL9, 0.73 ± 0.14; CXCL10, 0.90± 0.14), CCL2/4 (CCL2, 0.94± 0.09; and CCL4, 0.85 ± 0.13) in 5xFAD mice (Fig.
Overall, these results indicate that LD-LDRT and LMD-CDRT attenuated microgliosis and reduced the level of proin ammatory cytokines, but not anti-in ammatory cytokines.
Low-dose RT reduced mature amyloid plaques, but did not affect the number of amyloid plaques in the hippocampi of 5xFAD mice Because low-dose RT reduced the release of pro-in ammatory cytokines in 5xFAD mice, we speculated that low-dose RT may attenuate accumulation of amyloid plaques by inhibiting microglial activation.
The number and size of amyloid plaques was measured after 6E10 staining to identify the effect of low-dose RT on amyloid plaque burden (Fig.
The number of amyloid plaques was not signi cantly different among all mice groups (Fig.
However, the area of the amyloid plaques in the hippocampus of 5xFAD mice was signi cantly decreased by LD-LDRT and LMD-CDRT (Fig.
Amyloid plaques have been previously classi ed into different types by area
Therefore, we classi ed the amyloid plaques in the hippocampus based on their areas size and found that the number of amyloid plaques larger than 100 nm 2 were signi cantly reduced by approximately 12% with LD-LDRT and LMD-CDRT (Fig.
These data demonstrate that LD-LDRT and LMD-CDRT diminished the mature amyloid plaques in the hippocampus of 5xFAD mice.

Low-dose RT rescued the cognitive impairments in 5xFAD mice
Accumulation of amyloid plaques, a major neuropathological characteristic, together with neuro brillary tangles, contributes to cognitive impairment, which is one of the major symptoms in AD
To con rm the impact of RT on cognitive impairment, a spontaneous Y-maze test was performed before and after low-dose RT, to assess cognitive function and to determine a spontaneous ratio indicating spatial memory (Fig.
Before low-dose RT, the spontaneous alternation ratio in 5xFAD-Sham (0.60 ± 0.02), LD-LDRT (0.54 ± 0.03), and LMD-CDRT (0.51 ± 0.18), mice were compared to that in WT-Sham (Fig.
Surprisingly, cognitive impairment was recovered by LD-LDRT (1 st week, 0.62 ± 0.05; 2 nd week, 0.60 ± 0.02, 3 rd week, 0.64 ± 0.06; 4 th week, 0.60 ± 0.04) and LMD-CDRT (1 st week, 0.62 ± 0.05; 2 nd week, 0.60 ± 0.02, 3 rd week, 0.58 ± 0.03; 4 th week, 0.55 ± 0.03) and its effect lasted for 4 weeks (Fig.
Both body and brain weight showed no signi cant differences between Sham and RT group mice (Fig.
These results suggest that LD-LDRT and LMD-CDRT attenuates cognitive impairment in AD without signi cant adverse effects.
Low-dose RT did not affect neuronal death or synaptic plasticity-related proteins, but reduced reactive astrocytes in 5xFAD mice Neuronal cell death and impaired synaptic plasticity have been associated with the accumulation of amyloid plaques or cognitive impairment in AD
To examine whether low-dose RT could protect neuronal cell death or change synaptic plasticity by decreasing amyloid plaque burden, we analyzed neuronal loss and synaptic density in the hippocampus by examining the protein level of NeuN and PSD-95, which are markers for neurons and postsynapses, respectively.
The protein level of NeuN (1.02 ± 0.08) and PSD-95 (0.43 ± 0.08) was signi cantly reduced in 5xFAD-Sham mice.
The expression of both NeuN (LD-LDRT, 0.93 ± 0.04; LMD-CDRT 0.85 ± 0.09) and PSD-95 (LD-LDRT, 0.57 ± 0.10; LMD-CDRT 0.38 ± 0.08) was not affected by low-dose RT (Fig.
Taken together, low-dose RT did not affect neuronal death or impaired synaptic plasticity even though it reduced the amyloid plaque burden.
Next, we examined the astrocyte reactivity after low-dose RT in 5xFAD mice.
Reactive astrocytes that are close to amyloid plaques are associated with the development and progression of AD (26).
The increase in GFAP expression observed in 5xFAD-sham mice (1.92 ± 0.21) was also attenuated in 5xFAD-LD-LDRT (0.95± 0.17), but not in 5xFAD-LMD-CDRT (Fig.

Discussion
Despite the increasing prevalence and incidence rates of AD, there are no e cient disease-modifying therapies that have been successful in clinical trials
New promising drugs for AD are being intensively developed by many researchers and pharmaceutical companies, but these still have several limitations.
First, drugs need to reach the brain after systemic administration via the blood brain barrier (BBB).
The BBB is formed by tight junctions of microvascular endothelial cells, pericytes and perivascular astrocytes and prevents the brain from toxins and pathogens
Drug delivery via the BBB is still challenging in AD with many central nervous system (CNS) disorders.
Second, the majority of developing drugs target amyloid plaques or tau, the two hallmarks of AD.
However, over the decades, numerous clinical trials have failed as they were performed in the late stage of AD (28).
Therefore, early diagnosis of the disease and new perspectives in overcoming the existing hurdles is very important for AD treatment and therapeutics.
RT is one of the most commonly used treatment modalities against various kinds of cancers.
Recently, several studies have reported that low-dose RT attenuates in ammation in painful-degenerative diseases and in AD
In this study, we investigated the therapeutic effects of low-dose RT in the late stage of AD using 5xFAD mice.
Microglia are the only resident immune cells in the CNS and play a critical role in neuroin ammation
Neuroin ammation is reported to contribute to AD pathogenesis and in ammatory responses are implicated in microglial activation
Therefore, regulation of reactive microglia can be a potential therapeutic target in AD.
To elucidate whether RT prevents neuroin ammation by inhibiting microglial activation, we examined the protein expression of Iba-1, a well-known microglial marker.
Iba-1 expression was signi cantly decreased in the hippocampus of 5xFAD mice by LMD-CDRT, but not by LD-LDRT (Fig
Here, the lack of signi cantly reduced microglial activation in the 5xFAD-LD-LDRT group cannot be regarded as a negative result.
Microglia are divided into M1 or M2 phenotypes
M1-type microglia produce pro-in ammatory cytokines such as IL-4, IL-13 whereas M2-type microglia release anti-in ammatory cytokines such as IL-6, IL-1β
Especially, M2 type microglia are known to increase in the early stage of AD, whereas M1 type microglia are increased in the late stage of AD
To clarify the type of microglia existing after RT, we measured the levels of several cytokines through a cytokine array.
After LD-LDRT or LMD-CDRT, the level of pro-in ammatory cytokines such as IL-3, CXCL 9/10, and CCL2/4 was signi cantly reduced (Fig
The mRNA level of pro-in ammatory cytokines was also decreased after RT (Fig 2 ).
Taken together, LD-LDRT regulates neuroin ammation by decreasing pro-in ammatory cytokines and has effects similar to LMD-CDRT in the AD mouse model.
This suggests that low-dose RT may shift the M1/M2 ratio in the hippocampus of 5xFAD mice.
This mechanism was recently con rmed by Kim et al. in a study showing that the M2 marker CD206 was signi cantly increased in lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-and LMD-CDRTtreated BV-2 microglial cells compared with that in LPS-and sham-treated BV-2 cells; the effect of LMD-CDRT on M2 polarization was con rmed by increased TREM2 expression in LPS-induced BV2 cells
Amyloid plaques are reported to include reactive astrocytes and microglia, and these glial cells are recruited to clear the amyloid plaques.
In addition, neuroin ammation caused by reactive astrocytes and microglia induces the production of amyloid beta peptide (Aβ) and amyloid plaques (38).
Thus, there is a vicious cycle between neuroin ammation and accumulation of amyloid plaques, and it may be important to break this vicious cycle in AD.
Our results suggested that low-dose RT affects the accumulation of amyloid plaques by regulating neuroin ammation.in
AD.
Accumulation of amyloid plaques is considered a major neuropathological hallmark of AD
Neuroin ammation has been suggested to increase pro-in ammatory cytokines, induce Aβ production, and the aggregation and accumulation of amyloid plaques
Next, we investigated the relationship between RT and amyloid plaque accumulation.
Few studies have reported that RT affects Aβ deposition (16-18).
However, these studies examined the therapeutics effects of RT in AD after LMD-CDRT, and not LD-LDRT.
In the present study, we con rmed that low-dose RT did not change the number of amyloid plaques in the hippocampus.
However, the amyloid plaque burden or the area of amyloid plaques was signi cantly decreased in 5xFAD-LD-LDRT and 5x-FAD-LMD-CDRT (Fig
Further, reduction was observed in the large-sized amyloid plaques.
This suggested that low-dose RT prevents amyloid plaque aggregation.
Cognitive impairment, a major symptom of AD is observed from 6 months of age in 5xFAD mice
In this study, cognitive function was con rmed before and after low-dose radiation exposure (LD-LDRT, LMD-CDRT) in an AD mouse model.
Both 5xFAD-LD-LDRT and 5xFAD-LMD-CDRT mice showed rescue in cognitive impairment and this attenuating effect lasted for 4 weeks (Fig.
To remove the possibility of radiation toxicity, we also checked the body and brain weight.
Neither LD-LDRT nor LMD-CDRT resulted in altered body or brain weight (Fig.
This suggests that low-dose RT has therapeutic effectiveness in late stage AD and that it has a long-term effect without any serious side effects.
Next, we investigated the molecular changes in neurons and non-neuronal cells such as astrocytes.
Lowdose RT did not affect neuronal death or change synaptic plasticity-related proteins in neurons (Fig.
Increasing astrocyte reactivity in the brains has been observed in the brain in AD (26).
Recently, several studies reported that inhibition of reactive astrocytes is an important factor to attenuate cognitive impairments
Our study demonstrated that LD-LDRT decreased the expression of GFAP, a reactive astrocyte marker, in the hippocampus of 5xFAD mice (Fig.
Recently, we reported intriguing results that astrocytes reside in a new state called memory-induction state and that astrocytes in this state are actively involved in memory formation.
Reactive astrocytes exert detrimental effects of cognitive dysfunction in AD, as reactive astrocytes cannot change into the memory-induction state during memory induction
Further studies are thus needed to investigate whether attenuation in the increase of reactive astrocytes is also involved in alleviating cognitive dysfunction in the AD animal model after LD-RT.
Low-dose RT can be administered by reducing the total dose and/or reducing single fraction doses.
In previous studies on painful-degenerative disease, low-dose RT was performed by reducing both the total radiation dose and the single fraction dose (LD-LDRT)
To the best of our knowledge, the present study is the rst study to apply LD-LDRT to an AD mouse model.
Both LD-LDRT and LMD-CDRT were effective in improving cognitive impairment and neuroin ammation in the 5xFAD AD mouse model.
If there is no difference in the treatment e cacy, it would be reasonable that the radiation dose is kept as low as possible.
Currently, clinical studies are underway to treat AD using RT; most of these studies are using LMD-CDRT (ClinicalTrials.gov
Identifier: NCT02359864; NCT02769000; NCT03352258; and NCT04203121).
Based on the results of present study, it may be possible to conduct a clinical trial to treat AD with LD-LDRT, which is less than half of the RT dose used in these preceding clinical trials using LMD-CDRT.

Conclusions
LD-LDRT (3 Gy in 5 fractions) rescues cognitive impairment and prevent accumulation of amyloid plaques in a mouse model by regulating neuroin ammation in the late stage of AD; its effectiveness was equivalent to that of LMD-CDRT (10 Gy in 5 fractions).
LD-LDRT may thus make treatment accessible and convenient in clinical trials compared to LMD-CDRT.
Based on those results, it would be necessary to evaluate proper RT dose and time, including safety, in clinical trial.
Overall, LD-LDRT may be a promising treatment for AD, and further research is needed to con rm the various underlying mechanisms.



1 A
Abbreviations 5xFAD: 5x familial AD



Figure 2 Effect
Figure 2



Figure 3 Modulatory
Figure 3



Figure 4 Inhibitory
Figure 4



Figure 5 Protective
Figure 5