How to demix Alzheimer-type and PSP-type tau lesions out of their mixture -hybrid approach to dissect comorbidity-
Neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs), are shared between progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP) and Alzheimer disease (AD).
Histological distinction of PSP and AD is possible based on the distribution of NFTs.
However, neuropathologists may encounter diagnostic difficulty with comorbidity of PSP and AD.
In this study, we tried to circumvent this difficulty by analyzing five autopsied brains harboring both PSP and AD pathology.
Tau-positive lesions were sorted based on their cell type (neuron versus glia), and tau isoforms: three-repeat (3R) versus four-repeat (4R) tau.
16 regions were selected to map these lesions throughout the brain.
4R-tau lesions were present in all areas examined.
Among them, 3R-tau lesions were absent in some areas.
These 4R selective (4R+/3R-) areas dictate prototypic distribution of PSP, not usually found in AD, such as pontine nucleus, red nucleus, inferior olivary nucleus, dentate nucleus, globus pallidus and putamen, each contained both glial and neuronal lesions.
In contrast, additional 3R-tau lesions were found in hippocampal formation to neocortex, where 3R immunoreactivity (IR) was predominant over the 4R counterpart mainly in neurons as found in AD but not in PSP.
Although tau lesions in central grey matter, substantia nigra and locus coeruleus are found in both AD and PSP, 4R-selectivity with glial component suggests PSP origin.
Even if the presence of 3 R IR in these areas suggests AD pathology, it does not exclude the involvement of PSP-type lesion because distinction of 4R IR into PSP or AD is not yet possible.
Further demixing may be possible if biochemical difference of 4R tau between PSP and AD is identified.

Introduction
Alzheimer disease (AD) and progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP) are characterized by deposition of tau in the brain.
Initially, histological definitions were based on the disease-specific distribution of argyrophilic neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs), which are quite distinct between AD
Another histological hallmark of PSP is tuft-shaped astrocytes (TAs)
Because clinicopathological spectra of PSP and of AD are still expanding
This diagnostic difficulty is much enhanced in aged population, where cormorbid pathologies, such as AD or Lewy pathology, may be encountered.
Such comorbidity is challenging to neuropathologists; how to discriminate different types of pathology in the same brain.
This is particularly problematic when a brain harbors AD-type pathology and PSP-type pathology because both are characterized by tau deposits
Furthermore, it is not yet known whether these two types of pathology are independent or mutually related.
In this study, we selected autopsy samples carrying histological diagnoses of both AD and PSP.
We tried to extract disease-specific features from these brains with AD and PSP for possible discrimination, based on the distribution of TAs and that of NFTs and immunohistochemistry for phosphorylated tau (AT8)
This hybrid approach was quite successful in discriminating most, but not all, of tau-positive lesions, suggesting that AD-type pathology and PSP-type pathology are independent without significant interaction even when coexistent in the same brain.

Patients and methods
Among one hundred and eighty autopsy cases archived at Laboratory of Structural Neuropathology, Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Medical Science from 1999 to 2013, we picked up 5 cases (3 cases from Nitobe Memorial Nakano General Hospital and 2 cases from Yokufukai hospital) with comorbid pathologies with PSP
Written consent from the patient's family was obtained at autopsy and this study was approved at the ethics review committee of the Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Medical Science (authorization number
Demographic data are summarized in Table
Median age was 85 years (range 80-94 years) and male female ratio was 4:1.
Brain weight was 1260 g on average (range 1205-1395 g), Braak NFT stage
Sixteen regions, selected to map PSP-specific or AD-specific lesions
Isoform-specific antibodies directed against 3R or 4R tau
Briefly, deparaffinized sections were treated for 15 min with 0.25% potassium permanganate (KMnO 4 ), for 3 min with 2% oxalic acid (OA), for 30 min with > 99% formic acid (FA) and for 20 min autoclaved at 121 °C in 0.05 M citrate buffer
After intrinsic peroxidases were inactivated by 1% hydrogen peroxide (H 2 O 2 ) for 15 min, sections were incubated first with 5% horse serum in 0.01 M phosphate-buffered saline containing 0.03% polyoxyethylene
They were then incubated with either 3R tau-specific antibody (RD3 1:3000, Merck Millipore, Germany) or 4R tau-specific antibody (RD4 1:1000, Merck Millipore, Germany) diluted in the same buffer for 2 days at 4 °C
They were then incubated with biotinylated secondary antibody against mouse IgG (1:1000, ABC Elite, Vector, Burlingame, CA) diluted in the same buffer for 2 h at room temperature.
They were then incubated with avidin-biotin-peroxidase complex (1:1000, ABC Elite, Vector) for 1 h and visualized with diaminobenzidine and nickel ammonium chloride
4R or 3R immunoreactivity (IR) in each of 16 regions was separately evaluated semiquatitatively as none: 0, mild (1 to 5): +; moderate (6 to 10): ++; severe (> 10): +++, (lesions/visual field with × 20 objective).
In some areas, where both 3R and 4R tau immunoreactivities (IR) were coexistent, double immunofluorolabeling was performed as described previously.
The 6-μm thick sections were deparaffinized for double immunofluorolabeling with antibodies against isoform-specific anti-4R tau antibody (rabbit polyclonal, Cosmo Bio Co, Tokyo, Japan), raised against amino acids 275-291 of human 4R tau, which is deaminated at N279
Sections were washed with PBST, blocked for 30 min in 5% normal goat serum/0.05%
sodium azide /PBS and incubated with the polyclonal anti-4R-tau antibody (1:3000) and RD3 (1:300), diluted in the blocking buffer at 4 °C for 4 days.
To reduce autofluorescence of lipofuscin, sections were treated with Sudan Black B
These primary antibodies were labeled with Alexa 488 conjugated with anti-rabbit IgG (Molecular Probes, Oregon, USA, 1:200) and Alexa 568 conjugated with anti-mouse IgG (Molecular Probes, Oregon, USA, 1:200), respectively, diluted in PBS with 0.03% Triton X-100 overnight in the dark.
Sections were mounted with buffered glycerol containing 0.1%p-phenylenediamine.
Fluorescent signals were separately captured on a confocal system (Leica SP8; Leica Microsystems GmbH, Heidelberg, Germany) through a 63 x objective (NA 1.45).

Results
Tau-positive lesions detected by AT8 were sorted into TA and NFT and semiquantitatively mapped in 16 regions as shown in Table
The distribution of tau-positive lesions in these 5 comorbid cases was schematized in Fig.
Comparison with that of PSP (Fig.
However, distribution of TA and that of NFT were not Table
similar.
Both TA and NFT were detected in RN, ION, DN, GPI, GPE and PU (Tab.
2, italics), where tau-positive lesions are rare in pure AD.
These regions containing both TA and NFT replicated the distribution of pure PSP (Fig.
However, both TA and NFT were found in PC, M-TEG, CGM, P-TEG and SN, where tau-positive lesions were found in pure AD as well (Tab.
2, Fig.
To distinguish PSP-type and AD-type tau pathologies in these comorbid cases, tau-positive lesions, already sorted into NFT/TA (Tab.
2, Fig.
TAs were positive only for 4R tau and found in every area examined except for LC, HF, PN. 3R tau-positive TAs were absent even when 3R-positive NFT pathology was prominent as in LC (Fig.
4R-selective regions were GPI, RN, PN, ION, DN (Fig.
Representative immunostaining for four-repeat (4R) tau (RD4, green) and three-repeat (3R) tau (RD3, red) in these twelve regions.
The left set columns demonstrated 4R specific immunoreactivity (IR) without 3R IR in GPI (a, g), STN (b, h), RN (c, i), PN (d, j), ION (e, k) and DN (f, l), which replicates PSP-type distribution with glial involvement (arrows).
In contrast, the right set columns demonstrated both 4R and 3R tau IR in PC (m, s), HF (n, t), CGM (o, u), SN (p, v), LC (q, w) and RPN (r, x), which replicates AD-type distribution.
Glial lesions are exclusively positive for RD4 (arrows) but negative for RD3.
Bars: 100 μm contained a few NFTs positive for 3R.
In contrast, NFTs positive for 4R and 3R tau were found in 4R + 3R regions, including PC (Case 5 only), HF, CGM, SN, LC, RPN, M-TEG and P-TEG.
(Fig.
Among these 4R + 3R regions, HF and LC were characterized by dominant 3R IR in NFTs over 4R IR and lack of 4R-positive glia (Tab.
3).
NFTs in PC of case 5 (Braak NFT stage VI) exhibited dominant 3R IR over 4R IR.
In other 4R + 3R regions (CGM, RPN, SN, STN, M-TEG, P-TEG), 3R IR and 4R IR were comparable and tau-positive astrocytes were present in variable number.
Double immunofluorolabeling (Fig.
In contrast, the proportion of 3R tau (red) and 4R tau (green) was variable from a neuron to another (Fig.

Discussion
Tau pathology of PSP-type and that of AD-type have been described separately
In this study with 5 cases harboring both PSP-type and AD-type tau pathology, we tried to discriminate PSP-type and AD-type pathologies in each brain along different criteria (distribution, participation of glial changes and tau isoforms).
As initial description of PSP was based only on NFTs
4R-selective regions, characterized by the copresence of TA and NFT, both devoid of 3R tau IR (lower half of Tab. 3, in green box), include typical distribution of pure PSP (PN, RN, ION, DN, GPI, GPE and PU)
In contrast, involvement of 3R tau is seen in HF and LC in this series of cases with both disorders, which strongly suggests AD-type pathology
This assumption is reinforced by the paucity of glial involvement in these regions as in pure AD cases
3)
Therefore, neuron-selective involvement with preferential 3R tau over 4R tau may represent AD-type pathology
This is in contrast with PSP-type pathology with 4R-selective tau in both TA and NFTs (Fig.
This operational sorting through our hybrid approach was powerful enough to distinguish origin of most of tau lesions into either AD-type or PSP-type (Fig.
This sharp distinction of AD-type pathology and PSP-type pathology in the same brain suggests that extension of AD-type pathology and PSP-type pathology are independently guided by distinct cytopathological mechanism along disease-specific patterns without crossover even if 4R tau is found in AD and PSP.
If 4R-tau lesions extended transsynaptically (in a prion-like manner?
Because coexistent PSP-type pathology and AD-type pathology were distinct in the human brain, it is hard to explain how transsynaptic extension of 4R tau, for example if any, exhibit different types of tau pathology in the same brain.
Still, there remain some ambiguities in some regions such as STN, SN, M-TEG and P-TEG (area in broken line, Fig.
In these regions, 3R-positive NFTs (arrows in Fig.
However, it is not yet clear whether 4R-positive neurons without 3R tau in these areas are of AD-type or PSP-type (Fig.
Indeed, 4R-tau lesions of AD and those of PSP similarly exhibit argyrophilia with Gallyas silver impregnation
It has been reported that pretangle neurons are positive for 4R tau but not for 3R tau in both AD and PSP
However, this selective 4R tau IR at early phase of tau deposition is gradually replaced with 3R tau IR during evolution NFTs in AD brain
This is in sharp contrast with PSP or CBD brain, where 4R tau IR remains persistent without involvement of 3R even after tau-positive fibrils are dense enough to form aggregated inclusions
Because currently available antibodies against 4R tau immunolabel tau deposits both in AD and in PSP/CBD brains
However, if representation of 4R tau deposits is disease-specific, it is expected that molecular species of 4R tau itself is disease-specific as well.
For example, it has been reported that asparagine at residue 279 of 4R tau is deamidated to aspartate in AD brains
Immunoprobes that may detect such AD-specific posttranslational changes may provide a straightforward strategy to demix PSP-type lesions and AD-type lesions in the same brain, in the same area or even within a single neuron at molecular level.
If AD-type NFTs are characterized by paired helical filaments
Our hybrid approach to demix AD-type and PSP-type tau lesions may be corroborated by hybrid molecular demixing and electron microscopic studies, which will surely improve our mechanistic understanding of these diseases for more precise diagnosis and better management.

Conclusions
In human autopsied brains harboring both PSP-type and AD-type pathologies, tau-positive lesions were sorted based on their cell type (neuron vs glia), distribution and tau isoforms (3R vs 4R).
With this hybrid approach, we were successful in demixing PSP-type cytopathology (4R-selectivity in glia and neuron in PN, RN, ION, DN, GPI, GPE and PU) and AD-type cytopathology (3R and 4R in neuron in HF, insular cortex:IC and LC).
However, this demixing is still incomplete because STN, SN, M-TEG and P-TEG contain tau lesions in neurons and glia are positive for 3R and 4R.
Further demixing may be possible if biochemical difference of 4R tau between PSP and AD is identified.
Abbreviations 3R: three-repeat; 4R: four-repeat; AD: Alzheimer disease; CC: cerebral cortex; CGM: central grey matter; DN: dentate nucleus; FA: formic acid; GPE: external segment of globus pallidus; GPI: internal segment of globus pallidus; H 2 O 2 : hydrogen peroxide; HE: Hematoxylin-Eosin; HF: hippocampal formation; IC: insular cortex; ION: inferior olivary nucleus; IR: immunoreactivity; KB: Klüver-Barrera; KMnO 4 : potassium permanganate; LC: locus coeruleus; M-TEG: tegmentum of midbrain; NFT: neurofibrillary tangle; OA: oxalic acid; PBST: phosphate-buffered saline containing 0.03% polyoxyethylene



Fig. 1
Fig. 1 Separation of tau-positive lesions into progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP) and Alzheimer disease (AD) based on their distribution and cytopathology.
Tau-positive lesions of PSP shown in green (left column, a-e), typically include primary motor cortex (PC), putamen (PU), globus pallidus (GP), subthalamic nucleus (STN), central grey matter (CGM), substantia nigra (SN), red nucleus (RN), tegmentum (M-TEG), locus coeruleus (LC), pontine nucleus (PN) and tegmentum (P-TEG), inferior olivary nucleus (ION) and dentate nucleus (DN) in the cerebellum.
Tau-positive lesions of Alzheimer disease (AD), shown in grey (right column A-C), are more restricted to CGM, SN and LC in the brainstem while more extended in the hippocampal formation (HF) and cerebral cortex (CC).
In the five comorbid cases with PSP and AD (PSP + AD in the mid column), these taupositive lesions are partly overlapping.
Regions with neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs) with tuft-shaped astrocytes (TAs) are labeled in italics, which replicate of PSP-type distribution (left column).
Those with NFTs without TAs are labeled in Bold face (HF, LC and PN), which replicate AD-type distribution.
Cerebral left hemisphere (coronal), b: Midbrain (axial), c: Pons (axial), d: Medulla oblongata (axial), e: Cerebellum.



Fig. 3
Fig. 3 Tau isoforms on NFTs are different from a region (SN) to another (CGM) even in the same brain (Case 5).
Preferential 4R labeling (green) on NFT (arrow) in SN (a) represents PSP-type pathology.
In CGM (b), NFTs are differently labeled for 4R (green, arrowhead), 3R (red, arrows) or both 4R. and 3R (yellow, empty arrow), representing AD-type pathology.
Bar: 25 μm



Fig. 4
Fig. 4 How to differentiate the origin (PSP or AD) of each tau-positive lesion in comorbid brains with both PSP and AD pathology.
Tau-positive lesions are sorted along regions indicated at the center column.
Regions containing NFTs but not TAs are labeled in bold face (HF, IC: insular cortex, LC and PN).
Other regions containing both NFTs and TAs are labeled in italics.
Horizontal bars indicate relative quantity of TA and NFT in each region.
IR to 4R tau (green) and that to 3R tau (red) are indicated by vertical lines.
TAs are positive only for 4R tau as indicated on the left half.
In contrast, NFTs were sometimes positive for 3R tau in SN. 3R tau IR was more predominant in HF, IC, PC, LC, CGM and RPN, which replicates AD-like distribution partly shared with typical PSP.
Rectangle in the right upper corner labeled as AD encompasses AD-type pathology in terms of distribution, further characterized by dominance of 3R tau and lack of TAs.
The left lower area labeled as PSP encompasses PSP-type pathology in terms of distribution with 4R selectivity not only on TAs but also on NFTs.
Although this chart provides concise and operational sorting of tau-positive lesions into AD or PSP origins, it is still difficult how to sort STN, M-TEG and P-TEG into PSP or AD (dotted area), because a few lesions exhibited 4R tau IR



Table 1
Demographic data on 5 patients with neuropathological diagnosis of AD and PSP.
AD Alzheimer disease, AG argyrophilic grain disease, CAA cerebral amyloid angiopathy, CHF congestive heart failure, DLB dementia with Lewy body, N. A not available, NFT neurofibrillary tangle, PSP progressive supranuclear palsy



Table 2
Regional distribution of AT8 positive lesions.