Safety, tolerability, and pharmacokinetics of allopregnanolone as a regenerative therapeutic for Alzheimer's disease: A single and multiple ascending dose phase 1b/2a clinical trial
Allopregnanolone is an endogenous neurosteroid with the potential to be a novel regenerative therapeutic for Alzheimer's disease (AD).
Foundations of mechanistic understanding and well-established preclinical safety efficacy make it a viable candidate.
Methods: A randomized, double-blinded, placebo-controlled, single and multiple ascending dose trial was conducted.
Intravenous allopregnanolone or placebo was administered once-per-week for 12 weeks with a 1-month follow-up.
Participants with early AD (mild cognitive impairment due to AD or mild AD), a Mini-Mental State Examination score of 20-26 inclusive, and age ≥55 years were randomized (6:2 to three allopregnanolone dosing cohorts or one placebo cohort).
Primary endpoint was safety and tolerability.
Secondary endpoints included pharmacokinetic (PK) parameters and maximally tolerated dose (MTD).
Exploratory endpoints included cognitive and imaging biomarkers.
Results: A total of 24 participants completed the trial.
Allopregnanolone was safe and well tolerated in all study participants.
No differences were observed between treatment arms in the occurrence and severity of adverse events (AE).
Most common AE were mild to moderate in severity and included rash (n = 4 [22%]) and fatigue (n = 3
[17%]).
A single non-serious AE, dizziness, was attributable to treatment.
There was one serious AE not related to treatment.
Pharmacokinetics indicated a predictable linear dose-response in plasma concentration of allopregnanolone after intravenous administration over 30 minutes.
The maximum plasma concentrations for the 2 mg, 4 mg, 6 mg, and 10 mg dosages were 14.53 ng/mL (+/-7.31),
42.05 ng/mL (+/-14.55),
60.07 ng/mL (+/-12.8),
and 137.48 ng/mL (+/-38.69),
respectively.
The MTD was established based on evidence of allopregnanolone-induced mild sedation at the highest doses; a sex difference in the threshold for sedation was observed (males 10 mg; females 14 mg).
No adverse outcomes on cognition or magnetic resonance imagingbased imaging outcomes were evident.
Conclusions: Allopregnanolone was well tolerated and safe across all doses in persons with early AD.
Safety, MTD, and PK profiles support advancement of allopregnanolone as a regenerative therapeutic for AD to a phase 2 efficacy trial.
Trial registration: ClinicalTrials.gov-NCT02221622
allopregnanolone, Alzheimer's disease, maximally tolerated dose, neurogenesis, pharmacokinetics, phase 1 clinical trial, regenerative therapeutic, translational research

INTRODUCTION
Thus far no interventions have demonstrated meaningful therapeutic efficacy to treat Alzheimer's disease (AD) resulting in a 99.6% clinical trial failure rate with several accelerating disease progression.
2]
innovative approach is to target the regenerative system of the brain while simultaneously activating systems that reduce burden of AD pathology.
7]
Unlike its precursor, Allo is inactive at nuclear progesterone receptors and instead promotes neurogenesis through activation of GABA A receptor complex on neural stem cells.
0]
7]
6]
atients demonstrated improvement in executive functioning, episodic memory, and learning after treatment with Allo.
During their reproductive years, women are chronically exposed to Allo.
During pregnancy, blood concentration of Allo is highest during the third trimester reaching, on average, 157 nmol/l (50 ng/mL), which is not associated with adverse effects and is safe for mother and fetus.
Pharmacokinetic (PK) profile and maximally tolerated dose (MTD) were established, and cognitive, imaging, and blood-based biomarkers explored.
This is the first report describing the weekly administration of Allo in this patient population.

METHODS

Trial design
This was a randomized, double-blinded, placebo-controlled, multiple ascending dose study of 12 weeks' duration in persons with early AD, defined as mild cognitive impairment (MCI) due to AD or mild AD.
The study was comprised of three dosing cohorts of Allo: 2 mg, 4 mg, and 6-18 mg cohort.
After trial commencement, adjustments to the dosing regimen were done as described in Section 2.4.
The primary endpoint was the occurrence of adverse events (AE) and serious adverse events (SAE) in participants treated with Allo compared to placebo.
Secondary endpoints included the MTD and pharmacokinetic parameters of Allo administered intravenously for 30 minutes.
Exploratory endpoints included cognitive assessments, imaging, and blood-based biomarkers.

HIGHLIGHTS
• Targeting the regenerative system of the brain while simultaneously activating systems that reduce burden of pathology is an innovative therapeutic approach in treating Alzheimer's disease (AD).
• Allopregnanolone is a first-in-class regenerative therapeutic with a strong foundation of human safety.
• Allopregnanolone was safe and well tolerated when administered intravenously in an early AD cohort.
• Pharmacokinetics and maximally tolerated dose were established for a regenerative dosing regimen in early AD.
• Outcomes support advancement of allopregnanolone to later stages of clinical development.
The study was approved by the US Food and Drug Administration and the University of Southern California (USC) Institutional Review Board and was registered with clinicaltrials.gov
(NCT02221622).
All participants provided written informed consent prior to participation.

Participants
Eligible participants were at least 55 years of age, met criteria for MCI due to AD or probable AD,
In terms of estimation of PK and other continuously measured parameters, selected sample sizes allowed estimation with a 95% confidence interval with limits of ±0.8
standard deviation (SD).
Confidence intervals on mean group differences allowed interval limits of ±1 SD.

Interventions and study drug

Multiple ascending dose adjustment
The first and second cohort received 2 mg and 4 mg of IV Allo, respectively, for 12 weeks.
Symptoms of sedation were monitored during the infusions using a combination of a validated self-administered visual analogue scale, the Mood Rating Scale (MRS),
ese assessments showed no symptoms of sedation in either the 2 mg or 4 mg cohorts.
Consequently, a dose escalation regimen was implemented for the participants in the third cohort to ensure that a sedative dose would be identified.
Dose escalation for the last cohort occurred in the following manner: 6 mg-10 mg-14 mg-18 mg.
If any participant met the criteria for qualified sedation at any dose, higher doses were not tested for that participant and the lower dose was evaluated during the next infusion.
Participants continued at a sub-sedative maintenance dose for the remainder of the study.
Additionally, if any of the pre-established critical laboratory criteria were met within a dose cohort, dose escalation was temporarily suspended until safety data across all participants and dose cohorts was thoroughly evaluated.

Safety assessments
The primary objective of the trial was to evaluate the safety and tolerability of a weekly administration of Allo for 12 weeks in persons with early AD.
Weekly safety assessments included vital signs, treatment emergent adverse events (TEAEs), AEs, SAEs, and suicidal ideation as per the Columbia-suicide severity scale.
TEAE were defined as an AE occurring during the treatment window (24 hours post-infusion).
Clinical laboratory measurements were done at screening, weeks 5 and 9 of treatment, and at end-of-study (week 13).
Physical and neurological examinations were performed at screening, and 1-week and 1-month post-treatment.
All participants underwent magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) to assess amyloid-related imaging abnormalities (ARIA) related to vasogenic edema (ARIA-E) or microhemorrhages and hemosiderosis (ARIA-H).
Both MRI and electrocardiograms were performed at baseline and end-of-study.
Safety data from the intent-to-treat study population was analyzed by the DSMB during and at the end of the study.
Safety data from perprotocol study population is reported and analyzed here.
The incidence and severity of TEAEs was tabulated for participants randomized to each dose and compared to placebo using Fisher's exact tests.
Summary and descriptive statistics were used to further detail the safety assessment data that were measured on a continuous scale.
Mean values on these continuous safety measures were compared by randomized group using mixed effects models, with randomized group and visit (follow-up) as fixed effects and patient as a random effect.
For these safety analyses, the primary comparisons of interest were differences in each dose group relative to placebo.

Pharmacokinetic assessment
A 24-hour PK profile was established after a single administration of Allo at week 1, and at week 12 after repeated weekly dosing.
Plasma samples were collected before and after the start of the infusion at the following time points: 15 minutes, 30 minutes, 45 minutes, 1 hour, 2 hours, 4 hours, 6 hours, and 24 hours.
Allo concentration was measured using tandem quadrupole mass spectrometer Waters Acquity ultra high-performance liquid chromatography,
Plasma PK parameters were derived using Phoenix WinNonlin (version 8.0).
The following parameters were derived using noncompartmental analysis of the plasma concentration-time profiles for each participant: t max (time to reach maximum plasma concentration), C max (maximum plasma concentration), AUC 0-last (area under the plasma concentration-time curve from time zero to time of the last measured concentration above the limit of quantification), t ½ (terminal elimination half-life).
A two-compartment model fit was used for calculating the following parameter estimates: CL (clearance), CL2 (intercompartmental distribution), V1 (central compartment volume), and V2 (peripheral compartment volume).
Missing data were not imputed.
For plotting purposes only, if values were below the limit of quantitation (BQL), they were set to lower limit of quantitation (LLOQ)/2 (1.25 ng/mL).

Exploratory assessments

Cognitive assessment
The

Imaging biomarkers
MRI scanning of the brain without IV contrast was performed at baseline and end-of-study using a 3T whole-body scanner (General Electric Signa HDxt).
The imaging protocol used was a modification of the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative 3T MRI protocol.
T1 weighed images were acquired and volumetric analysis was done using Freesurfer 6.0 longitudinal version.
Automated segmentation was used to calculate hippocampal volumes.
Scans were also evaluated using Corlnsights MRI to assess overall baseline characteristics.

RESULTS

Study population
Overall, 47 participants were screened and of these,

Safety and tolerability
Overall, Allo IV administration was safe and well tolerated by all participants.
AEs were reported by 83% of participants in the placebo arm and 61% of participants in the Allo arm ( or -H across cohorts (Table

Pharmacokinetics
Allo PK parameters are summarized as mean values and standard deviations (Table
Mean plasma concentration-time profiles are presented on a semilogarithmic scale (Figure
At study weeks 1 and 12, mean plasma values of Allo after the administration of 2 mg, 4 mg, and 6 mg exhibited a peak (T max ) at approximately 30 minutes after the start of the infusion, which corresponded to the end of the infusion (Figure
After the peak, the mean concentration-time profile decreased steadily, with all participants exhibiting concentrations close to, or below, the LLOQ (2.5 ng/mL) by the 4-hour time point.
All plasma concentrations at 24 hours remained BQL (Figure
In dosing cohort three, all participants received 6 mg infusions at study week 1.
All participants were individually dosed to their MTD, which was found to be 6 mg for the three male participants and 10 mg for the three female participants.
Differences in exposure at study week 1 across three doses (2, 4, and 6 mg) show a less than dose-proportional concentration response at the lower dose.
Differences in exposure at study week 12 across four doses (2 mg, 4 mg, 6 mg, and 10 mg), demonstrates that C max was consistent with a linear dose-concentration relationship.
The AUC 0-last, data support a linear dose-exposure relationship after repeated dosing over 12 weeks (Table
For all doses, the apparent t 1/2 occurred at approximately 30 minutes, at which sufficient data points were available to characterize the elimination (Figure
These data are consistent with the observed profiles in which drug levels are close to depletion after ≈5 half-lives.
The

Pharmacodynamics and target engagement: sedation
No indicators of sedation were observed at the 2 mg and 4 mg doses of Allo as evaluated by the SSS and MRS.
Scores consistent with increased levels of sleepiness were observed with both assessment scales in the higher dose cohort (6-18 mg).
Mean post-infusion MRS composite scores are shown in Table
There was a statistically significant difference in post-infusion MRS scores among dosing cohorts in alertness, and mental and physical sedation that was dose dependent (P = 0.006, 0.002 and 0.01, respectively).
Overall, incidence of SSS scores consistent with sedation (≥7) was directly proportional to Allo dose.
The highest rated SSS score for participants in cohort one (2 mg) was 2; the majority had a score of 1, which denotes a person who is "feeling active, vital, alert, or wide awake."
The highest rated SSS score in cohort two (4 mg) was 4, which indicates that a person is "somewhat foggy or let down."
For cohort three (6-18 mg) the highest rated SSS score was ≥7, defining a person with "sleep onset soon" or who is asleep.
In all female participants, no sedation was observed per the SSS and MRS at either the 6 mg or 10 mg but was observed at 14 mg and 18 mg.
In contrast, male participants demonstrated sedation at doses ≥ 6 mg.

Exploratory endpoints
All 24 participants completed pre-and post-treatment cognitive assessments.
After 12 weeks of treatment, no statistically signifi-
Baseline and post-treatment MRI imaging data were available for 23 subjects.
Volumetric analysis hippocampal volume demonstrated no adverse outcome of Allo over the course of treatment.
There was no statistically significant difference in hippocampal volumes among the four cohorts (Table
Analysis of change in left and right hippocampal volumes suggest a trend of decreased atrophy in Allo-treated participants.

DISCUSSION
Safety and tolerability were the primary outcome measures in this first-in-human study of Allo in persons with early AD.
As anticipated, both the single dose IV administration and the weekly dosing over the course of 12 weeks were safe and well tolerated in this study population.
Safety outcomes are consistent with previously reported safety data in both animals and humans,
nisms by Allo reduces Aβ load in the brain are related to its reduced generation.
n was dose dependent (Table
In the multiple ascending dose cohort (Allo 6-18 mg) all female participants received two 18 mg infusions, which resulted in marked sedation.
Subsequently the dose was deescalated back to 10 mg, which resulted in no sedation.
In contrast, two of three male participants demonstrated mild sedation at 6 mg and all three participants demonstrated sedation at 10 mg. O
participant was escalated up to 14 mg for two infusions, which resulted in marked sedation; this participant was deescalated back to 6 mg for the remainder of the treatment period.
Based on these results, the MTD was determined to be 10 mg for females and 6 mg for males.
The dosing regimen is a critical factor for the neuro-regenerative effect of Allo, which occurs at nanomolar concentrations and is suppressed at higher doses.
Allo exhibits an inverted U-shaped dose-response which at low concentrations results in promotion of neural stem cell regeneration and at high concentrations suppresses proliferation, which protects against unchecked cell division.
evious preclinical data indicated that Allo administered once per week was maximally efficacious for increasing neurogenesis and markers of white matter generation while simultaneously reducing multiple indicators of AD pathology.
Conversely, frequent or continuous dosing regimens, similar to the one used to treat postpartum depression,
4]
The C max levels obtained from the 4 to 6 mg doses are consistent with the serum levels that occur during the third trimester of pregnancy, which range from 40 to 50 ng/mL.
These results are comparable to those reported in an open label trial of Allo in men with FXTAS, in which participants received the exact same dosing and treatment regimen.
A previous study reported the same steady-state plasma concentration of approximately 50 ng/mL in a postpartum cohort after 12 hours of continuous infusion with dosing up to 48 hours before a graduated decline in dose over the next 12 hours.
is trial was powered for safety and PK, thus given the small sample size and duration of treatment, the efficacy of Allo could not be determined.
By design, assessments of cognition and imaging biomarkers were exploratory.
Results indicated that Allo did not alter cognition, which can be interpreted as having no adverse effects on cognition over the course of 3 months of once-per-week treatment.
Likewise, Allo exerted no adverse outcome on total hippocampal MRI volumetric structure over the course of 3 months.
Analysis of change in hippocampal volume suggested a potential signal in the 4 mg Allo dose that will be investigated further in an appropriately powered phase 2 trial as a surrogate marker of regeneration.
7]

CONCLUSIONS
Allopregnanolone is a first in class regenerative therapeutic for early AD that targets endogenous neural stem cells and disease-modifying mechanisms.
The results of this phase 1b/2a clinical trial demonstrated that Allo was well tolerated and safe in an AD study population.
Pharmacokinetic profile and MTD obtained will guide dose selection for a randomized-controlled phase 2 trial to investigate the long-term safety and efficacy of this novel therapeutic for AD.


MMSE and Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR) were administered at screening only.
The following tests were administered at baseline, weeks 5 and 9 of treatment, and at end-of-study (week 13): Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale-Cognition (ADAS-Cog)14, Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA), and Cogstate Brief Battery.


26 participants were randomized (Figure A.1 in supporting information).
One participant from the placebo arm discontinued the intervention and dropped out of the study for reasons not related to treatment.
One participant from the Allo arm was removed from the study after randomization due to a pre-existing medical condition.
Both participants were subsequently replaced to ensure equal numbers in each cohort.
Patient retention for the study was 96.2%.
Demographic and baseline characteristics are summarized in Table A.1 in supporting information.



TA B L E 1
terminal elimination phase was consistent with first-order kinetics in the dose range studied.
Two-compartment PK parameter estimates obtained from modeling conducted for the mean data at each dose level demonstrated a Adverse events (AE) by treatment cohort.
A) Number of participants reporting categorized a AE; B) Number of participants with ARIA; C) Number of AEs distributed by severity



14 F I G U R E 1
Semilogarithmic mean plasma concentration-time profiles of Allopregnanolone doses.
Allopregnanolone 2 mg, 4 mg, and 6 mg doses shown at visit 3 and visit 14; 10 mg dose shown at visit 14 only.
Measurements in all cases after 2 hours were below limit of quantitation (4 hours, 6 hours, 8 hours, and 24 hours).
Error bars indicate standard error of the mean TA B L E 4 Mood Rating Scale composite scores by treatment cohort a



Table 1 )
. No differences in incidence and severity, nor differences in frequency of AEs within MedDRA classifications were detected across treatment groups (Table1).No participants discontinued treatment due to AEs.The most frequently reported AEs (≥2 participants) and SAEs, irrespective of causality, are summarized in Table2.
One SAE (rectal hemorrhage) occurred in the Allo 2 mg cohort but was determined to be unrelated to study medication, and the participant completed the study without interruption.
Of the total reported AEs, only one (2%) was determined to be "possibly related" at the time of assessment.
That participant experienced dizziness, which was reported to have occurred within 24 hours after the infusion.
Overall, there were no clinically significant changes in echocardiograms, physical exams, or clinical laboratory assessments.
Additionally, imaging analyses did not detect any ARIA-E


Linear mixed model with random subject effect was used to compare mean MRS scores among treatment cohorts.
P-value represents overall difference across all treatment cohorts.
Dunnett's method was used for multiple comparisons between each Allo cohort with placebo.
The mean difference in mental sedation between Allo 6-18 mg and placebo is significant (P = 0.007).
The difference in alertness between Allo 6-18 mg placebo is marginally significant (P = 0.07).
All other P-values >0.17.
Exploratory outcomes: comparison of change scores across treatment cohorts a Analysis of covariance on change in cognitive test scores and change in hippocampal volume (week 13 minus baseline), controlling for baseline scores and volume, respectively.
Least squares means, 95% confidence intervals, and P-values are shown in the table.
b To facilitate comparisons across cognitive tests, ADAS-Cog scores were reversed to a positive score.
Thus, positive change indicates improvement in all tests.
c One participant had a missing Cogstate ONB score at week 13; their week 12 score was carried forward for analysis.
d Composite: Change in average z-score (Detection test + Identification test + One back test + One card learning test).


Moreover, noted differences in hippocampal volume appeared to be differentially affected by apolipoprotein E (APOE) ε4 genotype.
Analyses of other MRI structural volumes, resting state functional MRI (fMRI), and diffusion tensor imaging, as well as other exploratory outcomes, are ongoing and will be published in detail separately.
Overall, exploratory outcome measures support safety outcomes by demonstrating that Allo infusions were not detrimental to cognition or imaging biomarkers.