A longitudinal examination of plasma neurofilament light and total tau for the clinical detection and monitoring of Alzheimer's disease
We examined baseline and longitudinal associations between plasma neurofilament light (NfL) and total tau (t-tau), and the clinical presentation of Alzheimer's disease (AD).
579 participants (238, normal cognition [NC]; 185, mild cognitive impairment [MCI]; 156, AD dementia) had baseline blood draws; 82% had follow-up evaluations.
Plasma samples were analyzed for NfL and t-tau using Simoa technology.
Baseline plasma NfL was higher in AD dementia compared to MCI (standardized mean difference=0.55,
95% CI: 0.37-0.73)
and NC (standardized mean difference=0.68,
95% CI: 0.49-0.88),
corresponded to CDR scores (OR=1.94,
95% CI: 1.35-2.79]),
and correlated with all neuropsychological tests (r's=0.13-0.42).
Longitudinally, NfL did not predict diagnostic conversion, but predicted decline on 3/10 neuropsychological tests.
Baseline plasma t-tau was higher in AD dementia compared to NC with a small effect (standardized mean difference=0.33,
95% CI: 0.10-0.57)
but not MCI.
T-tau did not statistically significant predict any longitudinal outcomes.
Plasma NfL may be useful for the detection of AD

BACKGROUND
Early and accurate detection of Alzheimer's disease (AD) is critical for timely diagnosis and implementation of preventative strategies and therapeutic interventions.
The National Institute on Aging and Alzheimer's Association (NIA-AA) Research Framework recommends AD to be defined based on its underlying pathophysiologic processes using in vivo biomarkers
These biomarkers can allow for the preclinical detection of pathological changes prior to onset of observable clinical symptoms
AD biomarkers are classified into markers of amyloid ("A"), tau ("T"), and neurodegeneration ("N").
The amyloid and tau biomarkers have been traditionally assessed via analysis of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and PET imaging of amyloid and phosphorylated tau (p-tau).
The "N" biomarkers are nonspecific markers of neurodegeneration often observed in AD, such as hippocampal atrophy on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), fluoro-deoxyglucose (FDG) PET, as well as CSF measurements of neurofilament light (NfL) and total tau (t-tau).
These biomarkers may be associated with AD neuropathologic changes in addition to other neurodegenerative and non-neurodegenerative pathologies.
PET and CSF are considered the gold standard in vivo AD biomarkers because they provide a direct window into the central nervous system (CNS) environment.
The high expense and perceived invasiveness of these procedures limits their potential feasibility for large-scale research studies and clinical utility
In recent years, ultrasensitive methods (e.g., single molecule array
With these advancements, growing literature has focused on the use of blood-based AD biomarkers
This includes plasma measurements of "A" biomarkers including plasma β-amyloid, specifically the ratio between Aβ42 and Aβ40 as the "A" biomarker using immunoprecipitation-mass spectrometry
These measurements have demonstrated promise as viable biomarkers that correlate with clinical disease progression and amyloid PET.
There have been advancements in the study of blood-based "N" biomarkers of NfL and ttau.
These plasma measurements correlate with disease severity in AD dementia and other biomarkers of AD neuropathologic changes
NfL is a structural neuronal protein that is released into the surrounding CSF following axonal or neuronal damage in many conditions.
Elevations in CSF NfL are observed not only in individuals with AD dementia, but also in frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD), Huntington disease, and other neurological conditions
Blood-based measurements of NfL (in plasma or serum) may be a valuable biomarker of neurodegeneration in AD.
For example, NfL has been shown to be elevated in individuals with AD dementia compared to MCI and normal cognition (NC)
Yet, research has been equivocal.
While NfL can discriminate between AD dementia, MCI, and NC individuals in some samples, there is substantial overlap between diagnostic groups
Moreover, one study
Rather, plasma NfL may be best suited for monitoring disease progression and tracking the effectiveness of diseasemodifying treatments in clinical research
T-tau is also a non-specific index of neurodegeneration.
The tau protein is involved with stabilization of microtubules in the neuronal cytoskeleton and is released into the surrounding CSF during cell death and neurodegeneration.
Tau may be released by neurons impacted by amyloid pathology
CSF t-tau elevations can be observed with several neurological conditions including AD, Lewy body dementia, FTLD, stroke, vascular dementia, and Creutzfeldt-Jacob disease
Plasma levels of t-tau have been shown to be elevated in individuals with AD dementia
However, it is unclear how meaningful and sensitive a biomarker it may be.
For example, t-tau has not discriminated between NC and MCI in multiple studies, where elevated levels were only observed in AD dementia, with considerable overlap between groups
The predictive utility also appears limited, as plasma t-tau has not significantly predicted conversion from MCI to dementia
There have also been concerns regarding the convergent validity with other measures of AD pathology, as plasma t-tau has demonstrated small or non-significant correlations with CSF t-tau
Given the ambiguous findings for plasma measurements of both NfL and t-tau, further investigation is crucial to validate these measurements as in vivo biomarkers for AD.
The objective of this study was to examine the utility of plasma NfL and t-tau in the detection of cognitive decline in a sample of participants with normal cognition and cognitive impairment due to AD.
We leveraged the Boston University (BU) Alzheimer's Disease Center (ADC) Clinical Core registry data set and biosample repository to examine the ability of plasma NfL and t-tau to predict diagnostic conversion, as well as neuropsychological test performance over time.
We hypothesized that plasma NfL would successfully discriminate between individuals with NC, MCI, and AD dementia while t-tau would only be elevated in individuals with dementia, consistent with previous research findings.
Longitudinally, we hypothesized that plasma NfL would have superior predictive validity compared to t-tau in predicting odds for conversion to MCI and AD dementia and declines on neuropsychological testing.
For individuals with multiple measurements, we hypothesized that increases in both biomarkers would correspond with the clinical progression of AD dementia.

METHODS

Participants and Design
The sample included participants from the BU ADC Clinical Core Registry.
The BU ADC is one of ~30 centers funded by the NIA and provides data to the National Alzheimer's Coordinating Center (NACC) to promote collaborative research on AD
A description of the BU ADC Clinical Core Registry, including participant recruitment and eligibility criteria, is provided elsewhere
The BU ADC longitudinally follows older adults with and without cognitive impairment to facilitate the study of AD and related dementias.
Inclusion criteria includes community dwelling, English speaking older adults who have adequate hearing and visual acuity.
Participants are excluded if they had a history of serious mental illness (e.g., schizophrenia, bipolar disorder), nonneurodegenerative disease neurological illness (e.g., multiple sclerosis, brain tumor), and/or other disorders that preclude the ability of the participant to participate in study procedures.
As part of the BU ADC protocol, participants complete an annual evaluation that consists of a clinical and medical interview, neurological examination, neuropsychological testing, and measures of functional independence.
Beginning in 2008, all BU ADC participants (i.e., existing individuals in the registry and new participants) completed one voluntary blood draw during a study visit.
Starting in 2015, all participants were asked to complete blood draws as part of all annual study visits.
All participants had data from at least one blood draw available for analysis, and many participants had data from multiple study visits.
All study visits in the current analyses took place between 2008 and 2018.
Participants were eligible for inclusion in the current study if at least one plasma sample was available from a study visit in which they received a designation of NC, MCI due to AD, or AD dementia.
We focus on AD as a suspected etiology because there are very few other suspected etiologies in the BU ADC Clinical Core (only 17 participants in this sample had cognitive impairment due to non-AD neurological conditions) and because our goal was to determine the utility and validity of these plasma biomarkers specifically in the setting of AD.
All BU ADC data collection procedures were approved by the BU Medical Center Institutional Review Board.
Participants (or their Legally Authorized Representatives) provided written informed consent to participate in the study.

Plasma Biomarker Analyses
Non-fasting blood samples were collected for all participants.
Blood was collected into plastic dipotassium EDTA tubes, and processed according to standard procedures, with plasma aliquoted and frozen at -80°C.
Frozen plasma aliquots were shipped on dry ice to the University of Gothenburg (Sweden) for batch analysis.
Plasma NfL concentration was measured using an ultrasensitive in-house Simoa method on an HD-1 Analyzer (Quanterix, Billerica, Massachusetts), as previously described in detail
This inhouse Simoa assay is very similar to commercial Simoa methods (only minor variations) and this same method was previously found to have a high correlation (r = .89)
with CSF NfL in a sample of patients with HIV infections
The LLOQ was 1.9 pg/mL, with a dynamic range of 1.9-1800 pg/mL.
T-tau concentrations were measured using the commercially available Tau 2.0 kit and the HD-1 analyzer (Quanterix, Billerica, Massachusetts) with an LLOQ of 0.061 pg/mL and a dynamic range of 0.061-360 pg/mL.
The measurements were performed by board-certified laboratory technicians who were blinded to clinical data.
All samples were detectable with an average coefficient of variation (CV) of 4%.

Diagnostic Procedures
Cognitive diagnoses (i.e., MCI; cognitively impaired, not MCI; dementia; or NC, reflecting a lack of cognitive diagnosis) are made for all participants enrolled in the BU ADC during multidisciplinary diagnostic consensus conferences that are comprised of neurologists and neuropsychologists, as well as geriatricians and/or psychiatrists.
Consensus diagnosis is adjudicated following presentation and discussion of all examination and test findings (including review of structural MRI, if available), as well as social, family, and medical history.
Established criteria are used for MCI
For participants who progressed to MCI and/or dementia at any point during the study, only those with a primary suspected etiology of AD were included in analyses (for reasons discussed above).
Note that there were two follow-up study visits in the entire sample where "cognitively impaired, not MCI" was listed as the clinical diagnosis but the suspected etiology was AD and therefore these study visits were not excluded; neither was a baseline or final study visit and these visits did not impact the baseline diagnostic discrimination analyses.
Participants who performed within the normal range on all neuropsychological tests were classified as having NC.

Dementia Severity
All participants received a global rating from the CDR® Dementia Staging Instrument to assess dementia severity at each visit
The CDR stages dementia severity through the assessment of several factors including memory, orientation, judgment/problem solving, community affairs, home and hobbies, and personal care.
Each domain is rated on a scale from 0 (no impairment) to 3 (severe impairment) and an algorithm is used to calculate a global severity rating designated as: 0 (no dementia), 0.5 (questionable dementia/MCI), 1.0 (mild dementia), 2.0 (moderate dementia), and 3.0 (severe dementia).

Neuropsychological Testing
Participants completed a battery of common neuropsychological tests at each study visit.
Many of these are NACC-UDS tests
In addition to standard NACC-UDS tests, the Neuropsychological Assessment Battery (NAB) List Learning Test is administered as part of the BU ADC Clinical Core Registry protocol.

Statistical Analyses
The study visit with the first plasma sample served as the baseline visit, with all subsequent visits being follow-up visits.
Descriptive analyses compared the three groups on demographic covariates at baseline.
Statistical analyses were conducted to determine the cross-sectional and longitudinal relationship between plasma NfL and t-tau with diagnostic status and conversion, CDR score, and neuropsychological test performance.
Analyses examined each biomarker (e.g., NfL and t-tau), separately.
Models also evaluated both biomarker measurements to determine the incremental validity in discriminating between participants groups at baseline compared to either biomarker alone.
The specific statistical models conducted based on the outcomes examined included: Diagnostic status and conversion: For cross-sectional analyses, ANCOVA models compared plasma NfL and t-tau levels between individuals classified as NC, MCI, or AD dementia at baseline, accounting for relevant covariates.
Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) analyses were conducted between each diagnostic pairwise comparison using logistic regression to determine the ability of the biomarkers to discriminate between groups, using the area under the curve (AUC) statistic.
Level of discrimination accuracy was interpreted using guidelines set forth by
These analyses were conducted in a two-step approach.
The first step examined demographic and APOE covariates (covariate selection described below), followed by the second step that included the biomarkers along with the covariates.
Three models were conducted for each pairwise group comparison: 1) only plasma NfL, 2) only plasma t-tau, and 3) a combined model with both NfL and t-tau.
For longitudinal analyses, logistic regression models tested whether baseline plasma t-tau and NfL concentrations predicted increased odds for conversion from baseline NC to MCI or AD dementia.
This was repeated for individuals with MCI at baseline to determine if baseline biomarker levels could discriminate between individuals with stable MCI and those who progressed to AD dementia.
For the subset of participants who had multiple biomarker measurements, we evaluated whether individuals who experienced a change in diagnosis across study visits experienced a corresponding change in biomarker measurements using logistic regression modelling.
CDR Score: Ordinal logistic regression models examined if the biomarkers could differentiate between dementia severity levels (as measured by CDR ratings) for individuals diagnosed with AD dementia at baseline.
For individuals with dementia at baseline who had follow-up data available, ordinal logistic regression models were conducted to determine whether each biomarker predicted CDR rating at the final study visit.
We also examined whether changes in biomarker levels over time were associated with changes in CDR rating for participants who had multiple biomarker measurements available.
Neuropsychological Test Scores: Partial Pearson correlations were used to examine the association between plasma biomarkers and performance on all neuropsychological tests at baseline across the entire sample, accounting for demographic covariates.
Generalized linear models estimated via generalized estimating equations (GEE) tested whether NfL and t-tau levels at baseline could predict subsequent changes in neuropsychological test performance based on the interaction effect between the biomarker level and time since baseline.
The GEE models included all study visits and used an autoregressive (AR1) correlation structure.
Only individuals classified as having NC or MCI at baseline were included in these analyses to avoid restricted range (i.e., floor effects) among individuals with AD dementia.
Age, education, race (white vs. other), sex, and APOE ε4 allele status (carriers vs. noncarriers) were included as covariates in all models.
These covariates were a priori selected based on their known associations with cognitive and brain aging outcomes, in general, and AD dementia, in particular.
For longitudinal models, the follow-up interval (time between the baseline and final study visits in years) and the baseline level of the outcome variable were included as additional covariates.
To reduce the risk of Type I error, all p-values were false discovery rate (FDR) adjusted using the Benjamini-Hochberg Procedure
FDR is a common procedure that is used to reduce the rate of Type I (false positive errors) when conducting multiple statistical analyses and to maintain overall false positive rate at 5%.
FDR adjusts the threshold for statistical significance based on the number of models conducted within each group of statistical analyses (specified in the table legends).
Statistical significance was defined as an FDR-adjusted alpha level less than 0.05.
All p-values presented are FDR-adjusted.

RESULTS

Participants
Demographics and clinical characteristics for the sample are shown in Table
A total of 579 individuals were included in this sample, including 238 with NC at baseline, 185 with MCI due to AD, and 156 with AD dementia.
A total of 638 individuals in the BU ADC Clinical Core Registry had blood draws available, but 59 were excluded due to not having qualifying diagnoses at the time of the draw (14 missing; 28 cognitively impaired, not MCI; and 17 with cognitive impairment due to non-AD disorders).
The range of values (NfL: 1.9-179 pg/mL; t-tau: 0.4-74.8)
fell within the dynamic ranges for the assays.
The distributions for both biomarkers were highly positively skewed.
To minimize the influence of outlier values, the natural logs of the values for both biomarkers were utilized for all remaining analyses.
Shapiro-Wilk testing confirmed how these analyses resulted in the data better conforming to a normal distribution.
For t-tau, the raw values had a W-value of 0.537 with p < .001.
The transformed data had a W-value much closer to 1 (0.966), indicating a more normal distribution; this value was still significant (p < .001),
which reflects a minor deviation from normality in the context of a large sample size.
Likewise, for NfL, the W-value increased from 0.771 (p < .001) to 0.992 (p = .003)
following the log transformation.
All scores were then transformed into standardized scores (i.e., z-scores) to facilitate interpretation of the coefficients in statistical analyses.
The two biomarkers were not significantly correlated with each other (using the log-transformed values) either across the entire sample (r = .07,
p = .078)
or within the participant groups of NC (r = -.04,
p = .521),
MCI (r = .13,
p = .074),
or AD dementia (r = .05,
p = .550).
For participants with NC at baseline, 49 of them converted to MCI at a subsequent study visit, including 10 who progressed to AD dementia.
Twenty-four participants with MCI at baseline subsequently progressed to AD dementia.
Among the 196 participants who had biomarker data from multiple study visits, 115 participants had NC at baseline, 56 were diagnosed with MCI, and 25 had AD dementia.
The mean follow-up interval was 5.09 years (SD = 2.66 years).
Among participants with NC at baseline, 20 had a diagnosis of MCI at a subsequent measurement, and 4 had AD dementia (an insufficient number of participants for analyses).
Among participants with MCI at baseline, 8 progressed to a diagnosis of AD dementia at a subsequent biomarker measurement, while 48 remained stable at MCI (n = 27) or reverted to NC (n = 21).

Outcome 1: Diagnostic Status and Conversion

NfL
Baseline NfL and Diagnostic Group Comparisons: Results from the ANCOVA model (Table
= 0.68, 95% CI: [0.49, 0.88], p < .001)
and MCI (mean diff.
= 0.55, 95% CI: [0.37, 0.73], p < .001).
Plasma NfL did not significantly discriminate between NC and MCI (mean diff.
= 0.10, 95% CI: [-0.05, 0.26], p = .226).
The AUC based on ROC analyses was also conducted using pairwise comparisons (Figure
For the comparison between NC and AD dementia, the AUC model including NfL with demographic and APOE covariates fell in the range of "excellent discrimination" at 0.83, according to interpretation guidelines set forth by
For the comparison between MCI and AD dementia, the AUC was in the range of "acceptable discrimination" at 0.78 (compared to 0.72 for the demographic model).
The AUC for the model comparing NC and MCI fell below the range of "acceptable discrimination" at 0.69 and did not improve upon the model including only demographic and APOE covariates.

NfL and Diagnostic
Change: There were no statistically significant effects between logtransformed baseline NfL and odds for progression from NC to MCI or from MCI to AD dementia (Models 3.1 and 3.2 in Table
Similarly, there were no statistically significant associations between changes in NfL and conversion from NC to MCI or from MCI to AD dementia.
See Models 3.3 and 3.4 in Table

T-tau
Baseline T-tau and Diagnostic Group Comparisons: Table
Plasma t-tau was significantly higher in participants with AD dementia at baseline compared to NC (mean diff.
= 0.33, 95% CI: [0.10, 0.57], p = .010),
but not significantly higher compared to MCI (mean diff.
= 0.21, 95% CI: [-0.03, 0.44], p = .126).
Plasma t-tau did not significantly differ between NC and MCI (mean diff.
= 0.07, 95% CI: [-0.13, 0.27], p = .501).
ROC analysis (Figure
The addition of ttau did not improve the AUC compared to demographic and APOE covariates alone in models examining the comparisons between NC and MCI (overall AUC = 0.69, falling below the range of "acceptable discrimination") or between MCI and AD dementia (AUC = 0.72, "acceptable discrimination").
Baseline T-tau and Diagnostic Change: Longitudinally, baseline plasma t-tau levels did not assist with prediction of future diagnostic changes among individuals with NC or MCI at baseline (Models 3.1 and 3.2 in Table
For participants with multiple biomarker measurements, changes in plasma t-tau levels over time did not correspond with changes in clinical status.
The increase in t-tau did not significantly differ between individuals who progressed from NC to MCI compared to individuals who remained stable at NC, or between individuals with MCI who progressed to AD dementia compared to those who remained stable at MCI. Refer to Models 3.3-3.4 in Table

Combination of both biomarkers-Additional
ROC analyses tested whether inclusion of both biomarkers could improve diagnostic discrimination beyond each variable alone; these are displayed in Figure
T-tau significantly discriminated NC and AD dementia groups (p = 0.049), but the AUC improved minimally compared to the model with NfL only, from 0.83 to 0.84, "excellent discrimination."
3.3 Outcome 2: CDR levels 3.3.1 NfL-Among the 156 individuals diagnosed with AD dementia at baseline, 42 had a CDR score of 0.5, 76 had a CDR of 1, 26 had a CDR of 2, and 12 had a CDR score of 3. Higher levels of NfL were significantly associated (p < .001)
with more severe dementia in an ordinal logistic regression model (Table
Each SD increase corresponded to a 94% increased risk of having a higher CDR level.
However, baseline NfL did not significantly contribute to prediction of CDR rating at the final study visit among individuals diagnosed with dementia at baseline (p = .252).
Likewise, for the 24 participants with dementia at baseline and NfL measurements available from multiple study visits, there was not a statistically significant relationship (p = .909)
between changes in NfL over time and corresponding changes in CDR rating after accounting for the baseline value (Table

T-tau-Among
participants with dementia at baseline, higher plasma t-tau was not significantly associated (p = .207)
with more severe dementia on the CDR after accounting for relevant covariates.
Total tau at baseline also did not significantly assist with the prediction of CDR rating the final study visit (p = .704),
nor were changes in t-tau associated with corresponding changes in CDR across multiple study visits (p = .474;
Table

Outcome 3: Neuropsychological testing
Table
Higher concentrations of NfL were associated with worse performance across all tests.
The absolute values of the correlation coefficients were 0.30 or greater for all tests other than DS (both forward and backward) and the BNT.
Across the entire sample, t-tau was significantly correlated with only the MMSE (p = .041).
The magnitudes of all correlations were smaller than those observed for plasma NfL.
Table
Higher values of NfL at baseline were significantly associated with worse performance on the MMSE, Vegetable Fluency, and Logical Memory II at subsequent study visits.
In contrast, baseline t-tau was not significantly associated with subsequent performance on any neuropsychological test.

DISCUSSION
The current study evaluated the associations between plasma NfL and t-tau with the clinical presentation of AD in a longitudinal sample of 579 community-dwelling older adults from the BU ADC.
At baseline, higher plasma NfL levels accurately discriminated participants with AD dementia from both NC and MCI with moderate effect sizes, as well as corresponded to greater dementia severity.
Plasma NfL also significantly correlated with worse performance on all 10 neuropsychological tests examined, with moderate effect sizes for 8 of the tests (r's ≥ 0.3).
Baseline NfL did not predict diagnostic conversion, but higher baseline levels of NfL predicted decline on the MMSE and measures of verbal fluency and episodic memory.
The effect sizes for prediction of decline were small (e.g., a decrease of 0.19 MMSE points per year for each SD increase in NfL).
Plasma t-tau levels significantly discriminated between individuals with NC and AD dementia at baseline with a small effect size, but not between NC and MCI or between MCI and AD dementia.
There were no statistically significant associations between t-tau and dementia severity or cognitive decline, and a statistically significant but small correlation coefficient was only found with the MMSE and none of the other neuropsychological tests.
T-tau provided a statistically significant but not clinically meaningful improvement in discriminating between NC and AD dementia in a combined model with NfL.
All results were independent of age, education, race, sex, and APOE ε4 allele status.
These results support plasma NfL as a viable in vivo biomarker for the detection of AD dementia and monitoring of disease progression.
In contrast, there was minimal evidence in support of plasma t-tau.
The results for NfL are consistent with previous research showing plasma NfL levels are elevated in AD dementia
In our sample, increased NfL at baseline was associated with worse performance on all neuropsychological tests administered and predicted declines on measures of global cognitive functioning, category fluency, and memory recall.
Increased NfL is not only associated with AD but also with other neurological disorders, including vascular dementia, FTLD, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, progressive supranuclear palsy, Huntington disease, TBI, multiple sclerosis, and Guillian-Barré syndrome
NfL is therefore a non-specific biomarker of pathophysiological processes in the CNS that cause axonal and/or neuronal injury.
This is notable in the context of the present sample of participants with AD dementia because AD dementia and neurodegeneration in AD can be result of mixed neuropathologies, including those that that affect the white matter, especially cerebrovascular disease
In addition to neurodegeneration associated with AD neuropathologic changes, plasma NfL may also capture the co-morbid cerebrovascular and other white matter pathologies that frequently accompany AD.
Regardless of the etiology, plasma NfL could be a useful marker to detect and monitor neurodegeneration, as well as track the effectiveness of diseasemodifying treatments in AD and similar settings.
Although neurodegeneration and axonal damage are observed throughout the course of AD, these become prominent with aging and disease progression
This may partially explain why the increased levels of plasma NfL were not observable until later in the clinical disease process (i.e., dementia), with no significant differences between NC and MCI (see Table
Research has indicated that increases in serum NfL can be observed prior to the onset of clinical symptoms in individuals with deterministic AD genetic mutations
Clinical trials have also indicated that NfL measurements may be effective for monitoring effects on neurodegeneration by disease-modifying therapeutics in AD
In our study, there was not a significant relationship between longitudinal changes in diagnostic status and corresponding changes the plasma NfL.
However, these analyses were notably limited by sample size and statistically under-powered.
Plasma t-tau was increased in individuals with AD dementia compared to NC.
However, the effect size was small and there was no evidence to suggest that t-tau could predict longitudinal cognitive changes.
Our finding that plasma t-tau is elevated in individuals in AD dementia but is unable to discriminate between NC and MCI is consistent with previous findings
T-tau, like NfL, is a non-specific and general index of neurodegeneration that is elevated not only in AD, but also with exposure to repetitive head impacts
In our dataset, plasma t-tau and NfL appeared to be independent of each other, as no significant correlations were observed across the sample or within each group.
Plasma ttau may be less sensitive to detecting underlying AD-related neurodegeneration, particularly early in the clinical course of disease as observed in our sample and others
Despite our discouraging findings for plasma t-tau, other research supports its value.
For example,
Another study
Thus, plasma t-tau may still have a valuable role for determining risk and monitoring the clinical course of AD and continued research is needed.
A limitation of our findings was that we did not have data available to examine the convergence between plasma biomarkers and direct measures of CNS pathology, such as post-mortem AD neuropathologic changes, CSF measurements, or PET imaging, nor did we have an independent validation cohort available for further replication and confirmation of our findings.
The lack of measures of direct CNS pathology has important implications.
Approximately 17% of individuals who receive a clinical diagnosis of AD dementia do not have AD neuropathologic changes at autopsy
Therefore, there is potential for misclassification of AD in this sample given it was measured via clinical diagnoses.
It precludes the ability to directly test whether the plasma biomarkers are capturing CNS pathological processes; it is indeed still unclear to what extent these plasma biomarkers truly represent CNS pathology
Several previous studies using Simoa technology have evaluated the convergent validity between plasma biomarkers and other indices of AD neuropathological changes.
Plasma NfL has been found to strongly correlate with CSF NfL
Moreover, longitudinal increases in plasma NfL are associated with concurrent changes in CSF measurements of t-tau, p-tau and Aβ42, hippocampal atrophy, and FDG PET uptake
For plasma t-tau, the evidence is less convincing, as previous studies have shown weak correlations with CSF measurements
Future studies could attempt to further validate these biomarkers using these more specific indices of AD neuropathology and other types of pathologies (e.g., white matter alterations, cerebrovascular vascular disease).
The current study also did not examine plasma biomarkers of AD neuropathological changes, such as p-tau.
Two recent studies compared plasma levels of p-tau and t-tau and observed that p-tau had stronger associations with amyloid and tau PET
Another limitation is that the participants were volunteers in a longitudinal research study and the findings are likely more representative of a clinic-based population than the general population.
The sample was also focused on the target population of AD and thus the results are unlikely to generalize to non-AD samples.
As described in the Results, only 17 participants with a plasma sample in the group had non-AD cognitive impairment.
Lastly, there was a relatively small number of individuals who progressed to MCI and/or dementia diagnoses at post-baseline measurements and there was a limited number of participants with multiple biomarker measurements.
Thus, some of the null findings regarding the changes in biomarker level analyses could potentially represent Type II errors.
In conclusion, the current study examined plasma NfL and t-tau measurements as potential biomarkers of AD-related neurodegeneration in a large longitudinal sample of communitydwelling individuals.
Overall, the results showed that plasma NfL and t-tau elevations were not observed until participants had dementia.
Plasma NfL was more sensitive to cognitive functioning and prediction of cognitive decline and may be a more promising biomarker of neurodegeneration in AD compared to t-tau.
Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves for plasma NfL and t-tau comparing the area under the curve (AUC) for diagnostic comparisons at baseline, including models for plasma NfL, t-tau, and both biomarkers combined.
Each graph displays a baseline model including only demographic covariates (age, sex, education, and race) and APOE ε4 carrier status, and models adding plasma NfL, t-tau, and simultaneously including both biomarkers.
Binary and ordinal logistic regression models demonstrating the effect of log-transformed plasma NfL and ttau in predicting subsequent cognitive change at the final study visit (3.1 and 3.2), and examining the correspondence between changes in biomarker level and corresponding diagnostic change over time
Odds ratios are based on the standardized values of log-transformed NfL or t-tau at baseline and represent the odds of having a more severe cognitive diagnosis for each SD increase in the biomarker at baseline (3.1 and 3.2) or biomarker change score across study visits

Abbreviations:



Figure 1 .
Figure 1.
Mean plasma biomarker levels at baseline, separated by consensus diagnostic groups.
Error bars represent the 95% confidence intervals.
Values are shown as standardized logtransformed scores.
*p < .01,
*p < .001
based on results from ANCOVA models and posthoc comparisons (shown in Table 2) accounting for demographic covariates and APOE ε4 carrier status.


Figure 2.



Table 1 .
Participant demographics at baseline.
Significant findings are baser on three-group ANOVAs or Chi-square tests of independence, with further two-groups post hoc comparisons for significant findings at an alpha level of p<0.05.



Table 3 .



Table 4 .
. Age, sex, education, race, APOE ε4 carrier status, and the time from baseline to the final study visit are included as covariates in each model.p-values
are adjusted based on a false discovery rate correction for eight comparisons.Ordinal logistic regression models demonstrating the effect of plasma NfL and t-tau in discriminating between dementia severity levels at baseline (as measured by CDR rating; 4.1), predicting subsequent changes in CDR among individuals with dementia based on baseline NfL and t-tau (4.2), and examining the correspondence between biomarker change scores and CDR level over time (4.3).
Odds ratios are based on the standardized values of log-transformed NfL or t-tau at baseline (i.e., z-scores) and represent the odds of having a more severe cognitive diagnosis rating for each SD increase in biomarker at baseline (4.1 and 4.2) or increase in biomarker between visits (4.3).
Age, sex, education, race, and APOE ε4 carrier status are included as covariates in models 4.1 and 4.2.
Only age, time since baseline, and baseline CDR values were used as covariates in 4.3 due to limited sample size (n = 24).
p-values are adjusted based on a false discovery rate correction for six comparisons.



Table 5 .
Matrix displaying partial correlations between plasma log-transformed NfL and t-tau neuropsychological test performance at baseline across the entire sample (N = 579).
Raw scores were used for all tests.
Age, sex, education, race, and APOE ε4 carrier status are included as covariates.