CircRNA-ceRNA Network Revealing the Potential Regulatory Roles of CircRNA in Alzheimer’s Disease Involved the cGMP-PKG Signal Pathway
Background: Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a chronic progressive neurodegenerative disease.
The characteristic pathologies include extracellular senile plaques formed by β-amyloid protein deposition, neurofibrillary tangles formed by hyperphosphorylation of tau protein, and neuronal loss with glial cell hyperplasia.
Circular RNAs (circRNAs) are rich in miRNA-binding sites (miRNA response elements, MREs), which serve as miRNA sponges or competitive endogenous RNAs (ceRNAs).
Although several research groups have identified dysregulated circRNAs in the cerebral cortex of SAMP8 mice or APP/PS1 mice using deep RNA-seq analysis, we need to further explore circRNA expression patterns, targets, functions and the signaling pathways involved in the pathogenesis of AD and in particular the hippocampal circRNA expression profiles in AD.
We used deep RNA sequencing to investigate circRNA-ceRNA network patterns in the hippocampus of APP/PS1 mice.
Results: In our study, 70 dysregulated circRNAs, 39 dysregulated miRNAs and 121 dysregulated mRNAs were identified between the APP/PS1 group and the wild-type group at 8 months in the hippocampus of the mice.
Through correlation analysis, we identified 11 dysregulated circRNAs, 7 dysregulated miRNAs and 8 dysregulated mRNAs forming 16 relationships in the circRNA-miRNA-mRNA regulatory network.
Gene ontology (GO) analysis indicated that the dysregulated circRNAs were most enriched in biological metabolic processes.
Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) analysis showed that the dysregulation of circRNAs was enriched in the cGMP-PKG signaling pathway, cAMP signaling pathway, Hippo signaling pathway, platelet activation, long-term potentiation and axon guidance.
In addition, our findings preliminarily verified that the novel_circ_0003012/mmu-miR-298-3p/Smoc2

INTRODUCTION
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a chronic progressive neurodegenerative disease and is the most common type of senile dementia
The main characteristics are memory impairment, cognitive decline, personality change and language impairment, which seriously affect people's daily lives.
However, the pathogenesis of AD has not been fully elucidated.
The characteristic pathologies include extracellular senile plaques formed by β-amyloid protein deposition, neurofibrillary tangles formed by hyperphosphorylation of the tau protein, and neuronal loss with glial cell hyperplasia
Circular RNA (circRNA) is a non-coding RNA with a unique covalent closed loop structure.
CircRNAs are rich in miRNAbinding sites (miRNA response elements, MREs), which serve as miRNA sponges or competitive endogenous RNAs (ceRNAs)
Currently, several studies have shown that circRNAs play an important role in the regulation of neurodegenerative diseases via their interaction with diseaseassociated miRNAs
In previous studies, several research groups have identified dysregulated circRNAs in the cerebral cortex of SAMP8 mice or APP/PS1 mice using deep RNA-seq analysis
Other groups have also identified dysregulated circRNAs in the hippocampal tissues of an AD mouse model by circRNA microarray
Currently, it is believed that the nerve loss caused by the development of AD is mainly in the cortex and hippocampus.
The hippocampus is very important for learning and memory.
Changes in the function and structure of the hippocampus are critical for learning and memory, such as long-term potentiation (LTP) and synaptic remodeling
Several key molecules influence the generation of new hippocampal neurons in AD, and significant changes in neurogenesis occur earlier than the onset of hallmark lesions or neuronal impairment
Despite these findings, we need to further explore the expression patterns, targets, and functions of circRNAs and the signaling pathways involved in the pathogenesis of AD.
Therefore, further research is of great importance.
Here, we Abbreviations: AD, Alzheimer's disease; BACE1, β-site amyloid precursor protein-cleaving enzyme 1; BP, biological process; cAMP, cyclic adenosine monophosphate; CC, cellular component; ceRNAs, competitive endogenous RNAs; circRNAs, circular RNAs; cGMP, cyclic guanosine monophosphate; Cst7, cystatin F; GO, Gene ontology; KEGG, Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes; LTP, long-term potentiation; MF, molecular function; MREs, miRNA response elements; OXPHOS, oxidative phosphorylation; PKG, cGMP-dependent protein kinase; WT, wild-type.
detected dysregulation of the circRNA-ceRNA profile in the hippocampus of APP/PS1 mice using deep RNA-seq analysis.
We performed Gene Ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) analyses to predict the biological roles and potential signaling pathways of these differentially expressed circRNAs.
Furthermore, we conducted circRNA-ceRNA network pattern analysis to further explore the potential roles of dysregulated circRNAs in AD pathogenesis.
Taken together, our findings may promote a better understanding of the role of circRNAs in the neuropathogenesis of AD.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Animals
Eight-month-old APP/PS1 mice and their age-matched wildtype mice were purchased from Model Animal Research Institute of Myhalic (Wuhan, China).
The mice were housed two per cage under the standard conditions (12 h light/dark cycle at 25 • C and 50 ± 10% relative humidity).
We randomly selected nine animals from each group, three animals for RNA-seq, and six animals for Real-time qPCR.
Animals administered general anesthesia and then collected hippocampal tissue.
Animal care and experimental procedures were implemented according to the document "Guidance Suggestions for Caring for Laboratory Animals" produced by the Ministry of Science and Technology of China in 2006.

RNA Extraction and Qualification
Total RNA was extracted from each hippocampal tissue sample by RNAprep Pure Tissue Kit
Using 1% agarose gels to monitor RNA degradation and contamination.
Then, using the NanoPhotometer R spectrophotometer to check the RNA purity (IMPLEN, CA, United States) and using Qubit R RNA Assay Kit in Qubit R 2.0 Flurometer to measure the RNA concentration (Life Technologies, CA, United States).
Finally, using the RNA Nano 6000 Assay Kit of the Bioanalyzer 2100 system to assess the RNA integrity (Agilent Technologies, CA, United States).

RNA-Seq
Details of the mRNA-seq, miRNA-seq, and circRNA-seq methods are described in Supplementary Materials.

Real-Time qPCR
To validate the RNA-Seq data, we randomly selected 3 of circRNA, miRNA and mRNA for qRT-PCR analysis, respectively.
Total RNA was extracted from each hippocampal tissue sample, and then reverse-transcribed into cDNA using PrimeScript TM RT reagent Kit with gDNA Eraser (Takara, Dalian, China) according to the manufacturer's instruction.
Real-time quantitative PCR (RT-qPCR) was performed using the SYBR R Premix Ex Taq TM II (Tli RNase H Plus) Kit with a Bio-Rad CFX Manager 3.1 real-time PCR system (CFX96 TM Real-Time PCR, Bio-Rad, United States).
The relative circRNA and mRNA expression levels were calculated using the 2 -Ct method and were normalized to GAPDH as an endogenous reference transcript.
miRNA expression levels were normalized to that of U6.
The specific primers for each gene are listed in Supplementary Table
Data shown represent the means of three experiments.

GO Annotations and KEGG Pathway Analyses
Gene Ontology (GO) enrichment analysis of differentially expressed genes was conducted by clusterProfiler, an R package for functional classification and enrichment of gene clusters using hypergeometric distribution.
KEGG is a database resource for understanding high-level functions and utilities of the biological system
We used clusterProfiler R package to test the statistical enrichment of aberrantly expressed circRNAs in KEGG pathways.
GO and KEGG terms with corrected P-value < 0.05 were considered significantly enrichment of aberrantly expressed circRNAs.

Annotation for CircRNA-miRNA-mRNA Interaction
We have selected the differentially expressed circRNA, miRNA and mRNA that have been identified.
CircRNA-miRNA interactions and miRNA-mRNA interactions were predicted with Arraystar's home-made miRNA target prediction software based on TargetScan
The circRNA-miRNA-mRNA network covered two cases: upregulated circRNA-downregulated miRNA-upregulated mRNA, and downregulated circRNAupregulated miRNA-upregulated mRNA.
Then, we constructed circRNA-miRNA-mRNA network using the Cytoscape software V2.7.0 (San Diego, CA, United States).

Statistical Analysis
Statistical analyses were performed using SPSS v16.0 software (SPSS, Inc., Chicago, IL, United States).
All data were expressed as the mean ± SEM. p < 0.05 was statistically significant.

RESULTS

Overview of CircRNA-Seq
A total of 514,529,568 raw reads were generated, 255,871,400 for wild-type (WT) mice, and 258,658,168 for APP/PS1 mice.
Removed poly(N)-containing, low-quality, and adaptorcontaining reads from the raw data, then remained 506,341,272 clean reads including 251,602,810 for wild-type and 254,738,462 for APP/PS1 mice.
The high-quality clean data were mapped to the mouse reference sequence by Hisat2
circRNAs were detected and identified using find_circ and CIRI, 5,683 circRNAs were detected
These circRNAs were used for subsequent analyses.

Overview of miRNA-Seq
A total of
After removal of low-quality and adaptor sequences, 41,501,993 clean reads for WT group and 46,256,666 clean reads for APP/PS1 group were remained.
The reads we selected are mostly based on the length of 21-22 nt in both groups.
These reads were annotated and classified based on previous studies
Finally, 1,351 matured miRNAs (1,275 known and 76 novel) were detected.
These miRNAs were used for the subsequent analysis.

Overview of mRNA-Seq
A total of 267,484,154 raw reads were generated: 135,704,866 for APP/PS1 mice, and 131,779,288 for wild-type mice.
After discarding the reads with adapters, poly-N > 10%, and discarding the low-quality reads.
211,535,266 UMI reads were obtained: 107,820,630 for APP/PS1 mice, and 103,714,636 for wild-type mice.
The clean reads were mapped to the mouse reference genome, and the Dedup2MappedUMI rates were approximately 80.50% for APP/PS1 mice and 85.08% for wild-type mice.
The cufflink results indicated that 57,077 protein-coding transcripts were identified.
These mRNAs were used for the subsequent analysis.

Differential Expression Analysis Between APP/PS1 and Wild-Type Mice
We identified 70 significantly aberrantly expressed circRNAs between APP/PS1 mice and wild-type (WT) mice at 8 months in the hippocampus (p < 0.05), of which 44 circRNAs were upregulated and 26 were downregulated (Table
We performed cluster analysis on the differential circRNA expression and generated a heatmap to visualize the results of the cluster analysis (Figures
Next, we identified 39 significantly aberrantly expressed miRNAs between APP/PS1 mice and WT mice (p < 0.05), of which 16 miRNAs were upregulated and 23 were downregulated (Table
Cluster analysis and heatmapping were performed to show the results of the differential miRNA expression (Figures
Finally, we estimated the expression levels of the mRNA transcripts.
A total of 121 mRNAs were significantly aberrantly expressed between the APP/PS1 mice and the WT mice (p < 0.05), with 34 upregulated mRNAs and 87 downregulated mRNAs (Table
Cluster analysis and heatmapping were  performed to show the results of the differential mRNA expression (Figures
The data showed that the significantly aberrantly expressed circRNAs were scattered across different chromosomes: the 44 upregulated circRNAs were located on 17 chromosomes, and the 26 downregulated circRNAs were located on 15 chromosomes.
The top three chromosomes for the upregulated circRNAs were chromosome (chr.)
5 (4/44), chr.
16 (4/44), and chr.
17 (4/44), while the top two chromosomes for the downregulated circRNAs were chr. 1 (3/26) and chr. 3 (3/26).
As for localization of the dysregulated circRNAs, there were 40 exonic and 4 intronic in the upregulated circRNAs and 25 exonic and 1 intronic in the downregulated circRNAs (Figures

qPCR Confirmation
We used RT-qPCR to confirm the differentially expressed RNAs in our RNA-seq experiments.
We randomly selected three circRNAs, three miRNAs and three mRNAs to perform RT-qPCR.
As shown in Figure
In summary, near consistency was observed between the qPCR results and the RNA-seq data.
Furthermore, we confirmed the differential expression of circRNAs, miRNAs and mRNAs in 8-month-old APP/PS1 mice relative to 2-month-old APP/PS1 mice.
The results showed that mmu_circ_0000672, mmu-miR-344d-3-5p and ENSMUSG00000068129 (Cst7) were significantly different between the hippocampal tissues of 8-month-old APP/PS1 mice and 2-month-old APP/PS1 mice (P < 0.05) (Figure
This

GO and KEGG Analyses
Gene Ontology (GO) analyses were performed on the circRNAs, and the top highly significantly enriched GO terms of the dysregulated circRNAs on biological process (BP) and molecular function (MF) are shown in Figure
The 5 top terms were phosphorus metabolic process (GO: 0006793), phosphatecontaining compound metabolic process (GO: 0006796),   organophosphate metabolic process (GO: 0019637), nucleotide metabolic process (GO: 0009117) and nucleoside phosphate metabolic process (GO: 0006753).
Several metabolic pathwayrelated terms were also observed, such as pyrimidine nucleobase metabolic process (GO: 0006206), ribonucleotide metabolic process (GO: 0009259) and ribose phosphate metabolic process (GO: 0019693).
In summary, the pathological progression of AD may be associated with several metabolic pathways regulated by circRNAs.
In addition, we also performed GO analysis of miRNAs and mRNAs.
Through GO analysis of miRNAs, we found that the 20 top terms enriched in BP, cellular component (CC) and MF were almost all associated with cellular metabolic process, intracellular organelle/part and binding functions (Supplementary Figure
Moreover, GO analysis indicated that the most enriched mRNAs correlated with single-organism developmental process (GO: 0044767), developmental process (GO: 0032502), multicellular organismal development (GO: 0007275), anatomical structure development (GO: 0048856), system development (GO: 0048731), gliogenesis (GO:0042063), extracellular region (GO: 0005576), extracellular region part (GO: 0044421), extracellular space (GO: 0005615) and structural molecule activity (GO: 0005198) (Supplementary Figure
This result indicated that the dysregulated mRNAs were mostly enriched in the cellular/organism development process or cell differentiation.
Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes pathway analysis was performed to determine the signaling pathways related to the dysregulated circRNAs.
By using the Q-value scale from 0 to 1, the top 20 significantly enriched pathways were identified, as shown in Figure
Specifically, the cGMP-PKG signaling pathway, cAMP signaling pathway, axon guidance, platelet activation, LTP, Hippo signaling pathway and phosphatidylinositol signaling system were demonstrated to be closely related to the onset and development of AD.
Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes pathways were associated with dysregulated miRNAs involved in the MAPK signaling pathway, Ras signaling pathway, endocytosis, focal adhesion, axon guidance, neurotrophin signaling pathway and glycerophospholipid metabolism (Supplementary Figure
KEGG pathway analysis of the dysregulated mRNAs identified enrichment in metabolic pathways, protein digestion and absorption, ribosomes, regulation of actin cytoskeleton, PI3K-Akt signaling pathway, platelet activation, spliceosome, tight junction, and the Hippo signaling pathway (Supplementary Figure

Construction of the CircRNA-ceRNA Regulatory Networks
CircRNAs have MREs, which can be used as miRNA sponges to competitively bind miRNAs, thereby inhibiting miRNA targets to mRNA and indirectly regulating mRNA expression.
Based on ceRNA theory, to search for circRNA-miRNA-gene pairs with the same MREs, circRNA-miRNA-gene pairs were constructed with the circRNA as a decoy, the miRNA as the core, and the mRNA as the target to construct a ceRNA regulatory network.
The circRNA-ceRNA network pattern can show the regulation of the circRNA on the related mRNAencoding genes.
Based on the RNA-seq data, we selected 11 dysregulated circRNAs, 7 dysregulated miRNAs and 8 dysregulated mRNAs, and there were 16 relationships contained in the constructed circRNA-miRNA-mRNA regulatory network (Figure
The ceRNA network covered two cases: one was circRNA (7 circRNAs upregulated in APP/PS1 mice)-miRNA (3 miRNAs downregulated in APP/PS1 mice)-mRNA (3 mRNAs upregulated in APP/PS1 mice), and the other was circRNA (4 circRNAs downregulated)-miRNA (4 miRNAs upregulated)-mRNA (5 mRNAs upregulated).
These circRNA-miRNA-mRNA interactions may supply a novel perspective for the pathogenesis of AD.
We observed that one circRNA could interact with different miRNAs and that one miRNA could be regulated by multiple circRNAs; for example, mmu_circ_0000717 could interact with mmu-miR-222-3p, mmu-miR-221-5p, mmu-miR-3102-3p and mmu-miR-344d-3-5p, and mmu-miR-298-3 could co-associate with mmu_circ_0001370, novel_circ_0007425, and novel_circ_0003012.

Verification of the Potential Regulatory Mechanism of circRNAs in the Key Signaling Pathways
Through KEGG analysis, we obtained key regulatory signaling pathways, including the cGMP-PKG signaling pathway, cAMP signaling pathway, and Hippo signaling pathway.
These pathways have been reported to participate in key regulatory roles in neurodegenerative diseases.
We further explored the regulatory effects of the differential expression of circRNAs on the cGMP-PKG signaling pathway, cAMP signaling pathway, and Hippo signaling pathway.
We searched for the differentially expressed circRNAs enriched in the 3 signaling pathways and obtained five circRNAs that might be involved in the cGMP-PKG signaling pathway: novel_circ_0002311, novel_circ_0009273, novel_circ_0003012, novel_circ_0003089, and novel_circ_0001331.
Four circRNAs might be involved in the cAMP signaling pathway: novel_circ_0006299, novel_circ_0003012, novel_circ_0003089, and novel_circ_0001331.
Two circRNAs might be involved in the Hippo signaling pathway: novel_circ_0008567 and mmu_circ_0000585.
We predicted differentially expressed miRNAs that interact with those circRNAs and found that novel_circ_0009273, novel_circ_0003012, novel_circ_0006299, novel_circ_0008567, and mmu_circ_0000585 could target mmu-miR-3074-1-3p, mmu-miR-298-3p, mmu-miR-296-3p, mmu-miR-298-5p, mmu-miR-3074-1-3p, and mmu-miR-669e-5p, respectively.
Through the predictive analysis of miRNA-mRNA interactions, we identified the downstream target mRNAs that might be regulated and constructed a circRNA-ceRNA network related to the three signaling pathways (Figure
Based on the regulatory mechanism of circRNA-ceRNA, we ultimately screened the novel_circ_0003012/mmu-miR-298-3p/Smoc2 signaling axis, which might affect the cGMP-PKG signaling pathway (Figure
We used qPCR to verify the differential expression of these genes, and used WB to verify the level of Smoc2, the results are shown in Figures
Furthermore, we also verified whether the circRNA-ceRNA network affects the cGMP-PKG signaling pathway.
As shown in Figure
Preliminary verification of the regulatory role of the novel_circ_0003012/mmu-miR-298-3p/Smoc2 signaling axis in the pathology of AD showed that it involved the downregulation of PKG.

DISCUSSION
Analyzing the expression profiles of circRNA-ceRNA may provide new insights into our understanding of the pathophysiology of AD.
In our study, we found 70 dysregulated circRNAs, 39 dysregulated miRNAs and 121 dysregulated mRNA between the APP/PS1 group and wild-type group at 8 months in the hippocampus of the mice; 44 circRNAs, 16 miRNAs and 34 mRNAs were upregulated, and 26 circRNAs, 23 miRNAs, and 87 mRNAs were downregulated in APP/PS1 mice relative to their levels in wild-type mice.
Through correlation analysis, we obtained 11 dysregulated circRNAs (7 upregulated circRNAs and 4 downregulated), 7 dysregulated miRNAs (4 upregulated miRNAs and 3 downregulated) and 8 dysregulated mRNAs (3 upregulated mRNAs and 5 downregulated), forming 16 relationships in the circRNA-miRNA-mRNA regulatory network.
Our results showed that the aberrantly expressed circRNAs had miRNA-binding sites and were thus predicted to play a regulatory role via the ceRNA mechanism
These circRNA-miRNA-mRNA regulatory networks may play an important role in the onset and development of AD.
For instance, mmu_circ_0001125 and mmu_circ_0000672 were found to be ceRNAs of mmu-miR-351-5p, which targets Cst7 (ENSMUSG00000068129). Cst7 (cystatin F) encodes an endosomal/lysosomal cathepsin inhibitor that regulates cathepsin activity in the lysosomal pathway
The expression of Cst7 is important in microglia for reducing the phagocytic capacity of activated microglia.
Reducing the expression of Cst7 might promote the clearance of Aβ species through microglia and macrophages
The GO analysis was performed to further annotate the biological functions related to the aberrantly expressed circRNAs.
The top GO terms of the differentially expressed circRNAs were most enriched in biological metabolic processes, such as phosphorus metabolic process, organophosphate metabolic process, nucleotide metabolic process, nucleoside phosphate metabolic process, pyrimidine nucleobase metabolic process, ribonucleotide metabolic process and ribose phosphate metabolic process.
This result indicated that the pathological progression of AD may be associated with several metabolic pathways regulated by circRNAs.
In addition, we also performed GO analysis of miRNAs and mRNAs.
The top terms of miRNAs were almost all associated with cellular metabolic process, intracellular organelle/part and binding functions.
The dysregulated mRNAs were mostly enriched in cellular/organism development processes or cell differentiation.
As the main components of nucleic acids, nucleobases, nucleosides, nucleotides and related phosphorylated metabolites have many important roles as intermediates in biosynthetic pathways in biological systems
There is growing evidence that nucleotide metabolism is involved in pathological mechanisms in many different neurodegenerative diseases, such as Alzheimer's disease.
As
This result indicated that alterations in the metabolism of nucleotides play an important role in the pathological process of AD.
For instance, purinergic signaling plays a critical role in the development of AD.
Studies have demonstrated that adenosine receptors in the frontal cortex of the affected brain are upregulated and that these receptors are redistributed.
Furthermore, these receptors have higher activity in neurons affected by Aβ deposition
In addition, abnormal synthesis or metabolism of pyrimidine nucleotides is also considered to be an important factor in the pathological process of AD, and its disorder can cause dysfunction of the oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) system
The OXPHOS system plays an important role in the mechanism of synaptic failure and neurodegeneration triggered by Aβ
After Aβ deposition, OXPHOS dysfunction appears to be a frequent finding in many AD patients
OXPHOS participates in many cellular processes, and defects in this system affect many biochemical pathways.
One of these biochemical pathways is de novo pyrimidine biosynthesis.
A decrease in the de novo synthesis of pyrimidine nucleotides leads to dysfunction of the OXPHOS system and to the pathogenesis of late-onset AD
Disorders of pyrimidine metabolism, with decreased uridine monophosphate and increased uracil, ultimately lead to synaptic plasticity and neuronal impairment
Several studies have also indicated that oxidative stress is closely related to the abnormal metabolism of purines and pyrimidines in AD
All these results indicate that abnormal nucleotide metabolism is also an important factor in the onset and development of AD.
These circRNAs in the hippocampus of AD mice may play a critical role in the pathological progression of AD by regulating nucleotide metabolism.
Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes analysis showed that the dysregulation of circRNAs was enriched in many signaling pathways, which are closely related to the pathogenesis of AD, including the cGMP-PKG signaling pathway, cAMP signaling pathway, Hippo signaling pathway, platelet activation, LTP and axon guidance.
KEGG pathway analysis of dysregulated miRNAs and mRNAs also identified enrichment in focal adhesion, axon guidance, platelet activation and the Hippo signaling pathway.
In particular, the signaling pathways of miRNA and mRNA enrichment, such as platelet activation, axon guidance and the Hippo signaling pathway, were consistent with the KEGG analysis of circRNAs.
Other studies have also reported that several dysregulated circRNAs in the cerebral cortex of AD mice are enriched in the PI3K-Akt signaling pathway, tight junctions, Hippo signaling pathway, LTP and axon guidance
These results are consistent with our study that the dysregulated circRNAs in the hippocampus of AD mice were also enriched in the Hippo signaling pathway, LTP and axon guidance.
The Hippo signaling pathway, also known as the Salvador/Warts/Hippo (SWH) pathway, is named after the protein kinase Hippo (Hpo) in Drosophila and is a key regulator in the pathway
The Hippo pathway is composed of a series of conserved kinases
Numerous studies have confirmed that the Hippo signaling pathway plays an important role in cell functions.
Hippo signaling activates induced cell death, whereas inactivation of Hippo signaling triggers cell proliferation
A recent study indicated that the Hippo pathway plays an important role in the pathogenesis of AD.
The Hippo pathway affects Aβ42-mediated neurodegeneration due to the excessive activation of Hippo signaling, leading to enhanced Aβ42 toxicity; however, downregulation of the Hippo signaling pathway can rescue Aβ42-mediated neurodegeneration
Interestingly, we also found that the signaling pathways of the cGMP-PKG signaling pathway, cAMP signaling pathway and platelet activation in the hippocampus of AD mice were associated with dysregulated circRNAs in the pathogenesis of AD
Cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) and cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP) are well-established second messengers required for LTP and memory formation and consolidation
Recent evidence indicates that excessive Aβ deposition inhibits both the cAMP and cGMP pathways and impairs LTP signal transduction.
Changes in cAMP signals in specific brain regions may be related to the pathology of dementia.
Reduced cAMP signaling is an important factor in AD pathology.
Increasing cAMP signaling in specific regions of the brain can resist age-related declines in brain function.
Studies have shown that cAMP levels in the hippocampus can be reduced by the overexpression of β-site amyloid precursor protein-cleaving enzyme 1 (BACE1) or the infusion of Aβ 1-42
Furthermore, cAMP-elevating agents can reverse or prevent Aβ-induced hippocampal deficits.
Cyclic guanosine monophosphate-dependent protein kinase (PKG) and the cGMP controller phosphodiesterase are critical participants in the neuroinflammatory process, which may lead to neurological dysfunction, cell death and further neurodegeneration
The increase in cGMP levels decreases the Aβ load in transgenic models of AD and in models of physiological aging
In addition, cGMP-dependent Akt activation and GSK3β inactivation can reduce tau hyperphosphorylation. PKG, as the key downstream target of cGMP, has been reported to be significantly decreased in both the cortex and hippocampus after treatment with Aβ
The cGMP-PKG pathway plays a crucial role in preventing apoptosis and promoting neural cell survival.
It has been shown that the activation of PKG in hippocampal neurons is involved in the LTP induced by NO and carbon monoxide
Inhibition of PKG activity in hippocampal neurons can partially block the prosurvival effects of APP S , suggesting that cGMP, via activation of PKG, mediates the neuroprotective effect of APP S
Our results are consistent with the above research, confirming that the expression of PKG in the hippocampus was obviously decreased in AD mice and that the cGMP-PKG pathway might play an essential role in the pathophysiology of AD.
From the results of the circRNA-ceRNA network constructed on the basis of the differentially expressed circRNAs, miRNAs and mRNAs obtained from the sequencing analysis results and the series of circRNAs predicted by KEGG analysis that are closely related to the cGPM-PKG signaling pathway, we found that the novel_circ_0003012/mmu-miR-298-3p/Smoc2 signaling axis may be closely related to the pathological mechanism of AD.
Through preliminary verification, we found that the differential expression of novel_circ_0003012 and mmu-miR-298-3p may regulate the pathological mechanism of AD by affecting the cGPM-PKG signaling pathway.

CONCLUSION
In summary, we elucidated the circRNA-ceRNA network patterns in the hippocampus of APP/PS1 and WT mice by using deep RNA-seq analysis.
Our findings further expand the current knowledge regarding the biology of circRNA-ceRNA, their involved signaling pathways, such as the dysregulated circRNAs in nucleotide metabolism, cGMP-PKG signaling pathway, cAMP signaling pathway, platelet activation and Hippo signaling pathway, and their regulatory roles in AD pathogenesis.
In addition, our findings preliminarily verified that the novel_circ_0003012/mmu-miR-298-3p/Smoc2 signaling axis may regulate the pathophysiology of AD by affecting the cGMP-PKG signaling pathway.
These newly identified circRNAs in networks and signaling pathways reveal potential diagnostic or therapeutic targets for AD.



FIGURE 1 |
FIGURE 1 | Expression profiles of distinct RNAs.
(A,B) Expression profiles of circRNAs.
(A) In the volcano plots, green, red, and blue points represent circRNAs that were downregulated, upregulated, and not significantly different in 8-month APP/PS1 mice relative to 8-month WT mice.
(B) Cluster analysis of expression of circRNAs.
Red and blue: increased and decreased expression, respectively.
(C,D) Expression profiles of miRNAs.
(C) In the volcano plots, green, red, and blue points represent miRNAs that were downregulated, upregulated, and not significantly different in 8-month APP/PS1 mice relative to 8-month WT mice.
(D) Cluster analysis of expression of miRNAs.
Red and blue: increased and decreased expression, respectively.
(E,F) Expression profiles of mRNAs.
(E) In the volcano plots, green, red, and blue points represent mRNAs that were downregulated, upregulated, and not significantly different in 8-month APP/PS1 mice relative to 8-month WT mice.
(F) Cluster analysis of expression of mRNAs.
Red and blue: increased and decreased expression, respectively.
(G-I) Chromosomal distribution of differentially expressed circRNAs in hippocampal of APP/PS1 mice.
(G) Chromosomal localization of differentially expressed circRNAs in hippocampal of APP/PS1 mice.
(H) Gene localization of upregulated circRNAs in hippocampal of APP/PS1 mice.
(I) Gene localization of downregulated circRNAs in hippocampal of APP/PS1 mice.



FIGURE 2 |
FIGURE 2 | Validation of circRNA, miRNA and mRNAs expression by qPCR.
(A) The expression levels of candidate circRNAs, miRNAs and mRNAs for validation by qPCR in hippocampal tissues of 8-month-old APP/PS1 mice and WT mice.
(B) The expression levels of candidate circRNAs, miRNAs and mRNAs for validation by qPCR in hippocampal tissues of 8-month-old APP/PS1 mice and 2-month-old APP/PS1 mice.
CircRNA and mRNA expression was quantified relative to Gapdh expression level by using the comparative cycle threshold ( CT) method.
MiRNA expression was quantified relative to U6 expression level by using the comparative cycle threshold ( CT) method.
Data are presented as means ± SD (n = 6; *p < 0.05).
(C) The comparison information of the RNA-Seq and qRT-PCR data of 8-month-old APP/PS1 mice vs. WT mice.



FIGURE 3 |
FIGURE 3 | (A) Gene Ontology (GO) Enrichment Annotations of pathological progression of AD: Biological Process (BP) and Molecular Function (MF).
(B) Significantly Enriched Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG).
The aberrantly expressed circRNAs in distinct aspects of AD pathology.



FIGURE 4 |
FIGURE 4 | CircRNA-ceRNA network analysis in hippocampal tissue of APP/PS1 Mice.
The ceRNA networks were based on circRNA-miRNA and miRNA-mRNA interactions.
Circle nodes represent circRNAs, triangle nodes represent miRNAs, and rectangle nodes represent mRNAs.
Red represent upregulated, green represent downregulated.
(A) circRNA (down in APP/PS1 mice)-miRNA (up in APP/PS1 mice)-mRNA (down in APP/PS1 mice).
(B) circRNA (up in APP/PS1 mice)-miRNA (down in APP/PS1 mice)-mRNA (up in APP/PS1 mice).



FIGURE 5 |
FIGURE 5 | Verification of the potential regulation mechanism of circRNAs in the key signaling pathways.
(A) CircRNA-ceRNA network of circRNAs in the key signaling pathways.
Circle nodes represent circRNAs, triangle nodes represent miRNAs, and rectangle nodes represent mRNAs.
Red represent upregulated, green represent downregulated.
(B) The interaction of novel_circ_0003012/mmu-miR-298-3p.
(C) The expression levels of novel_circ_0003012, mmu-miR-298-3p and SMOC2 by qPCR in hippocampal tissues of 8-month-old APP/PS1 mice and WT mice.
CircRNA and mRNA expression was quantified relative to Gapdh expression level by using the comparative cycle threshold ( CT) method.
MiRNA expression was quantified relative to U6 expression level by using the comparative cycle threshold ( CT) method.
Data are presented as means ± SD (n = 6; *p < 0.05).
(D) The expression of Smoc2 by Western blot in hippocampal tissues of 8-month-old APP/PS1 mice and WT mice.
Data are presented as means ± SD (n = 2).
(E) The expression of PKG by Western blot in hippocampal tissues of 8-month-old APP/PS1 mice and WT mice.
Data are presented as means ± SD (n = 3; *p < 0.05).



TABLE 1 |
Differently expressed circRNAs between APP/PS1 and WT mice.



TABLE 1 |
Continued



TABLE 2 |
Differently expressed miRNAs between APP/PS1 and WT mice.



TABLE 3 |
Differently expressed mRNAs between APP/PS1 and WT mice.



TABLE 3 |
Continued



TABLE 3 |
Continued



TABLE 4 |
CircRNA-ceRNA networks in AD.



TABLE 5 |
CircRNA-ceRNA networks in cGMP-PKG, cAMP, and Hippo signaling pathway.