Resting-state posterior alpha rhythms are abnormal in subjective memory complaint seniors with preclinical Alzheimer's neuropathology and high education level: the INSIGHT-preAD study
à la diffusion de documents scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non, émanant des établissements d'enseignement et de recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires publics ou privés.

Introduction
According to the international guidelines for the in vivo diagnosis of Alzheimer's neuropathology in clinical research
Furthermore, Alzheimer's disease (AD) neuropathology can be revealed by both Aβ42 and phosphor-tau in the CSF and tau PET load
The downstream effects of AD neuropathology on structural (i.e., neurodegeneration) and functional brain integrity can be evaluated by (1) structural magnetic resonance imaging (sMRI) of hippocampus and cortical gray matter and (2) 18 F-Fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) of metabolic activity (i.e., quiet wakefulness) in hippocampus and cerebral cortex during the resting state condition
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and FDG-PET markers have shown that in older adults, high education attainment, indexes of intellectual activity in life span, verbal intelligent quotient, and residual variance in episodic memory scores after accounting for brain and demographic variables may represent the so-called "cognitive reserve" (CR), which may be associated with both protective and compensatory mechanisms in relation to pathological brain aging
Neuroprotection mechanisms of CR may maintain a relative structural integrity of brain over age ("brain-maintenance"), whereas compensatory mechanisms may make older adults clinically resilient to extended brain neuropathologies and neurodegeneration
Specifically, compensatory mechanisms of CR may attenuate or annul (i.e., "moderate") the expected linear relationship between structural-functional integrity of the brain and cognitive status in older people.
When CR is depleted, patients' cognitive status may quickly worsen in older adults not only with AD neuropathology
The above findings encourage longitudinal observational studies lasting several years, including serial measurements of brain and cognitive functions in seniors with intact cognitive status and AD patients having various education levels.
However, the repeated recordings of neuroimaging data may be challenging because of their invasiveness and high costs.
Therefore, lower-threshold alternative techniques for brain research are under evaluation.
An interesting low-cost, noninvasive, repeatable over time, and worldwide available candidate technique is the recording and quantitative spectral analysis of scalp electroencephalographic (EEG) rhythms in resting individuals with eyes closed instructed to maintain quiet wakefulness and vigilance for a while, the so-called resting state condition.
In this condition, seniors are asked to remain comfortably seated and relaxed in a silent room, without substantial goal-oriented mentalizations.
The EEG recording typically shows resting state posterior electroencephalographic (rsEEG) oscillatory activity characterized by ample alpha rhythms at 8e12 Hz frequencies distributed in posterior regions of the scalp
These ample alpha rhythms may reflect oscillatory neurophysiological mechanisms of thalamuscortical neural synchronization related to the thalamic gating of neural signals arousing cerebral cortex with a general effect of cortical inhibition of primary and associative cortical areas
In physiological aging, alpha rhythms exhibit a progressive reduction in amplitude in relation to the deterioration in fiber tracts linking cholinergic basal forebrain, thalamus, and visual cortex
This relation has been also corroborated by in vitro studies of thalamocortical alpha rhythms in mice
In pathological aging, previous rsEEG investigations have used low-resistance EEG recordings from 10 to 20 montage system (i.e., 19 scalp electrodes) to demonstrate abnormalities in alpha and other rhythms at different AD stages.
Compared with seniors with intact cognition, AD patients with dementia (ADD) were characterized by lower posterior alpha (8-12 Hz) and beta (13-30 Hz) rhythms
Furthermore, ADD exhibited higher delta (<4 Hz) and theta (4-7 Hz) rhythms widely distributed over the scalp
These abnormalities in rsEEG rhythms were related to genetic disease risk factors, cholinergic therapy, vascular lesions of brain white matter as well as regional cerebral blood flow and atrophy of posterior cortical gray matter and hippocampus
Concerning prodromal AD stages, previous rsEEG investigations also showed that AD patients with mild cognitive impairment (ADMCI) were characterized by abnormally low amplitude of posterior alpha rhythms and higher amplitude of delta-theta rhythms, in association with the mentioned abnormalities in brain structure and alterations in functional connectivity within cortical default mode network
These changes in rsEEG rhythms exhibited some peculiar features when compared with those observed in patients suffering from MCI to dementia because of Parkinson's and Lewy Body diseases
In an earlier AD stage, namely that of subjective memory complaint (SMC), previous rsEEG investigations showed mixed results.
On one hand, it was reported that SMC participants (amyloid deposition in the brain not tested) were characterized by elevated amplitude of alpha rhythms negatively correlated with language and memory scores and positively correlated with reversed digit span scores
In the same line, SMC patients with amyloid deposition in the brain (i.e., preclinical Alzheimer's neuropathology) presented an increase in amplitude of alpha rhythms estimated in medial frontal cortex by magnetoencephalographic (MEG) techniques
On the other hand, other EEG and MEG evidence showed decreased amplitude of posterior alpha rhythms in quiet vigilance.
Compared with a control group of older adults without SMC and cognitive deficits, both SMC and MCI seniors were characterized by lower amplitude of posterior alpha rhythms in rsEEG and rsMEG rhythms in relation to cognitive functions
Furthermore, SMC participants with amyloid deposition in the brain (i.e., preclinical Alzheimer's neuropathology) exhibited higher amplitude of delta-theta rhythms and lower amplitude and frequency of alpha rhythms in relation to clinical worsening over time
The monocentric observational INSIGHT-preAD study reported other relevant evidence.
In that study, SMC seniors were enrolled to investigate optimal biomarkers of AD progression from preclinical stages
The diagnosis of preclinical Alzheimer's neuropathology in SMC (SMCpos) seniors was based on the positivity to SUVR of 18F-florbetapir PET
Up to now, two articles reported the first rsEEG findings of INSIGHT-preAD study.
They are summarized in the following.
In the first study
In the second study
Taken together, the findings of these two INSIGHT-preAD articles suggest that the preclinical Alzheimer's neuropathology may affect rsEEG rhythms in SMC seniors but with unclear consequences on posterior alpha rhythms.
In both articles, effects of the participants' education level were not considered.
In the present retrospective study, we re-analyzed the rsEEG data of the INSIGHT-preAD cohort with the aim to test the hypothesis that SMC seniors with in vivo evidence of Alzheimer's neuropathology, and high education level may show first signs of abnormalities in resting-state posterior alpha rhythms as a neurophysiological counterpart of the picture emerging from the sMRI and FDG-PET evidence reported above.
To ensure the spatial-frequency comparison of the present results with those of our previous rsEEG studies mentioned above
Furthermore, the primary analysis of the study took into account the individual variation of alpha frequency peak in rsEEG rhythms in line with recent reference studies of rsEEG rhythms in older control adults and AD patients

Materials and methods

Participants
Participants were recruited at the Pitié-Salpêtrière University Hospital in Paris, France, in the framework of the INSIGHT-preAD study with the objective to investigate the earliest preclinical stages of AD and its development including influencing factors and markers of disease progression
The INSIGHT-preAD study currently includes baseline data of 318 cognitively normal individuals, between 70 and 85 year old, with SMCs and unimpaired cognition
Demographic, cognitive, functional, nutritional, biological, genetic, genomic, imaging, electrophysiological, and other assessments were performed at baseline (see
No evidence of episodic memory deficit was observed among participants, with a total recall at the Free and Cued Selective Reminding Test in the normal range (mean 46.1 ± 2.0;
SMCs were confirmed by an affirmative answer to both of the following questions: (1) "Are you complaining about your memory?" and (2) "Is it a regular complaint which lasts more than 6 months?".
All experiments were performed with the informed and overt consent of each participant or caregiver, in line with the Code of Ethics of the World Medical Association (Declaration of Helsinki) and the standards established by the local Institutional Review Board.
Local institutional Ethics Committee approved data sharing for scientific purpose.

MRI acquisition
MRI images were acquired using a 3 Tesla scanner with parallel imaging capabilities (Siemens Magnetom Verio, Siemens Medical Solutions, Erlangen, Germany).
A quadrature detection head coil with 12 channels (transmit-receive circularly polarized CP-head coil) was used.
For the anatomical structural study, 3D Turbo-FLASH sequences were performed (orientation sagittal; repetition time 2300 ms; echo time 2.98 ms; inversion time 900 ms; flip angle 9 o ; 176 slices; slice thickness 1 mm; field of view 256 * 240 mm; matrix 256 * 240; bandwidth 240 Hz/Px; see
In this study, we used biomarkers of sMRIs derived in the INSIGHT-preAD cohort in a previous investigation of this Workgroup focused on those biomarkers
Full details of the standard procedures for the computation of the biomarkers reported in the present tables and wording can be found in the original article reporting the results of that investigation

PET data acquisition and processing
PET scans were acquired 50 minutes after injection of 370 MBq (10 mCi) 18 F-florbetapir.
Reconstructed PET images were analyzed with a pipeline developed by the CATI (
sMRI images were co-registered to 18 Florbetapir-PET images using SPM8 with visual inspection to detect any coregistration errors.
Inverse deformation fields and matrix transformation from MRI data processing were used to derive composite cortical regions of interest (ROIs) (left and right precuneus, posterior and anterior cingulate, parietal, temporal, and orbitofrontal cortex; according to
RBV-sGTM method was used to correct for partial volume effect
Parametric PET images were created for each individual, by dividing each voxel with the mean activity extracted from the reference region.
Finally, SUVR values were calculated by averaging the mean activity of all cortical ROIs in the individual PET native space.
To stratify participants into two groups of amyPET-positive (SMCpos) and amyPET-negative (SMCneg), we used the specific SUVR thresholds identified in a previous investigation of this Workgroup focused on those biomarkers
Full details of the procedures for the computation of those thresholds can be found in the original article reporting the results of that investigation
Summarizing, those procedures identified two thresholds, one more conservative (0.88) and the other more liberal (0.79).
The more conservative threshold was used in the previous reference study investigating functional brain connectivity from rsEEG alpha and beta rhythms in the INSIGHT-preAD cohort
The liberal threshold has been adopted for several parallel rsEEG and neuroimaging studies in the INSIGHT-preAD cohort
Therefore, for the present study, we opted for the value of 0.79 for the main rsEEG data analysis.
The statistically significant results of such rsEEG data analysis (p < 0.05 corrected) were, then, cross-validated with that based on the value of 0.88.

EEG recordings
EEG data were recorded while the participants were sitting comfortably and relaxed with eyes closed in a standard resting state condition.
At least 120 seconds of rsEEG (e.g., 2 periods of eyes-closed condition lasting 30 seconds each, intermingled with 2 periods of eyes-open condition) were acquired using a high-density 256-channel EGI system (Electrical Geodesics Inc, Eugene, OR, USA) with a sampling rate of 250 Hz and antialiasing band-pass analogic filtering.
In this EGI system, the electrodes used are sponge-based to have a quick application time (10-20 minutes), ideal for seniors.
Among the 256 electrodes, 224 electrodes cover the whole scalp while the remaining ones are placed on the front, top neck, and the face, allowing the measurement of electro-oculographic and muscular electromyographic (EMG) activity.
The impedances of all scalp electrodes were kept below 50 KOhm.
The reference electrode was placed at Cz site.
A cephalic ground was used.

Spectral and quality analysis of the rsEEG data
An important step of the present methodological approach was to minimize the inter-individual variance of rsEEG rhythms with a procedure able to minimize (1) confounding effects of border electrodes with high impedance; (2) rsEEG data with residual artifacts provoked by head or eye muscle activities; and (3) individual variability in the alpha frequency power peak (i.e., using individual alpha frequency peak, IAFp, as a benchmark;
This goal was reached by a semiautomatic "pruning" procedure of preliminary rsEEG data analysis.
Specifically, the "pruning" procedure was designed (Dr Susanna Lopez and Prof. Claudio Babiloni) and applied by two experts (Dr Susanna Lopez and Dr Claudio Del Percio) of the Group of Sapienza University of Rome to discard individual rsEEG segments, single electrodes, or the whole rsEEG data sets with long periods (>20 seconds) of irremediable artifacts.
To ensure rsEEG recordings of sufficient quality and an optimal comparison with previous rsEEG findings obtained in international projects (e.g., European FP7 IMI project with the short name "PharmaCog" performed in AD patients with amnesic MCI [ADMCI; www.pharmacog.org/]),
we considered only 19 scalp electrodes of the traditional 10-20 montage system (i.e., Fp1, Fp2, F7, F3, Fz, F4, F8, T3, C3, Cz, C4, T4, T5, P3, Pz, P4, T6, O1, and O2) from the whole array available.
According to the mentioned "pruning" procedure, an individual rsEEG data set of the present INSIGHT-preAD database was defined as "artifact freeewith sufficient quality" and usable for the final rsEEG data analysis if it passed the following control steps:
(1) Mathematical removal (detrending) of the slow fluctuation from the recorded scalp rsEEG traces (10-20 electrode montage system) was performed using the popular EEGLAB toolbox (
Afterward, the rsEEG traces (10-20 electrode montage system) were expected to cross the isoelectric lines.
(2) The first visual analysis of the detrended rsEEG traces (10-20 electrode montage system) was performed to discard the rsEEG segments showing instrumental (bad electric contact electrode-scalp) artifacts that were considered as "irremediable" by the two experts working independently.
More than 40 seconds of EEG traces without those "irremediable artifacts" had to be available for the following step;
(3) EEGLAB independent component analysis and removal of the estimated independent components showing residual instrumental or biological (i.e., electrooculographic and EMG) artifacts were performed.
EEGLAB was used to reconstruct rsEEG signals without those artifactual components.
The second visual analysis of the EEG traces (10-20 electrode montage system) served to control the quality of the detrended and reconstructed rsEEG traces without noise-related independent components.
This analysis aimed at discarding rsEEG segments showing residual instrumental or biological artifacts.
The individual rsEEG data sets were accepted for the following step only if they were formed by > 40 seconds of artifact-free EEG activity; (4) For each subject, rsEEG data were re-referenced to the common average among all artifact-free electrodes of 10-20 montage system.
This procedure regenerated the voltage values at Cz used as physical reference electrode during the rsEEG recordings.
Afterward, we used a standard digital fast Fourier transform for the computation of power density spectra from the artifact-free rsEEG traces (Welch technique, Hanning windowing function, no phase shift).
The power density spectra were computed from the artifact-free 2-s rsEEG epochs with 0.5 Hz of frequency resolution and averaged across all these epochs.
Afterward, these rsEEG power density spectra were normalized with the following procedure: the absolute rsEEG power-density mean was calculated averaging the power density values for each electrode (10-20 electrode montage system) and frequency bin from 0.5 to 45 Hz.
Afterward, any absolute rsEEG power density value at a given electrode and frequency bin was divided by the absolute rsEEG power-density mean to obtain the normalized rsEEG power density values.
In these values, one was equal to the absolute rsEEG power density mean across all electrodes and frequency bins.
The operation was repeated for all frequency bins from 0.5 to 45 Hz.
All normalized rsEEG power density spectra of this step were used for the following step.
(5) The third visual analysis of the averaged (normalized) rsEEG power density spectra (10-20 electrode montage system) was performed to discard the individual rsEEG data sets associated with artifactual shapes of those spectra.
Artifactual shapes were defined as characterized by the following features:
• Lack of the physiological decrease of the EEG power density after the IAFp as a function of the increase of the frequencies in the range of 1-40 Hz; • Presence of an offset of power density across all frequencies at some scalp electrodes (especially visible as big differences in gamma rsEEG power density among the ROIs); • Presence of many peaks of high-power density in the range of 1-40 Hz;
• Lack of a visible IAFp in the range between 6 Hz and 14 Hz.
When an rsEEG experiment in participants with normal brain structure and cognitive status is of sufficient quality, a visible IAFp is expected in rsEEG power density spectra at posterior scalp electrodes.
To minimize the probability that the lack of IAFp be because of preclinical AD neuropathology rather than substantial artifacts, we considered only seniors with raw MMSE scores equal or greater an arbitrary value of 28.
The rationale was that even an SMCpos individual with preclinical Alzheimer's neuropathology (but without remarkable abnormalities in sMRIs based as revealed by visual inspection of the medical and radiological staff involved in the formulation of the diagnosis of the present SMC participants) should show a visible IAFp in association with MMSE scores ?_28 and neuropsychological test scores in the normal range.
After this "pruning" procedure, 118 SMCneg and 54 SMCpos seniors with MMSE scores ?_28 and accepted rsEEG data sets were identified for the final data analysis.
Table
In the table, we also report the results of the statistical analyses (p < 0.05) computed to evaluate the presence or absence of statistically significant differences between the two SMC groups for the age, sex, education, MMSE score, and APOE genotype.
As expected, a statistically significant difference was found between the two SMC groups for the APOE genotype ( 2 = 12.3; p < 0.05).
Specifically, there was a higher number of participants with APOE ε4 genotype in the SMCpos than the SMCneg group (p < 0.05).
On the contrary, no statistically significant difference was found for the age, sex, education, and MMSE score between the SMCpos and SMCneg groups (p > 0.05).
The rsEEG frequency bands of interest were individually identified based on the following frequency landmarks: the transition frequency (TF) and the IAFp
The TF marks the transition frequency between the theta and alpha bands defined as the minimum of the rsEEG power density between 3 Hz and 8 Hz (i.e., between the delta and the alpha power peak), whereas the IAFp is defined as the maximum power density peak between 6 Hz and 14 Hz.
The reference values to compute TF and IAFp on individual basis were obtained averaging rsEEG power density across Fz, Cz, Pz, O1, and O2 electrodes, which ensure the recording of scalp EEG signals with low biological noise (e.g., the scalp midline is relatively far from temporal and frontal muscles) and optimal electrical contacts using a standard EEG helmet.
Furthermore, those selected electrodes were especially suitable to record rsEEG rhythms at delta/theta (Fz and Cz) and alpha (Pz, O1, and O2) frequencies in our previous reference field studies
In detail, the following individual frequency bands were used in the present study considering a frequency resolution of 0.5 Hz:
(1) delta from TF -4 Hz to TF -2 Hz;
(2) theta from TF -2 Hz to TF;
(3) alpha 1 from TF to the midpoint of the TF-IAFp range;
(4) alpha 2 from the midpoint of the TF-IAFp range to IAFp;
(5) alpha 3 from IAFp to IAFp +2 Hz.
Table
To clarify the procedure, please consider an example of TF = 4.5 Hz and IAFp = 10 Hz.
The midpoint of the TF-IAF range would be rounded to the nearest 0.5 Hz frequency (= 7.25 Hz, rounded to 7 Hz for alpha 1 and 7.5 Hz for alpha 2).
As a result, the alpha 1 power density would correspond to the mean obtained averaging all frequency bins included between TF and the midpoint of the TF-IAF range, namely 4.5, 5, 5.5, 6, 6.5, and 7 Hz frequency bins.
In the same vein, the alpha 2 power density would correspond to the mean obtained averaging all the frequency bins included between the midpoint of the TF-IAF range and the IAFp, namely 7.5, 8, 8.5, 9, 9.5, and 10 Hz frequency bins.
In the present study, the mean TF was = 5.4 Hz (±0.1 SE) in both SMCneg and SMCpos groups.
The mean IAF was 9.3 Hz (±0.1 SE) in the SMCneg group and 9.4 Hz (±0.1 SE) in the SMCpos group, with the maximum value of IAFp = 11 Hz.
No statistically significant differences between the two groups were observed for both TF and IAFp (t test, p > 0.05).
Fixed beta 1 (13-20 Hz), beta 2 (20-30 Hz), and gamma (30-40 Hz) bands were also considered.
Five ROIs were used considering the frontal, central, parietal, occipital, and temporal electrodes of the traditional 10-20 electrode montage system.
Specifically, these ROIs included, respectively, (1) F3, Fz, and F4 electrodes for the frontal region; (2) C3, Cz, and C4 electrodes for the central region; (3) P3, Pz, and P4 electrodes for the parietal region; and (4) O1 and O2 electrodes for the occipital region; and (5) T3, T4, T5, and T6 for the temporal region

Stratification of the SMC seniors based on the education level
To test the effect of the education level on the present spectral rsEEG markers, we used the education score adopted in the INSIGHT-preAD project
In this score, the level of education ranged from 1 to 8, one being associated with the attendance of the only infant school and eight with the attendance of the highest education level in the population (i.e., bachelor, master's degree, or doctorate).
All the present SMC participants were stratified in 2 subgroups based on this score.
The Edu-participants ranged from 2 to 6 of the education score, which grouped the SMC seniors with low-moderate education level.
Furthermore, the SMC Edu+ participants were characterized by seven or eight of the education score

Statistical analysis of spectral rsEEG power density
Three statistical sessions were performed by the commercial tool STATISTICA 10 (StatSoft Inc, www.statsoft.com)
to test the study hypotheses.
The results (e.g., coefficients and degrees of freedom) were reported using the direct outcome of this tool (p < 0.05).
Owing to the factorial design of the present study, we used the linear general model and analysis of variances (ANOVAs) for the comparison of the rsEEG power density variables between the SMC groups and subgroups.
However, the use of ANOVA models implies that dependent variables approximate Gaussian distributions while rsEEG power density distributions may not fit this feature.
To tackle this issue, we used the following procedure.
The Kolmogorov-Smirnov test was used to determine if the rsEEG power density distributions of a given ANOVA model approximated to Gaussian distributions (null hypothesis of non-Gaussian distributions tested at p < 0.05).
If this was not the case, all rsEEG power density distributions were processed by the log transformation and re-tested.
Such a transformation is a popular method to transform skewed data distribution with all positive values (as rsEEG power density values are) to Gaussian distributions, thus augmenting the reliability of the ANOVA results.
The same procedure was used for the sMRI used as inputs for the comparison between SMC groups.
The outcome of the procedure approximated all rsEEG power density distributions to Gaussian distributions, allowing the use of the ANOVA models.
The same was true for the MRI markers used as inputs for the t-tests.
The first statistical session was performed to test the hypothesis that some sMRI markers typically used in AD research might differ
(1) between the SMCneg and SMCpos groups (p < 0.05 corrected) and (
To these aims, four ANOVAs (p < 0.05) were performed to compare the following four sMRI makers: the normalized gray matter, white matter, and CSF volume (based on the total intracranial volume), as well as the adjusted hippocampal volume (for the procedure to derive these MRI markers, see
The ANOVA factors were education (Edu-and Edu+) and group (SMCneg and SMCpos).
The degrees of freedom were corrected by the Greenhouse-Geisser procedure when appropriate.
Duncan test was used for post hoc comparisons applying a statistical threshold of p < 0.05 corrected for the planned contrasts.
A Bonferroni correction was applied to post hoc solutions for 4 MRI markers (p < 0.05/4 = 0.0125) to evaluate statistically significant differences between the SMCneg and SMCpos groups and for 2 SMC subgroups x 4 MRI markers = 8 (p < 0.05/8 = 0.00625) to evaluate statistically significant differences between the Edu-and Edu+ subgroups.
The study hypothesis may be confirmed by the following effects: (1) a statistically significant main effect of group factor; (2) a statistically significant ANOVA interaction among the factors Edu and group (p < 0.05), and (3) post hoc solutions showing differences between the SMCneg and SMCpos groups (p < 0.0125) and between Edu-and Edu+ subgroups for both SMCneg and SMCpos seniors (p < 0.0025) in the MRI markers.
The second statistical session was performed to evaluate the hypothesis that the posterior rsEEG power density at the individual alpha 2 and alpha 3 bands might differ (1) between the SMCneg and SMCpos groups and (2) between the Edu-and Edu+ subgroups of the SMCneg and SMCpos seniors (p < 0.05 corrected).
To this aim, an ANOVA used the regional spectral rsEEG power density as a dependent variable.
The ANOVA factors were education (Edu-and Edu+), group (SMCneg and SMCpos), band (delta, theta, alpha 1, alpha 2, alpha 3, beta 1, beta 2, and gamma), and ROI (frontal, central, parietal, occipital, and temporal).
The APOE genotype was used as a covariate.
The degrees of freedom were corrected by the Greenhouse-Geisser procedure when appropriate.
Duncan test was used for post hoc comparisons using a statistical threshold of p < 0.05 corrected for the planned contrasts.
In line with previous results obtained in ADMCI and AD patients with dementia
In the above statistical sessions, Bonferroni correction was applied based on the following computation: (1) 2 frequency bands x 5 ROIs = 10 (p < 0.05/10 = 0.005) and (2) 2 SMC groups (SMCneg, SMCpos) x 2 frequency bands x 5 ROIs = 20 (p < 0.05/ 20 = 0.0025).
In this line, the study hypotheses may be confirmed by: (1) a statistically significant ANOVA interaction among the factors group, band, and ROI (p < 0.05); (2) a statistically significant ANOVA interaction among the factors Edu, group, band, and ROI (p < 0.05); and (3) post hoc solutions showing differences (1) between the SMCneg and SMCpos groups (p < 0.005) and (
Noteworthy, the significant effects of this statistical analysis were controlled by the iterative (leave-one-out) Grubbs' test detecting for the presence of one or more outliers in the distribution of the regional rsEEG power density computed in the Edu-and Edu+ individuals for both SMCneg and SMCpos groups (null hypothesis of non-Gaussian distributions tested at the arbitrary threshold of p < 0.001, to remove only individual values with high probability to be outliers and maintain the random sampling of the SMC population with the rsEEG features described above).
The third statistical session was performed to correlate two relevant neuropsychological scores to the posterior alpha 2 and alpha 3 power density across the SMCpos and SMCneg groups considered separately (p < 0.05 corrected).
The selected neuropsychological variables were the MMSE score (as a rough index of global cognition) and the duration of delayed copy of Rey figure (30 minutes; as an index of episodic memory performance).
As a composite rsEEG marker, the posterior alpha power density was calculated as the mean of parietal, occipital, and temporal alpha power density values.
Spearman test was used for the correlation of EEG variables with MMSE scores, while Pearson test was used for the correlation with scores of Copy of Rey Figure test.
A Bonferroni correction was applied equal to 2 neuropsychological scores x 2 frequency bands = 4 (p < 0.05/4 = 0.0125).

Results

Characterization of brain structural integrity in the SMCneg and SMCpos groups and effect of education
Table
Four ANOVAs were performed having these MRI markers as dependent variables and group (SMCneg, SMCpos) and education (Edu-, Edu+) as factors.
The results of the comparison of these markers between the SMCneg and SMCpos groups (Bonferroni corrected: p < 0.0125) and between the Edu+ and Edu-subgroups (Bonferroni corrected: p < 0.00625) are reported in the following.
A statistically significant main effect of the group factor was found only for the adjusted hippocampal volume (F[1, 143]=7.7,
p < 0.007), which was lower in the SMCpos than the SMCneg group.
Furthermore, there was a statistical trend in the main effect of the group factor for the normalized CSF volume.
Specifically, there was a larger normalized CSF volume in the SMCpos than the SMCneg group (p < 0.05 uncorrected).
No statistically significant difference or trends were found between the Edu-and Edu+ subgroups (p > 0.00625).

Quality control of the regional alpha power density spectra
Fig.
In both groups, the posterior (i.e., parietal, temporal, and occipital) regional rsEEG power density spectra were characterized by well-shaped alpha peaks and other benchmark features of rsEEG recordings of sufficient quality such as (1) visible TFs; (2) drop of rsEEG power density values as a function of the increase of rsEEG frequencies after alpha power density peaks; (3) no significant power density offsets at gamma frequencies in some ROIs; and (4) no multiple rsEEG power density peaks in the spectra.

Comparisons in the regional alpha power density between the SMCneg and SMCpos groups and effect of education
Fig.
Compared with the SMCneg group, the SMCpos group exhibited similar magnitude in the rsEEG power density across the spectra.
No statistically significant effect was produced by the ANOVA (p > 0.05) including the factors group (SMCneg, SMCpos), band (delta, theta, alpha 1, alpha 2, beta 1, beta 2, and gamma), and ROI (frontal, central, parietal, occipital and temporal).
The ANOVA showed a statistically significant 3-way interaction effect (F (28, 4704) = 2.5, p < 0.00005) among the factors group (SMCneg, SMCpos), education (Edu-, Edu+), band (delta, theta, alpha 1, alpha 2, beta 1, beta 2, and gamma), and ROI (frontal, central, parietal, occipital and temporal).
The Duncan planned post hoc test (p < 0.0025, equivalent to p < 0.05 corrected) showed that compared with the SMCpos Edu-subgroup, the SMCpos Edu+ subgroup pointed to (1) lower occipital alpha 2 power density (p < 0.000005) and (2) higher temporal alpha 3 power density (p < 0.0001).
Opposite effects of the education level were observed in the SMCneg seniors.
Compared with the SMCneg Edu-subgroup, the SMCneg Edu+ subgroup exhibited higher parietal (p < 0.00001), occipital (p < 0.000005), and temporal (p < 0.00001) alpha 2 power density as well as higher parietal (p < 0.0001), occipital (p < 0.000005), and temporal (p < 0.0001) alpha 3 power density.
The above effects of the education level were because of neither the presence of outliers (statistical threshold of Grubbs' test at p < 0.001; Fig.
In the results of this last section, the most statistically significant effects of the education level were observed for the occipital alpha 2 power density in both SMCneg and SMCpos subgroups (p < 0.000005).
Therefore, we tested the hypothesis that the education level may be related to differences in the following relevant variables between the SMCneg and SMCpos subgroups: immediate copy of Rey figure, delayed copy of Rey figure (30 minutes), MRI markers of occipital thickness, and occipital 18F-florbetapir PET SUVR.
Specifically, the following comparisons were performed for the above neuropsychological, MRI, and PET variables separately: SMCneg Edu-versus SMCneg Edu+ and SMCpos Edu-versus SMCpos Edu+ (t test at p < 0.00625, equivalent to p < 0.05 corrected for eight comparisons).
In the SMCneg subgroups, the only remarkable effect was a statistical trend in the delayed copy of the Rey figure (p <0.05 uncorrected), indicating a better score in the SMCneg Edu+ subgroup compared with the SMCneg Edu-sub-group.
In the SMCpos subgroups, no statistically significant effect was observed (p > 0.1 uncorrected).

Correlation between posterior alpha power density and neuropsychological scores in the SMCneg and SMCpos groups
In the SMCneg seniors, there was a statistically significant (p < 0.0125 equivalent to p < 0.05 corrected) positive correlation between the posterior alpha 2 power density and the MMSE score (r = 0.23, p = 0.01).
The higher the alpha 2 power density, the higher the MMSE score.
In the same seniors, just a trend (p <0.05 uncorrected) was observed in the positive correlation between the posterior alpha 3 power density and the MMSE score (r = 0.21, p = 0.02).
No statistically significant effect was produced by the ANOVA design (p > 0.05) using the factors group, band, and ROI.
Abbreviations: ANOVA, analysis of variance.
In the SMCpos seniors, there was no statistically significant correlation between the posterior alpha 2 and alpha 3 power density and the MMSE score (p > 0.7).
Finally, no statistically significant correlation was found between the posterior alpha power density and the score of delayed Copy of Rey Figure test (p > 0.1 for SMCneg and p > 0.7 for SMCpos seniors).
3.5.
Cross-validation of the statistically significant rsEEG results using the 18F-florbetapir PET SUVR threshold of 0.88 A cross-validation analysis was performed to evaluate whether the above effects of the education level on the regional rsEEG power density, based on a 18 F-florbetapir PET SUVR threshold of 0.79, was confirmed using the more conservative 18 F-florbetapir PET SUVR threshold of 0.88.
The latter was used in the quoted study investigating functional brain connectivity from rsEEG alpha and beta rhythms in the INSIGHT-preAD cohort
In this cross-validation analysis, the SMC seniors were grouped as follows: The ANOVA and Duncan post hoc tests evaluating the effects of the education level on the regional rsEEG power density showed the same effects of the principal analysis, so cross validating its results.
Specifically, there was a statistically significant 3-way interaction effect (F[28, 4676] = 2.6, p < 0.00001) among the factors education (Edu-, Edu+), group (SMCneg, SMCpos), band (delta, theta, alpha 1, alpha 2, beta 1, beta 2, and gamma), and ROI (frontal, central, parietal, occipital and temporal).
The Duncan planned post hoc test (p < 0.0025, equivalent to p < 0.05 corrected as in the principal analysis) showed that compared with the SMCpos Edu-subgroup, the SMCpos Edu+ subgroup pointed to lower parietal (p < 0.00005) and occipital (p < 0.000005) alpha 2 power density.
Opposite effects were observed in the SMCneg subgroups.
Compared with the SMCneg Edu-subgroup, the SMCneg Edu+ subgroup exhibited higher parietal (p < 0.0001), occipital (p < 0.000005), and temporal (p < 0.00001) alpha 2 power density as well as occipital (p < 0.00001) and temporal (p < 0.0001) alpha 3 power density.
The above effects were not because of the presence of outliers (statistical threshold of Grubbs' test at p < 0.001).

Control analysis
As a secondary (control) cross-validation rsEEG analysis, we used a data driven approach without constraints in a priori frequency bands (i.e., delta to gamma) and scalp regions of interest (i.e., occipital to frontal lobes).
For this analysis, we used a Fieldtrip software plugin
The original plugin implements a nonparametric Monte Carlo method using a statistical permutation by which the significance probability returned by the randomization test is a Monte Carlo estimate of the p-value under the permutation distribution
To address the problem of multiple comparisons for EEG frequencies and electrodes, cluster-correction statistics were chosen, based on clustering of adjacent time or frequency-samples exhibiting similar differences
Cluster-based correction within the sensor and frequency dimensions was applied by defining clusters through the selection of neighboring electrodes with the triangulation method (based on a 2D projection of the sensor positions) and taking the maximum of the cluster-level statistics (a cluster-level statistic is equal to the sum of the sample-specific t-statistics that belong to this cluster;
The threshold of the corrected p value was set to 0.05.
As an add-on variant of the original plugin (not available on default options), we implemented the normalization of power density estimates before the mentioned statistical analysis.
This normalization was done by an external MATLAB scrip integrated with the study tool available in the EEGLAB package.
This script normalized EEG power density estimates by the mean value of EEG power density evaluated across all electrodes and frequency bins from 0.5 to 45 Hz.
Unfortunately, this secondary (control) analysis could not take into account the individual variation of alpha frequency peak (i.e., IAFp), not implemented in the Fieldtrip toolbox used.
In the secondary (control) analysis, two statistical sessions were performed.
The first session compared the EEG (normalized) power density between Edu-and Edu+ subgroups in the SMCpos seniors, whereas the second session compared it between the Edu-and Edu+ subgroups in the SMCneg seniors.
Results of this analysis were as follows.
After the permutation test, no statistically significant effect was observed in the first session (p > 0.05 corrected).
In contrast, one statistically significant effect was observed in the second session (p < 0.05 corrected).
Compared with the SMCneg group with Edu-, the SMCneg group with Edu+ showed higher (normalized) alpha power density at T5 electrode (i.e., left temporal region) from 4 to 17 Hz (p < 0.05 corrected), namely an effect centered around 10 Hz (alpha).
For illustrative purposes, Fig.
The results of this analysis were also represented in Overall, these results are consistent with those reported in the main analysis showing greater normalized power density at temporal alpha rhythms in the SMCneg Edu+ subgroup compared with the SMCneg Edu-(middle) subgroup.

Discussion
In previous investigations, abnormalities in posterior rsEEG rhythms were reported in ADMCI and ADD compared with seniors with intact cognition
These previous findings made posterior alpha rhythms an interesting marker to test the effect of high education attainment in preclinical AD stages.
In this line, the present retrospective study tested the hypothesis that abnormalities of those alpha rhythms may characterize SMC seniors with preclinical Alzheimer's neuropathology (SMCpos) as a function of the education level.

Resting state alpha rhythms do not change in SMCpos seniors as a whole
Compared with the SMCneg, the SMCpos showed neither differences in posterior alpha rhythms nor in the other frequency bands.
These findings were found with the more liberal 18 F-flor-betapir PET SUVR threshold at 0.79 and were confirmed with the one at 0.88 (not shown).
Therefore, the present results do not extend to the present whole group of SMCpos seniors the abnormalities in posterior alpha rhythms previously reported in ADMCI and ADD
As such, the present results agree with the evidence of two previous rsEEG studies performed in the INSIGHT-preAD cohort
In the first rsEEG study
The rsEEG-dependent variables included markers of power density, phase lag index, and spectral coherence computed from 70 selected scalp electrodes.
The fixed frequency bands were delta (2-3.9
Hz), theta (4-7.3
Hz), low alpha (7.5-9.75
Hz), high alpha (10.25-12.5 Hz), beta (13-30 Hz), and gamma (31-49 Hz).
Results showed no statistical associations between global 18 F-florbetapir PET SUVR and those EEG variables in the whole group of SMC seniors.
However, when only SMCpos seniors were considered, there was a statistical trend (noncorrected for statistical comparisons) for higher global 18 F-florbetapir PET SUVR and lower functional connectivity (phase lag index) of parietal and temporal alpha and beta rhythms.
In the second rsEEG study
The rsEEG dependent variables at single electrodes included power density, median spectral frequency, spectral entropy measure, and signal complexity estimates based on information theory.
Another information-theoretic measurement estimated the interdependence of rsEEG rhythms at pairs of electrodes (i.e., one electrode against all the others).
The fixed frequency bands of interest were delta (1-4 Hz), theta (4-8 Hz), alpha (8-12 Hz), beta (12-30 Hz), and gamma
Results showed that positivity to the 18 F-florbetapir PET SUVR (i.e., indicative of Alzheimer's neuropathology) and rsEEG variables had a nonlinear relationship, namely a U-shape curve with delta power density and inverted U-shape with beta, gamma, median spectral frequency, spectral entropy, and complexity more obvious for intermediate to very high amyloid load individuals.
As mentioned above, amyloid burden did not show noticeable effects on alpha, and the association between FDG-PET and alpha was not clear.
Taken together, the results of the two previous INSIGHT-preAD studies
The above lack of effects may not be because of unfavorable signal-to-noise ratio in the rsEEG data or interindividual variability in alpha frequencies.
Indeed, here we implemented and use the following ad hoc procedure to tackle those confounders (see Methods), which produced final rsEEG power density spectra with the following benchmarks of good quality: (1) posterior regional rsEEG power density spectra with well-shaped TF and alpha peaks;
(2) rsEEG power density values progressively dropping after the alpha peak in the frequency range; and (3) no remarkable offset in the rsEEG power density at gamma frequencies in the temporal and frontal ROIs (such offset is typically induced by EMG artifacts because of head and neck muscle tensions).

Resting state alpha rhythms do change in SMC seniors with high education level
As a novelty, here we report that compared with the SMCpos and SMCneg seniors with low-moderate education level, those with high education level (i.e., bachelor, master's degree or PhD title) exhibited significant changes in amplitude of alpha rhythms in posterior areas of the scalp.
This effect was obtained with both relevant 18F-florbetapir PET SUVR thresholds (0.79 and 0.88) in the stratification of SMC individuals and may be specific in frequency.
In fact, the other rsEEG frequency bands including delta and theta exhibited no significant effects.
Furthermore, differences in alpha rhythms did not depend on cognitive status and abilities of daily living as the subgroups were carefully matched for those variables.
More specifically, results showed that posterior alpha rhythms were (beneficially) higher in amplitude in the SMCneg senior sub-group (i.e., without preclinical Alzheimer's neuropathology) with high over low-moderate education level.
This difference might unveil a neuroprotective effect of the high education level on neurophysiological oscillatory mechanisms modulating dominant alpha rhythms in quiet vigilance, when AD neuropathology is not challenging the brain and CR may be still available.
In this line, previous sMRI evidence showed that SMC seniors with high over low education level were characterized by larger cortical thickness
Noteworthy, this neuroprotective effect may resist in temporal cortex even for a certain load of Alzheimer's neuropathology.
Indeed, the present SMCpos senior subgroups (i.e., with preclinical Alzheimer's neuropathology) showed a similar effect in temporal areas.
Specifically, comparing with the SMCpos senior subgroup with low-moderate education level that with high education level showed greater amplitude in temporal alpha rhythms.
At this early stage of the research, it was unclear why this effect may be limited to temporal cortical areas possibly generating those rhythms.
Future studies should test if the well-known high metabolic rate of neurons in medial temporal cortex and hippocampus may play a role in explaining the present findings.
In the SMCpos seniors (i.e., with preclinical Alzheimer's neuropathology), the picture was quite different in occipital areas.
In fact, occipital alpha rhythms showed lower (not higher) amplitude in the SMCpos seniors with high over low-moderate education level.
Noteworthy, this effect was not associated with greater occipital atrophy, occipital amyloid-β accumulation, and worse scores in the Rey figure copy (visual function).
The present results in the SMCpos seniors complement previous neuroimaging evidence in AD patients.
In sMRI studies carried out in ADMCI, a high CR (i.e., years of education, reading, and vocabulary measures, etc.) was associated with the following findings: (1) reduced cortical thickness values and later progression to dementia
(2) decreased left hippocampus volume and cortical thickness in the right supramarginal gyrus
In ADD, high education level was related to smaller regional cortical thickness in frontal, temporal, and parietal association areas in one sMRI study
In the same line, previous FDG-PET studies of resting-state neuronal metabolic activity unveiled that a high education level was related to hypometabolism in temporo-parietal and ventral prefrontal brain areas in seniors with intact cognition and AD preclinical neuropathology
Interestingly, a significant Alzheimer's disease neuroimaging initiative study showed that the education level might not predict amyloidβ deposition or brain metabolism rate in ADMCI, so the CR might not affect the progression in the Alzheimer's neuropathology
Keeping in mind the above data and considerations, we posit that the present amplitude reduction in occipital alpha rhythms in SMCpos seniors with high education level might be because of altered synchronization mechanisms in neural circuits impinging upon thalamic nuclei and posterior sagittal cortex before the appearance of substantial local AD neurodegeneration and cognitive deficits.
This lack of consequences of the alterations in alpha rhythms may be because of a compensatory residual brain reserve factor represented in those circuits, including posterior nodes of default mode network.
According to previous functional MRI studies in healthy older adults
Therefore, such an increase of functional connectivity may enhance the efficiency of those networks not only in frontal but also posterior cortical areas, attenuating the positive relationship between AD neuropathology-neurodegeneration and clinical manifestation of the disease typically observed in AD patients with low education attainment
At this early stage of the research, we do not know the relationship among amyloid-β deposition in the brain, the mentioned decrease in amplitude of occipital alpha rhythms dominant in quiet wakefulness, and brain correlates of high education level in SMC seniors with Alzheimer's neuropathology.
It can be speculated that such an amyloid-β deposition may induce thalamus-cortical overexciting synchronization signals reflected by the reduction of dominant occipital alpha rhythms in quiet wakefulness (those rhythms mainly underpin inhibition of cortical primary and associative sensory areas in the experimental conditions of absence of sensory stimulations as resting state is;
This speculation is based on the following data and considerations.
Previous studies have shown that posterior alpha rhythms in quiet wakefulness were lower in amplitude in MCI patients positive over negative to AD markers of Aβ42 and phospho tau in the CSF
Furthermore, increased cortical neuronal hyperactivity and excitability generating epileptiform activity may be associated with earlier clinical onset of AD and faster disease progression
In the same line of "overexcitation" hypothesis, transgenic mouse models of AD with APP and/or PS1 mutations showed brain amyloid plaque deposition and neurodegeneration, cognitive deficits, alterations in on-going dominant EEG oscillatory activity recorded in quiet wakefulness, and epileptiform activity

Methodological remarks
In the interpretation of the present findings, the following methodological limitations should be considered.
This retrospective study was based on data collected by the only French clinical unit involved in the INSIGHT-preAD project.
As such, the study ensured the maximum methodological consistency in the SMC seniors' enrollment and data collection.
However, the study results will require cross-validation by a multicenter clinical trial with independent and "harmonized" clinical units.
Owing to the intense experimental plan, just 1 minute of rsEEG recordings at eyes closed was available.
Results of the present study encourage investments for future rsEEG recordings lasting some minutes in the continuation of the INSIGHT-preAD project.
The topographical analysis of rsEEG rhythms has been done using only 19 scalp electrodes of traditional 10-20 montage system to ensure the best control of EEG signal and comparability of the present findings with those of previous rsEEG studies carried out in AD patients by the Authors
As a rationale of this methodological option, a bulk of previous studies showed that (eyes closed) rsEEG rhythms are characterized by low-frequency spatial contents well sampled by 10-20 montage system.
Indeed, they are formed by a sequence of short (i.e., few seconds), quasi-stable topographical patterns of EEG voltage maps with large centroids of voltage positive and negative maxima (several centimeters), the socalled brain electrical microstates
Abnormalities in the mentioned microstates may be associated with alterations in a set of distributed cortical neural networks spanning frontal, parietal, temporal, occipital, and limbic areas
Keeping in mind these data and considerations, we think that the present topographical analysis of rsEEG rhythms could successfully account for (1) subject-wise individual features of posterior alpha rhythms in quiet wakefulness, generated by distributed neural networks, and (2) spatial abnormalities in posterior alpha rhythms detected in AD patients even at the disease stage of SMC in relation to the education attainment, in line with a recent position paper of Electrophysiology Professional Interest Area of International Alzheimer's Association

Conclusions
In the present study, we tested whether SMC seniors associated with Alzheimer's neuropathology (SMCpos) and high education level may present abnormal resting state posterior rsEEG rhythms at alpha (8e12 Hz) frequencies, as predicted by the general theory of the CR
The SMCneg participants with high (over low-moderate) education level showed the higher amplitude of posterior alpha rhythms (possibly "neuroprotective").
Furthermore, the SMCpos participants with high (over low-moderate) education level showed the higher amplitude of temporal alpha rhythms (possibly "neuroprotective") and lower amplitude of posterior alpha rhythms (possibly "compensatory").
This effect may reflect CR as no differences in brain gray-white matter and cognitive functions were observed between these SMCpos/SMCneg subgroups.
Overall, preclinical Alzheimer's neuropathology may interact with education attainment and neurophysiological mechanisms generating cortical alpha rhythms in quiet wakefulness.
These results and conclusions motivate future multicenter studies in SMCpos seniors using harmonized protocols and data collection hardware for the cross-validation of the present findings.
Those studies may test the hypothesis that as a function of the high education level, posterior alpha rhythms in quiet wakefulness may provide useful first-level biomarkers in prevention programs developed in SMC seniors to undergo to more invasive or expensive diagnostic procedures of AD, especially in lower-income and middle-income countries and underserved populations.

Disclosure statement
None of the authors has relevant conflicts of interest to disclose.

CRediT authorship contribution statement



Fig. 1 .
Fig.1.
Mean values (± standard error mean, SE) of power density in normalized resting state eyes-closed electroencephalographic (rsEEG) rhythms in seniors with subjective memory complaint (SMC) found to be amyloid-negative (SMCneg) and amyloid-positive (SMCpos) to the marker of Alzheimer's neuropathology derived from 18 F-florbetapir positron emission tomography (amyPET).
These data are ordered for (1) two groups (SMCneg and SMCpos seniors), (2) five regions of interest (ROIs) of the scalp (frontal, central, parietal, occipital, and temporal), and (3) eight frequency bands of rsEEG rhythms (delta, theta, alpha 1, alpha 2, alpha 3, beta 1, beta 2, and gamma).
No statistically significant effect was produced by the ANOVA design (p > 0.05) using the factors group, band, and ROI.
Abbreviations: ANOVA, analysis of variance.



Fig. 2 .
Fig. 2. Mean values (± SE) of normalized rsEEG power density for (1) two groups (SMCneg and SMCpos seniors), (2) two education levels (Edu+ and Edu-), (3) five ROIs (frontal, central, parietal, occipital, and temporal), and (4) eight frequency bands (delta, theta, alpha 1, alpha 2, alpha 3, beta 1, beta 2, and gamma).
The ANOVA showed a statistically significant 3-way interaction effect (F [28, 4676] = 2.5, p < 0.00005) among the factors group, education, band, and ROI.
The rectangles indicate the scalp regions and frequency bands in which the rsEEG power density presented statistically significant pattern: Edu+ s Edu-in the SMCneg and SMCpos senior groups (Duncan post hoc test, p < 0.05 corrected for multiple comparisons = p < 0.0025; see "Methods" for the criterion of such correction).
Abbreviations: rsEEG, resting state eyes-closed electroencephalographic; SMC, subjective memory complaint; ROIs, regions of interest; ANOVA, analysis of variance.



Fig. 3 .
Fig.3.
Individual values of the normalized rsEEG power density showing statistically significant (p < 0.05 corrected for multiple comparisons = p < 0.0025) differences between the groups of SMCpos and SMCneg seniors stratified according to the high (Edu+) or low (Edu-) educational level (i.e., parietal alpha 2, occipital alpha 2, temporal alpha 2, parietal alpha 3, occipital alpha 3, and temporal alpha 3).
Noteworthy, the Grubbs' test showed no outliers from those individual values of the normalized rsEEG power densities (arbitrary threshold at p < 0.001; see "Methods" for the criterion of such correction).
Abbreviations: rsEEG, resting state eyes-closed electroencephalographic; SMC, subjective memory complaint.


Fig. 5.
This Figure plots the rsEEG (normalized) power density spectra from 0.5 to 45 Hz at T5 electrode in the SMCneg Edu+ (left) and Edu-(middle) subgroups.
It also plots a diagram showing the frequency range from 4 to 17 Hz in which the two rsEEG (normalized) power density spectra differed (p < 0.05 corrected).



Fig. 4 .
Fig. 4. Topographical maps of the normalized spectral rsEEG power density computed from 19 electrodes of 10-20 system in the SMCneg Edu+ (left) and Edu-(middle) subgroups of older adults.
The computation was performed at 9.5 Hz (upper row) and 10 Hz (lower row) frequency bins, which were those expressing the most statistically significant differences between the two subgroups (red color indicates higher values of spectral power density).
Right column reports the topographical maps with p values (uncorrected) computed through a Monte Carlo permutation test assessing the statistical differences in alpha power density between the SMCneg Edu-and Edu+ subgroups (red color indicates lower p-values).
(For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the Web version of this article.)
Abbreviations: rsEEG, resting state eyesclosed electroencephalographic; SMC, subjective memory complaint.



Fig. 5 .
Fig. 5.
The left and middle panels plot individual normalized rsEEG power density spectra (blue lines) computed at T5 electrode of 10-20 system in the SMCneg Edu+ and Edusubgroups of older adults in the frequency range from 0.5 to 45 Hz.
In those panels, the normalized spectral rsEEG power density values averaged across all individuals within each subgroup (black thick lines) are also plotted.
The right panel graphically indicates the frequency bins showing statistically significant differences (p < 0.05 corrected) in rsEEG power density between the two SMCneg subgroups of older adults (those significant frequencies meet the gray rectangle).
(For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the Web version of this article.)
Abbreviations: rsEEG, resting state eyes-closed electroencephalographic; SMC, subjective memory complaint.


Claudio Babiloni: Conceptualization, Methodology, Formal analysis, Validation, Writing -original draft, Supervision, Writing -review & editing.
Susanna Lopez: Conceptualization, Methodology, Formal analysis, Validation, Writing -original draft, Supervision, Writingreview & editing.
Claudio Del Percio: Formal analysis, Software, Writing -review & editing.
Giuseppe Noce: Formal analysis, Software, Writing -review & editing.
Maria Teresa Pascarelli: Formal analysis, Software, Writing -review & editing.
Roberta Lizio: Formal analysis, Software, Writing -review & editing.
Stefan J. Teipel: Investigation, Data curation, Project administration, Writingreview & editing.
Gabriel González-Escamilla: Investigation, Data curation, Project administration, Writing -review & editing.
Hovagim Bakardjian: Investigation, Data curation, Project administration, Writing -review & editing.
Nathalie George: Investigation, Data curation, Project administration, Writing -review & editing.
Enrica Cavedo: Investigation, Data curation, Project administration, Writing -review & editing.
Simone Lista: Investigation, Data curation, Project administration, Writing -review & editing.
Patrizia Andrea Chiesa: Investigation, Data curation, Project administration, Writing -review & editing.
Andrea Vergallo: Investigation, Data curation, Project administration, Writing -review & editing.
Pablo Lemercier: Investigation, Data curation, Project administration, Writing -review & editing.
Giuseppe Spinelli: Investigation, Data curation, Project administration, Writing -review & editing.
Michel J. Grothe: Investigation, Data curation, Project administration, Writing -review & editing.
Marie-Claude Potier: Investigation, Data curation, Project administration, Writing -review & editing.
Fabrizio Stocchi: Investigation, Data curation, Project administration, Writing -review & editing.
Raffaele Ferri: Investigation, Data curation, Project administration, Writing -review & editing.
Marie-Odile Habert: Investigation, Data curation, Project administration, Writing -review & editing.
Francisco J.
Fraga: Formal analysis, Software, Writing -review & editing.
Bruno Dubois: Investigation, Data curation, Project administration, Writing -review & editing.
Harald Hampel: Investigation, Data curation, Project administration, Writing -review & editing.


the presence or absence of statistically significant differences between the Edu-and Edu+ subgroups for both SMCneg and SMCpos seniors as age (t-test), sex (Fisher test), education (t-test), MMSE score (Mann-Whitney U test), and APOE genotype (X 2 test).
As expected, and based on the stratification criterion, a statistically significant difference in education was unsurprisingly found between the Edu-and Edu+ subgroups for both SMCneg and SMCpos seniors considered separately (p < 0.00001).
On the contrary, no statistically significant difference was found for the age, sex, MMSE score, and APOE genotype between the Edu-and Edu+ subgroups for both SMCneg and SMCpos seniors considered separately (p > 0.05).



Table 2
Mean values (± standard error mean, SE) of the demographic, neuropsychological, and genetic data, together with the results of their statistical comparisons (p < 0.05) in the groups of SMCpos and SMCneg seniors stratified according to the high (Edu+) or low (Edu-) educational level



Table 3
Mean values (± SE) of the structural magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) markers, together with the results of their statistical comparisons (p < 0.05) in the SMCpos and SMCneg senior groups and the Edu-and Edu+ subgroups : CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; n.s., not significant (p > 0.05 corrected for multiple comparisons); ANOVA, analysis of variance.


63 SMCneg Edu-(15 male; mean age: 76.5 years; mean education level: 4.3; mean MMSE score: 28.7), 71 SMCneg Edu+ (31 male; mean age: 75.3 years; mean education level: 7.8; mean MMSE score: 29.0), 21 SMCpos Edu-(7 male; mean age: 76.6 years; mean education level: 4.0; mean MMSE score: 28.6), and 17 SMCpos Edu+ (10 male; mean age: 76.2 years; mean education level: 7.8; mean MMSE score: 28.7).
No statistically significant difference was found for the age, sex, and MMSE score between the Edu-and Edu+ subgroups in the SMCneg and SMCpos seniors considered separately (p > 0.05 uncorrected in all comparisons; see the tests of the principal analysis).