Shared genetic architecture between metabolic traits and Alzheimer’s disease: a large-scale genome-wide cross-trait analysis
A growing number of studies clearly demonstrate a substantial link between metabolic dysfunction and the risk of Alzheimer's disease (AD), especially glucose related dysfunction; one hypothesis for this comorbidity is the presence of a common genetic etiology.
We conducted a large-scale cross-trait GWAS to investigate the genetic overlap between AD and 10 metabolic traits.
Among all the metabolic traits, fasting glucose, fasting insulin and HDL were found to be genetically associated with AD.
Local genetic covariance analysis found 19q13 region had strong local genetic correlation between AD and T2D (P=6.78×10 -2
), LDL (P=1.74×10 -25
) and HDL (P=7.94×10 -1
).
Cross-trait meta-analysis identified 4 loci that were associated with AD and fasting glucose, 3 loci that were associated with AD and fasting insulin, and 20 loci that were associated with AD and HDL (P meta <1.6×10 -8 , single trait P < 0.05).
Functional analysis revealed that the shared genes are enriched in amyloid metabolic process, lipoprotein remodeling and other related pathways; pancreas, liver, blood and other tissues.
Our work identifies common genetic

INTRODUCTION
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a progressive and devastating neurodegenerative disorder characterized by impairments of memory, cognitive function, language and behavior
In 2016, over 44 million people worldwide were estimated to be affected,
During the last decade, 19 loci have been identified for AD, a number of which are related to metabolism.
The link between metabolic dysregulation and impaired cognition has recently become clearer, leading some to consider late-onset AD a "metabolic" disease
Diabetes mellitus, both type 1 (T1D) and type 2 (T2D), increases the risk of AD fourfold.
The metabolic syndrome, a clinical entity including abdominal obesity, hypertension, low HDL, hyperglycemia and hypertriglyceridemia
One hypothesis to account for the link between metabolism and AD is a common genetic etiology.
Metabolic traits and AD may have similar clinical or epidemiological risk factors, and these risk factors can be originated from the same genetic variants.
Specifically, our initial hypothesis was that AD is associated with glucose-related traits, represented by T2D, fasting glucose and fasting insulin.
The sharing of multiple risk factors for two complex diseases could be due to an overlap in causal genes and pathways.
Thus, grouping the genetic variants common to multiple diseases or traits could provide insight into specific biological processes underlying their comorbidity; in addition, except for population stratification bias which were usually accounted for using principal components of genomewide association studies (GWAS) data, these shared genetic variants are not likely affected by confounding factors at the phenotypic level, such as diet and other environmental factors.
For example, we recently identified 38 loci that shared by asthma and allergic diseases and these loci were found to be enriched in epithelium and immune related biological process
Genetic factors play a significant role in AD, as evidenced by twin data indicating heritability varying between 58% and 79%, even after accounting for shared environmental influences
The co-occurrence of metabolic disorders and AD in the same individual suggests the potential of pleiotropic effects, which may have a substantial genetic contribution.
A recent study assessed the genetic causality between AD and metabolic traits
However, no genome-wide study has been conducted to identify the shared genetic loci between AD and metabolic traits and provide biological interpretation of the shared loci.
We therefore conducted a large-scale cross-trait GWAS analysis to investigate the shared heritability between AD and 10 metabolic traits, at both globally whole-genome level and individual variant level.

METHODS

Study design, data summary and quality control (QC)
The overall study design is shown in Supplementary Figure
We retrieved summary statistics from publically available GWAS studies, including AD from the International Genomics of Alzheimer's Project (IGAP) consortium (N = 54,162), body mass index (BMI)
Details of each of the datasets can be found in supplementary table 1.
We applied standardization of GWAS summary data to minimize potential biases due to the different array platforms and QC procedures.
First, we used the LiftOver (
tool to convert any GWAS summary data that have reference genome NCBI36/hg18 to GRCh37/hg19.
We further filtered out variants with a minor allele frequency (MAF) <1%.
In this study, we restricted our analysis to autosomal chromosomes.

LD score regression analysis
We conducted post-GWAS genome-wide genetic correlation analysis by LD score regression (LDSC) using all SNPs after merging with HapMap3 SNP excluding the HLA region.
LDSC estimates genetic correlation between the true causal effects of two traits (ranging from -1 to 1) from summary statistics using the fact that the GWAS effect size estimate for each SNP represents the effects of all SNPs in linkage disequilibrium with that SNP.
SNPs in a high linkage disequilibrium region would have higher χ2 statistics than SNPs in a low linkage disequilibrium region, and a similar relationship is observed when single-study test statistics are replaced with the product of the z-scores from two studies of traits with some correlation
LDSC applied a self-estimated intercept during the analysis to account for shared subjects between studies

Partitioned genetic correlation analysis
To characterize the genetic overlap at the level of functional categories, we estimated genetic correlation between AD and 3 metabolic traits in 11 large genomic functional annotation using partitioned LDSC, where each annotation contains more than 200,000 SNPs that are in common with our GWAS data.
These annotations included transcribed region, transcription factor binding sites (TFBS), Super Enhancer, intron, DNaseI digital genomic footprinting (DGF) region, DNase I hypersensitivity sites (DHSs), fetalDHS and histone marks H3K9ac, H3K4me1, H3K4me3, H3K27ac
For each annotation, we recalculated LD scores for SNPs assigned to that particular category and then used the annotation-specific LD scores for estimating the AD-metabolic trait genetic correlation for each partition separately.

Local genetic covariance analysis
To investigate whether there is local genetic correlations between AD and metabolic traits, we performed ρ-HESS
Approximately independent LD blocks with average 1.5Mb long were used for the calculation of each local genetic heritability and genetic covariance.
The traits were included in this nalysis based on 2 criteria: the genome-wide genetic correlation estimate from LDSC analysis is greater than 10%, the summary statistic data is based on 1000 genome imputation to ensure non-zero number of variants in each local region in ρ-HESS, thus three traits pairs were included in this analysis, AD and T2D, AD and LDL, AD and HDL.

Meta-analysis of fasting glucose and fasting insulin (FG-FINS meta-analysis)
The fasting glucose and fasting insulin GWAS summary statistics were derived from the MAGIC consortium, with a sample size of 58,047 and 51,750 respectively.
All participants were adults with European ancestry.
Both traits were measured from whole blood, plasma or serum with standard and used for GWAS linear regression model.
However, the power of each GWAS trait was limited by their sample size in terms of their genetic correlation with AD.
Thus in order to boost the power of GWAS for glucose metabolism phenotype, we used inverse-variance-weighted meta-analysis from METAL
We flipped the sign of effect estimates of fasting insulin before the meta-analysis in order to incorporate the known negative biological relationship between insulin and glucose.
To account for the genomic inflation due to shared samples where the two GWAS summary statistics were calculated, Zscore output from METAL meta-analysis were further adjusted by dividing the square root of LDSC intercept (1.333) of meta-analysis summary statistics
P-values were re-calculated based on adjusted Z-scores.
Thus, the adjusted genomic inflation factor for fasting glucose and fasting insulin meta-analysis result is 1.061.

Cross-trait meta-analysis
After assessing genetic correlations among all traits, we applied cross-trait GWAS metaanalysis by using the R package Cross Phenotype Association (CPASSOC) to combine the association evidence for AD with fasting glucose, fasting insulin and HDL respectively at individual variants as exploratory post-hoc analysis based on the criteria of both Rg>10% and P<0.05 from LDSC
This method combines effect estimate and standard error of the GWAS summary statistics to test hypothesis of association between the SNP with both traits, for example AD and fasting glucose, or AD and fasting insulin, or AD and HDL.
A heterogeneous version of CPASSOC (SHet) was used in this study.
SHet is a cross phenotype meta-analysis method based on fixed effect model.
It can be viewed as the maximum of weighted sum of trait-specific test statistics, which is closely related to a gamma distribution.
It is more powerful when there is heterogeneous effect present between studies, which is common in meta-analysis of different phenotypes
SHet uses the sample size for a trait as a weight instead of variance.
It can also account correlation due to overlapping or related subjects within and among different studies or cohorts.
We applied PLINK clumping function (parameters: --clump-p1 1.6e-8 --clump-p2 1e-5 -clump-r2 0.2 --clump-kb 500) to determine top loci that are independent to each other, i.e. variants with P-value less than 1×10 -5 , has r2 more than 0.2 and less than 500 kb away from the peak will be assigned to that peak's clump.
We identified all genes falling within each clump region.
A P-value of 1.6×10 -8 (5×10 -8 /3) was used as genome-wide significance level for cross-trait meta-analysis to account of 3 meta-analysis testing.

Pathway analysis, tissue enrichment analysis and transcriptome-wide association analysis (TWAS)
In order to understand the biological insights of the shared genes between 3 trait pairs, AD and fasting glucose, AD and fasting insulin, AD and HDL, we have performed multiple post-GWAS functional analyses using shared genes identified from cross-trait meta-analysis.
We used the WebGestalt tool
The Benjamini-Hochberg procedure was used for correcting multiple testing in pathway analysis.
The GTEx tissue
Integrative transcriptome-wide association analyses was performed using FUSION package based on 44 post-mortal GTEx (version 6) tissues
In order to identify association between AD and metabolic traits with gene expressions in specific tissues, we conducted a TWAS using FUSION software package based on 44 post-mortal GTEx (version 6) tissues expression weights
Bonferroni correction was applied for each trait's all gene-tissue pairs on TWAS P-values to account for multiple testing.

Prioritization of candidate genes
We used 2 methods to prioritize the genes to be discussed among the candidates within the region boundaries from cross-trait meta-analysis.
First, we prioritized the genes that are overlap with TWAS functional analysis.
When there is not overlapped genes with TWAS, we review the literature for all genes within the boundaries, and then discuss genes/gene families with the most biologically relevance to our traits.

Mendelian Randomization (MR) analysis
We performed MR analysis using MR-PRESSO
We built the MR instruments based on LD-independent SNPs.
We did not include fasting insulin trait because no genome-wide significant SNPs was presented.

RESULTS

Genetic correlation between AD and metabolic traits
We evaluated the genetic correlation of AD and 10 metabolic traits using cross-trait LD score regression from both GWASs to estimate their genetic relationship.
Fasting glucose and fasting insulin both have substantial magnitude of genetic correlation with AD, though statistical significance were marginal (Rg = 0.169, P= 0.081 for fasting glucose; Rg = -0.196,
P= 0.087 for fasting insulin).
Their genetic correlations with AD were in opposite direction with similar magnitude.
We did not observe substantial genetic correlation between AD and obesity traits (BMI and WHR, both Rg<0.05 and P>0.3), T2D (Rg=0.106,
P>0.2) and other lipid traits (LDL, TC and TG, Rg= 0.104, -0.076, 0.022, respectively, all P>0.17) (Table
Considering the well-known inverse direct relationship between glucose and insulin, we carried out cross-trait meta-analysis between FG and FINS to boost GWAS power for glucose regulation effect.
This meta-analysis would increase the power to detect genetic effects that increase glucose level via reduction of insulin secretion.
We observed that FG-FINS meta-analysis effect have an even greater magnitude of genetic correlation with AD and is statistically significant (Rg = 0.254, P=0.016).
We also observed that HDL had a significant genetic correlation with AD (Rg = -0.137,
P=0.0436).

Analysis of partitioned genetic correlation by functional category
In partitioned LDSC analysis, we evaluated the genetic correlation between AD and 3 metabolic traits by 11 functional annotations to pin down specific regions on the genome that may explain more of the genetic effect sharing than others.
In this analysis, we found AD and metabolic traits to have a similar genetic correlation pattern.
The genetic correlation suggested various signals but with similar trends in all the regions.
Notably, the Rg estimate was negatively correlated between AD and fasting insulin, AD and HDL, among all partitioned categories.
We identified intron had the highest level of genetic correlation between AD and fasting insulin (Rg= -0.366) (Figure
In addition, the transcribed region was found to have the highest level of genetic correlation between AD and HDL (Rg= -0.1471),
where this region can transcribe DNA sequence to mRNA.
On the contrary, positive genetic correlations were observed among fasting glucose and the FG-FINS meta-analysis in almost all the functional categories for AD.
Specifically, we identified intron had the highest level of genetic correlation between AD and FG-FINS meta-analysis (Rg= 0.1946) (Figure

Local genetic correlation between AD and metabolic traits
Although the genome-wide genetic correlation between AD and some metabolic traits was not significant, we additionally performed ρ-HESS to investigate whether a specific region of genome can be genetically correlated between them.
In the analysis among 3 trait pairs (AD-T2D, AD-LDL, AD-HDL), we identified 1 region (chromosome 19: 44744108-46102697) that showed a strong local genetic correlation between each of the 2 traits (P=6.78×10 -2
for AD-T2D, 1.74×10 -253 for AD-LDL, 7.94×10 -18 for AD-HDL) (Figure
This region is known for the APOE gene, who serves as a modulator between AD and T2D.

Cross-trait meta-analysis between AD and metabolic traits
We used CPASSOC to perform genome-wide meta-analysis to identify genetic loci that were associated with both AD and metabolic traits (meta-analysis P<5×10 -8 , and trait-specific P<0.05).

AD and fasting glucose
After pruning, we found 4 loci that were associated with both AD and fasting glucose at the genome wide significance level in the cross-trait meta-analysis (Table
The first locus (index SNP: rs10501320, P meta =2.80×10 -16 ), was in close proximity to genes MADD, ACP2 and AGBL2, which was found to play roles in insulin sensitivity
The second loci (index SNP: rs12805422, P meta =1.57×10 -13 ) was mapped to the genes C11orf94 and CRY2 which encode for a flavin adenine dinucleotide-binding protein involved in regulating the circadian clock.
The third loci (index SNP rs1483121 P meta =6.10×10 -10 ) was in close proximity to an intergenic region closest to the OR4S1 gene, which is related to G-protein coupled receptor activity and transmembrane signaling receptor activity.
In addition, we found that genetic loci represented by rs17747324 (P meta =4.52×10 -9 ) on TCF7L2 is associated with both AD and fasting glucose after metaanalysis.
Notably, TCF7L2 is a well-known risk gene for diabetes, which exerts a strong inhibitory effect on glucose-induced insulin secretion

AD and Fasting insulin
A total of 3 loci were identified after meta-analysis of AD and fasting insulin (Table
The first one (index SNP: rs2279590, P meta =1.14×10 -17 ) was mapped on CLU, a gene that encodes a secreted chaperone protein involved in basic biological events such as cell death, tumor progression, and neurodegenerative disorders.
The second locus represented by rs6656401 (P meta =3.71×10 -15 ) was mapped on CR1 and CR2, genes encoding for membrane protein.
The third locus (index SNP: rs4803750, P meta =6.54×10 -13 ) located in close proximity to BCL3, which encodes the apolipoprotein J/clusterin, whose polymorphisms have been related to AD susceptibility in published GWAS

AD and HDL
The cross phenotype meta-analysis between AD and HDL identified 20 genome-wide significant loci (Supplementary Table
The most significant locus is characterized by the APOE/APOC1 gene (index SNP rs157595, P meta =1.21×10 -97 ).
We noticed that this locus was not only significant after meta-analysis, but also reached genome-wide significance in both single trait GWAS of AD (P=3.76×10 -10
) and HDL (P=1.92×10 -
).
Among 20 independent loci, eight of them were from 19q13.32 region, which is known for the APOE/ APOC1/APOC2 gene cluster.
In addition, BIN1 on 2q14.3 (index SNP rs6733839, P meta =3.19×10 -25 ) and CCDC116 on 22q11.21
(index SNP rs5754166, P meta =3.61×10 -12 ) showed moderately strong association with both AD and HDL, which drove the overall significance of the meta-analysis.

Overlap between cross-trait meta-analysis results and genotype-protein associations (pQTL)
For assisting in further functional annotation, we checked our cross-trait meta-analysis for the 3 pairs with recent published study pQTL study
We compared the genomic position of our significant SNP clumps with the pQTL genomic regions for overlap checking (Table
A total of 23 loci are overlap with pQTL regions.
Notably, we identified 19q13.32
(known for APOE) and 19q13.42
(known for LILRA3) regions were associated with many correlated proteins.

Biological pathway, tissue enrichment and TWAS
Pathway analyses were performed to identify biological pathways enriched of shared loci (P meta <1.6×10 -8 ) related to AD and metabolic traits.
We found that AD shared amyloid metabolic process pathways with both fasting glucose trait and fasting insulin trait (FDR<0.01),
and shared protein lipid remodeling reverse cholesterol transport and sensory perception related pathways with HDL trait (FDR<0.01)
(Supplementary Table
The GTEx enrichment analysis identified five independent tissues expression that were significantly enriched (after Benjamin-Hochberg correction) for expression of cross-trait associated genes for each of the 3 trait pairs, including blood, heart, liver, muscle and pancreas for AD and fasting glucose; blood, liver, pancreas, small intestine and spleen for AD and fasting insulin; blood esophagus, heart, liver and pancreas for AD and HDL (Figure
Among them, the most strongly enriched tissue was part of the hormone and enzyme producing system (pancreas).
In order to identify association between AD and metabolic traits with gene expressions in specific tissues, we conducted a TWAS in 44 GTEx tissues (Supplementary Table
We used the Bonferroni correction for each trait's all gene-tissue pairs on TWAS P-values to account for multiple testing.
A total of 33 gene-tissue pairs were significantly associated with AD, 66 gene-tissue pairs with fasting glucose, and 37 gene-tissue pairs with fasting insulin.
Specifically, MADD, a gene expressed in multiple tissues, such as pituitary, artery and esophagus, was shared by AD (P TWAS =2.49×10 -8 ) and fasting glucose trait (P TWAS =4.5×10 -10 ).
Interestingly, MADD was also found to be genome-wide significant in AD and fasting glucose cross-trait meta-analysis (P meta =2.80×10 -16 ).

DISCUSSION
To our knowledge, this is the first study to identify genome-wide genetic correlation and shared genetic variants between AD and metabolic traits.
Specifically, we found a genetic correlation between AD and fasting glucose, fasting insulin and HDL.
In the LDSC analysis between AD and metabolic traits (Table
These findings are consistent with the known association between higher glucose levels and cognitive impairment, including AD
Previous studies also found HDL is negatively correlated with AD
Our findings suggest that the phenotypic correlation between AD and metabolic traits were due to a common genetic predisposition base.
However, we did not observe genetic correlation between AD and obesity traits, which suggests that the phenotypic association between AD and BMI may due to environmental factors, such as lifestyle
In the analysis of partitioned co-heritability by functional categories, we observed positive genetic correlation between AD and fasting glucose or FG-FINS meta-analysis, and negative genetic correlation between AD and fasting insulin or HDL in different functional categories.
We found the genetic correlation estimates were significant in super enhancer, H3K9ac, H3K27ac and DGF for AD-sugar traits pairs (Figure
This indicates the possible role of genetic correlation with respect to these functional categories in the shared genetic etiology of AD and these traits.
With regard to fasting glucose, we found 6 significant loci related to AD, including the genes MADD, CRY2 and OR4S1.
MADD has been shown to play a critical role in glucoseinduced insulin release as well as AD
The reduced expression of MADD was found to link with declined long-term neuronal viability in late-onset AD
With regard to fasting insulin, our results indicated 3 significant loci related to AD.
The top locus is CLU, which induces the differentiation of pancreatic duct cells into insulin-secreting cells
CLU has also been found to be increased in affected cortical areas in AD and is present in amyloid plaques and in the cerebrospinal fluid of patients with ADs.
Among them, the most significant gene was APOE, a well-established risk factor for late-onset AD
Notably, in the single trait GWAS analysis, APOE also achieved genome-wide significance with HDL level (P=1.92×10 -
) (Supplementary Table
Recent studies suggest that APOE is the major cholesterol carrier in the central nervous system, and that APOE-containing HDL contributes to the redistribution of cholesterol for cellular remodeling and repair in the brain
In local genetic correlation analysis, we also found the APOE region to have a strong genetic correlation with both AD and T2D.
The presence of APOE in T2D cases with AD is associated with increased neurofibrillary tangles, amyloid plaques, and cerebral amyloid angiopathy
In addition, we also tested SNPs that were identified from our cross-trait meta-analysis in 3 AD related endophenotypes: hippocampal volume, Alzheimer's disease progression score and cortical amyloid beta load
We found rs2279590 was significant in cortical amyloid beta load (P=0.0197) and rs157595 was significant in hippocampal volume (P=0.0265), which may provide additional insight of these shared loci in terms of endophenotypes of AD.
The post-GWAS functional analyses provided biological insights into the shared genes between AD and 3 metabolic traits.
The GTEx tissue enrichment analysis identified shared genes enriched in several tissues, such as pancreas, liver and spleen, which are known to play important roles in regulating the hormone and enzyme function.
These hormones and enzymes can further impact the glucose and lipid level in the blood or brain
Blood, as a transporting carrier for nutrients, hormones and enzymes, was also found the be enriched in all 3 trait pairs.
From TWAS analysis, we identified 14 significant unique gene-tissue pairs associated with AD, 21 with fasting glucose, and 5 with fasting insulin.
Of these, MADD was the only gene significantly associated with AD and fasting glucose, exclusively in pituitary tissue; it is also the only shared gene found in both cross-trait metaanalysis and TWAS.
MADD is known to improve insulin sensitivity, especially proinsulinto-insulin conversion, for the variant with higher fasting glucose
The pituitary plays a central role the endocrine axis because its hormones regulate the function of other endocrine glands.
The relationship between diabetes and pituitary function is well known
Our results thus supported the hypothesis that the pituitary may link fasting glucose and AD.
Even though MADD was only found to be significantly associated with AD in pituitary tissue, we found this gene expressed in 4 other tissues in fasting glucose trait, including the tibial artery, the aorta, and the muscularis and mucosa of the esophagus, which showed the importance of vascular and epithelium system in AD and neurodegeneration
The genetic correlation between AD and metabolic traits may be due to both pleiotropy and causality
Our MR analysis showed no causal relationship between fasting glucose or HDL and AD after adjusting pleiotropy (Supplementary Table
These results further supported our findings that the shared genetic effects between metabolic traits and AD are more likely to be pleiotropic effects, rather than causal etiology or mechanism.
In addition to the genetic contribution to AD and metabolic traits, environmental and behavioral factors also play important role in their comorbidity.
The combination of diet and exercise, and some drugs that modulate metabolism, are a few interventions that have been shown to improve cognition in AD, and currently represent the most hopeful approach to its prevention and treatment
We also acknowledge the limitations of our work.
First, our study power is also limited by the sample size of the AD IGAP consortium.
A larger sample size AD or its related endophenotypes, such as infarcts, amyloid, tau accumulation and vascular dementia, are needed to identify more novel shared loci between AD and metabolic traits.
With the understanding that the power of individual GWAS traits are limited, we seek evidences based on multiple analyses from the genome-wide level, to locus, gene and genetic variant level, where we can take advantage of the benefit of each methods.
For example, LDSC can be used to determine the genome-wide genetic correlation, which takes the sum of local genetic covariance but diminishes the power of each individual locus, where ρ-HESS can help to unveil.
The TWAS and cross-trait meta-analysis can further investigate genetic overlap on gene and genetic variant level, which provide higher functional significance.
There were 2 reasons we did not apply Bonferroni correction for 10 traits in this study.
Our primary focus is based on glucose-related traits, given the high correlation between T2D, fasting glucose and fasting insulin; the Bonferroni correction would seem too conservative.
Nevertheless, it is still significant after accounting for 2 traits: T2D and FG-FINS analysis (p<0.025).
In addition, our study is based on publicly available GWAS summary statistics.
Even though we have tried to standardize the data using ImpG summary statistic imputation to the 1000 Genome reference panel, the fasting glucose and fasting insulin summary statistics did not yield good quality imputed data, with only ~1.5 million SNPs' imputation quality having a r2pred >0.6.
Thus, we kept original fasting glucose and fasting insulin summary statistics data for downstream analysis, which is based on HapMap 2 imputation.
However, the HapMap 2 platform can also provide powerful and accurate results for the entire genome

CONCLUSION
In conclusion, our novel genome-wide cross-trait analysis reinforced the idea that AD and disorders of metabolism are connected.
Evaluation of the genetic overlap between AD and metabolic traits can be beneficial to understand the shared biological mechanisms underlying this comorbidity.
We highlighted the key roles of APOE and MADD genes played for shared etiology between AD and metabolic traits.
More work is needed to fully characterize the heritable component of the metabolic origins of AD.

Genetic correlation and SNP based heritability between AD and metabolic traits



Figure 1 .
Figure 1.
Partitioned genetic correlation.
a. Genetic correlation between Alzheimer's disease and sugar traits by functional category.
b.
Genetic correlation between Alzheimer's disease and HDL by functional category category.
Vertical axis represents the genetic correlation estimate Rg (standard error), horizontal axis represents 11 functional categories.
Asterisk represents significance (P<0.05).
DGF: DNaseI Digital Genomic Footprinting; DHS: DNase I hypersensitivity Site; TFBS: Transcription Factor Binding Sites.
AD: Alzheimer's disease;



Figure 2 .
Figure 2. Local genetic correlation and local SNP-heritability between Alzheimer's disease and T2D (2a), LDL (2b) and HDL (2c) respectively.
For each sub-figure, top part represents local genetic correlation, middle part represents local genetic covariance, and significant local genetic correlation and covariance after multiple testing correction are highlighted in blue; bottom part represents local SNP-heritability for individual trait.



Figure 3 .
Figure 3. GTEx tissue enrichment analysis.
a. GTEx tissue enrichment analysis of AD and fasting glucose.
b.
GTEx tissue enrichment analysis of AD and fasting insulin.
c.
GTEx tissue enrichment analysis of AD and HDL.
Red bar represents significant tissue enrichment after Benjamin-Hochberg correction.


Abbreviation: Rg: genetic correlation estimate; SE: standard error of genetic correlation estimate; BMI: Body mass index; WHR: Waist hip rate; T2D: Type 2 diabetes; FG: Fasting glucose; FINS: Fasting insulin; LDL: Low density lipoprotein; TC: Total cholesterol; TG: Triglyceride



Table 1 .