Potential of Caffeine in Alzheimer’s Disease—A Review of Experimental Studies
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the most common type of dementia leading to progressive memory loss and cognitive impairment.
Considering that pharmacological treatment options for AD are few and not satisfactory, increasing attention is being paid to dietary components that may affect the development of the disease.
Such a dietary component may be caffeine contained in coffee, tea or energy drinks.
Although epidemiological data suggest that caffeine intake may counteract the development of cognitive impairment, results of those studies are not conclusive.
The aim of the present study is to review the existing experimental studies on the efficacy of caffeine against AD and AD-related cognitive impairment, focusing on the proposed protective mechanisms of action.
In conclusion, the reports of studies on experimental AD models generally supported the notion that caffeine may exert some beneficial effects in AD.
However, further studies are necessary to elucidate the role of caffeine in the effects of its sources on cognition and possibly AD risk.

Introduction
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the most common type of dementia, accounting for 50-70% of neurodegenerative dementia cases.
AD leads to a progressive loss of memory and cognitive abilities
It is believed, especially taking into account very limited therapeutic options, that dietary interventions or nutraceuticals may be promising in the prophylaxis and treatment of cognitive impairment of ageing, including AD
The effects of dietary components are usually evaluated based on dietary questionnaires, and the results of those studies, as well as the results of their meta-analyses are often not conclusive.
The number of randomized controlled trials concerning phytochemicals is low
On the other hand, numerous experimental studies indicated phytochemicals as potentially useful in the prophylaxis of AD, including flavonoids, phenolic acids, carotenoids, curcumin, resveratrol, and some alkaloids (for comprehensive review-see
From among those phytochemicals, the effects of caffeine seem to be the most thoroughly examined and best documented.
Caffeine
Caffeine is probably the most commonly used psychoactive substance/psychostimulant
It is found in coffee (Coffea L.) beans, cola (Cola acuminata (P.
Beauv.)
Schott and Endl.) nuts, tea (Camellia sinensis (L.) Kuntze) leaves and yerba mate (Ilex paraguariensis A.St.-Hil.)
leaves, as well as guarana (Paullinia cupana Kunth) seeds and cocoa (Theobroma cacao L.) beans
The main dietary source of caffeine is coffee, tea and yerba mate
Caffeine is also present in soft drinks (cola-type) and energy drinks, used mainly by younger individuals
The mean caffeine intake varies between countries, however it has remained stable in adults in the last 10-15 years
According to the recommendations of the European Food Safety Authority (EFSA), the daily caffeine intake up to 400 mg is considered safe for healthy adults
Numerous health-promoting activities are attributed to coffee and caffeine.
A recent umbrella review of meta-analyses indicated, among others, beneficial role of coffee in reducing risk of type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2D), cardiovascular diseases, some cancers and Parkinson's disease
The results of epidemiological and experimental studies suggest also a possible beneficial effect of caffeine in the prevention of AD
However, human studies concerned caffeine contained in the diet and cannot isolate caffeine's effects from countless lifestyle choices people make.
Here we would like to focus on the results of experimental studies of caffeine, carried out in order to evaluate its potential in the prophylaxis and treatment of AD.
A literature search was conducted on the PubMed electronic database.
Articles presented in languages other than English were excluded.
Results of all studies on caffeine effects in different AD experimental models, published until December 2020, and found in the PubMed electronic database, were referred to in the present review.

Caffeine-Main Mechanisms of Action
The mechanism of action of caffeine is complex.
Caffeine is a non-selective antagonist of adenosine receptors (mainly A 1 and A 2A ), demonstrating a structural similarity to adenosine.
The blocking of these receptors modulates glutamatergic, cholinergic, dopaminergic, serotoninergic and noradrenergic neurotransmission
The blockade of adenosine receptors is observed in lower concentrations of caffeine (<250 µM)
Moreover, caffeine is an agonist of ryanodine receptors (RyRs), stimulation of which increases the release of Ca 2+ from the endoplasmic reticulum
Caffeine is also a non-selective competitive inhibitor of phosphodiesterases (PDEs), the enzymes degrading cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP), which leads to increases in the cell cAMP concentration
However, the effect of caffeine through the signaling pathways associated with the stimulation of RyRs and the blocking of PDEs is only possible at higher doses (plasma concentration >250 µM)
Caffeine also interferes with γ-aminobutyric acid type A (GABA A ) receptors
Caffeine protects against cell damage, exerts antioxidant effects, reducing oxidative stress markers
Caffeine may exert also anti-inflammatory activity, decreasing proinflammatory (C-reactive protein, interleukin (IL)-1β, IL-6, IL-18, tumor necrosis factor α-TNF-α) and increasing anti-inflammatory (IL-10, adiponectin) marker levels

Alzheimer's Disease (AD)
AD is characterized by personality disorders, amnesia, dementia and cognitive impairment
Brain atrophy observed in AD results from the synaptic degeneration and neuronal cell death.
Dysfunctions occur mainly in the brain regions that play a major role in memory and spatial orientation, i.e., in the hippocampus, striatum, cerebral cortex, thalamus and amygdala
Besides cognitive dysfunctions, the majority of patients with AD suffer from behavioral and psychological symptoms of dementia (BPSD).
BPSD include depression, apathy, anxiety, sleep changes, hallucinations, delusions and agitation
There are two major forms of AD-familial (or early-onset) and sporadic.
Familial AD (FAD), 5% of AD cases
The cause of the sporadic forms of AD is unknown; the majority of them develop after 65 years of age
The ε-4 allele of the apolipoprotein E (APOE) is a risk factor in the pathogenesis of late-onset of AD, playing an important role in amyloid β (Aβ) brain metabolism (APOE ε-4 exacerbates deposition of Aβ in the brain and tau-mediated neurodegeneration)
Among various risk factors associated with AD, T2D, traumatic brain injury, cerebrovascular disease, hypertension, dyslipidemia, obesity and metabolic syndrome have been demonstrated
There is a hypothesis that the sporadic type of AD is triggered by dysfunctional insulin signaling in the brain; it has been proposed that sporadic AD may be considered the brain type of diabetes
The most popular hypothesis on the pathogenesis of AD is the amyloid hypothesis, which assumes an important role of Aβ deposits in the form of senile plaques
In fact, the neuropathological hallmarks of AD are the presence of extracellular neuritic plaques, consisting of deposits of Aβ peptides and intraneuronal neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs) composed of aggregated and often truncated, and hyperphosphorylated tau protein
Aβ is formed as a result of incorrect fragmentation of the amyloid precursor protein (APP) processed by β-secretases (β-site amyloid-precursor-protein-cleaving enzyme-1-BACE-1 and BACE-2) and γ-secretases
Senile plaques activate microglial cells and induce inflammation
In AD, the tau protein uncouples from microtubules, aggregates into tangles and inhibits microtubular transport
Hyperphosphorylation of tau protein causes dysregulation of the neuronal system and axon damage
Also, neuroinflammation is considered to be involved in the pathogenesis of AD
Proinflammatory cytokines (TNF-α, IL-1 and IL-6), reactive oxygen species (ROS) and NO production leads to dysfunction of the blood-brain barrier (BBB) and the influx of immunocompetent cells
The associated oxidative stress causes lipid and neuronal protein oxidation
Inflammation-related biomarkers are present in the cerebrospinal fluid, peripheral blood and brain in AD patients
Neurodegenerative disorders in AD lead to decreases in the levels of neurotransmitters.
An important role in the pathogenesis of AD is a reduction of acetylcholine (ACh) content.
The dysfunction of cholinergic system is related to degeneration of the nucleus basalis of Meynert cholinergic neurons caused by NFTs formation.
The presence of NFTs and Aβ plaques leads to cholinergic synapse loss.
Moreover, despite the preservation of postsynaptic M 1 muscarinic receptors (the level of presynaptic M 2 receptors is decreased) in the cerebral cortex, their functions are impaired.
Also, progressive decrease in the number of nicotinic receptors in the cerebral cortex is observed.
Deficits in cholinergic neurotransmission contribute to the learning, memory and attention impairment
Moreover, it has been demonstrated that interaction between cholinergic and glutamatergic transmission is involved in Ca 2+ -dependent neuroprotection
The glutamatergic system is controlled by various mediators, including adenosine and ACh
In AD, there is a decrease in the number of the N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptors resulting in an imbalance between synaptic and extrasynaptic NMDA receptors
Malfunctioning glutamatergic neurons release too much glutamate, which over-stimulates the extrasynaptic NMDA receptors leading to the neuronal cell death and synaptic loss
Moreover, cholinergic neuronal loss leads to dopaminergic transmission dysfunction which is correlated with psychiatric symptoms of AD (BPSD)
Also, the loss of noradrenergic neurons in the locus coeruleus caused by the tau protein accumulation results in the progression of AD.
Noradrenergic receptors (mainly α 2 receptor activation or β receptor blockade) are involved in the Aβ-related neuropathology.
Upregulation of adenosine receptors (A 1 R and A 2A R) is also observed in AD.
Activation of adenosine receptors affects synaptic neurotransmission and various neurotransmitters release (ACh, glutamate)
Moreover, it disrupts learning and memory processes and leads to cognitive disorders
Also, dysregulated signaling by other purinergic receptors may be involved in the pathomechanism of AD.
Activation of P2X7 receptors by high levels of adenosine triphosphate-ATP or its metabolites (Aβ accumulation induces increased release of ATP) leads to neuroinflammation, i.e., increased level of IL-1, IL-6, IL-18, TNF-α and interferon-γ, and neurodegeneration
Summing up, cholinergic and glutamatergic transmission disorders are associated with impaired cognitive processes, while disorders of dopaminergic, serotonergic and noradrenergic transmission are responsible for the symptoms associated with dementia, such as depression, apathy, anxiety and psychotic symptoms
Epidemiological studies demonstrated higher occurrence of AD (2:1 women to men ratio) and risk of developing AD in women compared to men.
It is probably related to the longer life expectancy for women.
In addition, faster cognitive decline and longer life span after diagnosis of mild cognitive impairment or AD dementia is observed in elderly women in comparison to men
More aggressive behaviors and higher mortality is demonstrated in men, whereas women suffer from more severe symptoms of affective disorders
The treatment options of AD are very limited.
Currently, only four drugs are approved by Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and European Medicines Agency (EMA) for AD treatment.
These include three drugs from the group of acetylcholinesterase (AChE) inhibitors (donepezil, rivastigmine and galantamine) and memantine, a selective and noncompetitive NMDA receptor antagonist
AChE inhibitors increase ACh levels in the synaptic cleft and partially improve cognitive function and the quality of a patient's life
Memantine restores NMDA receptor function and exerts neuroprotective effects, reducing the intracellular influx of calcium ions
There is a great need to search for new therapeutic and prophylactic approaches to AD.
Taking into account the postulated pathomechanism of AD, it is believed that antioxidant nutraceuticals may have beneficial effects in the prevention of AD.
The best-known antioxidants include plant polyphenols such as curcumin, flavonoids and phenolic acids.
Experimental studies and/or population studies suggest the possibility of beneficial effects of curcumin

Caffeine in Alzheimer's Disease
The studies on the effects of caffeine consumption (coffee, tea, other sources) on the cognitive impairment, mild cognitive impairment, dementia and AD led to differential conclusions.
Although the review articles and meta-analyses indicated rather favorable effects of caffeine-containing dietary sources on those disorders, their conclusions were not unequivocal
For example, a latest systematic review supported the notion that green tea intake might reduce the risk of those disorders
Similarly, the meta-analyses concerning coffee intake led to differential conclusions.
A meta-analysis of prospective cohort studies demonstrated a "J-shaped" association between coffee intake and the occurrence of cognitive disorders (the lowest risk with daily consumption level of 1-2 cups of coffee)
On the other hand, another analysis of prospective cohort studies found that higher coffee consumption was associated with reduced risk for AD
The most recent meta-analysis of prospective studies did not support an association between coffee consumption and a risk of AD and overall dementia
Moreover, it seems worth mentioning that studies using Mendelian randomization, which is a genetic epidemiological method, did not provide the evidence for a causal effect of habitual coffee consumption on global cognition or memory
In fact, surprisingly, one study even suggested an association between genetically predicted higher consumption of coffee and higher risk of AD (the report concerned analysis of genome-wide association studies of the potentially modifiable risk factors of AD)
It should be emphasized that other than caffeine active constituents of coffee or tea (like phenolic acids, EGCG, trigonelline) may contribute to their effects on cognition/AD risk
Decaffeinated coffee constituents have been demonstrated to exert potential beneficial effects in neurodegenerative diseases
However, decaffeinated coffee was not associated with a protective effect on cognitive performance in older people
The data from the human studies do not allow to conclude on the role of caffeine itself in the modulation of AD risk.
However, there is growing evidence on the effects of caffeine on cognition and AD development coming from numerous experimental studies.

Experimental Models of AD
It is crucial to use experimental models faithfully mimicking the pathologies of investigated diseases.
In case of AD, it is problematic.
None of the experimental AD animal models fully reflects complete disorders and cognitive impairments characteristic for human AD.
Although FAD accounts for about 5% of all disease cases only, the majority of potential therapies has been investigated in transgenic mouse models of AD
Transgenic technologies allowed mouse and rat models to be created, based on the mutations of APP, presenilin (PS), APOE and tau protein genes
Mouse models are the most commonly used in the experimental studies on AD, due to their low prices, relatively short life span and similar AD symptoms to the human disease
Histopathological changes in the brain tissue, depending on the mutation used, are characterized by the presence of Aβ plaques, tau protein deposits and hippocampus atrophy
APP mutations causing cognitive deficits in mice and rats are related to an increased Aβ production, increased Aβ accumulation (in the blood or cerebral vessels, in neurons of the cortex and hippocampus), promotion of fibrillogenic and toxic Aβ 1-42 form or modification of the Aβ 1-42 /Aβ 1-40 ratio, depending on the type of mutation
Pathogenic PS1 or PS2 mutations increase the levels of Aβ 1-42 form in vitro, but do not promote Aβ plaques aggregation in vivo in mice.
Several double-transgenic (2xTg) mouse models have been developed by crossing APP and PS1 transgenic mice, demonstrating accelerated Aβ accumulation leading to the impairment of cognitive functions
In the human tau protein (h-tau) transgenic model, the mice tau gene is replaced by the human gene correlating with NFTs development and neurodegeneration
The most commonly used tau transgenic model is THY-Tau22 model in which progressive development of the hippocampal tau pathology is observed.
Hyperphosphorylated hippocampal tau protein and neuroinflammation results in an age-dependent memory impairment
A triple-transgenic mice model of AD (3xTg-AD) is a combination of three mutations resulting in the age-related progressive neuropathy including accumulation of Aβ plaques and NFTs, resulting in the cognitive deficits
The number of rat genetic models is much lower (for example TgF344-AD, single Tg UKUR28, double Tg UKUR25).
In the TgF344-AD rat model (human APPswe and human PS1∆E9 mutations) accumulation of Aβ plaques, presence of NFTs, gliosis, increased tau protein level and decreased basal hippocampal synaptic transmission was observed
Aβ accumulation in the hippocampus and cortex, and increased levels of phosphorylated mitogen-activated protein kinase/extracellular signal-regulated kinase 2 (MAPK/ERK2) were observed in UKUR28 (human APPswe mutation) and UKUR25 (human APPswe and human PS1 Finn mutations) transgenic rat models
Moreover, several non-mammalian species, including nematode (Caenorhabditis elegans), zebrafish (Danio rerio) and fruit fly (Drosophila melanogaster) and have been used to create transgenic models of AD
In spite of a large number transgenic animal models of AD, it should be pointed out that results of the preclinical studies on those models have been rather not satisfactorily translated into clinical outcomes
Several pharmacological models of sporadic AD have been used.
Those models included: administration of aluminum chloride per os (p.o.)
injections of streptozotocin (STZ)
injections of lipopolysaccharide (LPS)
A model of senescence-accelerated rodents (OXYS rats) is also used as a model of sporadic AD
It is a non-transgenic model established by inbreeding of highly susceptible rats with spontaneously developing cataract and accelerated senescence syndrome.
OXYS rats demonstrate learning and memory deficits, decreased locomotor activity and progressive cognitive impairment
To summarize, it should be pointed out that sophisticated transgenic experimental models of AD are used in preclinical in vitro and in vivo studies on novel drugs or compounds potentially useful in the prevention or treatment of AD.
However, those models reflect only genetic changes present in familial AD, whereas the sporadic form of AD is much more common.
On the other hand, mostly rather simplistic models of sporadic AD are currently being used in the experimental studies.
Some of them are controversial, for example the scopolamine model
It seems that there is a need for development of new, reliable models of sporadic AD.

Effects of Caffeine in Experimental Animal Models of AD
The most commonly used transgenic models of AD in animals is the APPswe mouse model.
In the APPswe model, mice develop cognitive deficits, learning impairment and age-dependent spatial memory dysfunction
Expression of human APP in transgenic mice model enable Aβ plaques deposition and synaptic and neuritic dystrophy
In studies on the APPswe transgenic mice model, caffeine intake prevented cognitive impairment, memory deficits and exerted neuroprotective activity
The neuroprotective caffeine activity associated with reduced Aβ production resulted from the inhibition of BACE-1 and γ-secretase [129], suppressed neuronal cell death, reduced caspase-3 activity [131], activation of cAMP/PKA (cyclic adenosine monophosphate/phosphokinase A) signaling pathway and stimulation of cAMP response element-binding protein (CREB) phosphorylation in the striatum
Two-week caffeine treatment in APPswe mice exerted antiapoptotic activity (decreased the expression of phosphorylated c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) and phosphorylated extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) in the striatum and frontal cortex)
Long-term treatment with caffeine improved mitochondrial functions in the hippocampus, cerebral cortex and striatum in APPswe transgenic mice
No effect on A 1 R and A 2A R hippocampal density was observed in APPswe transgenic mice treated with caffeine
Caffeine treatment in N2a neuroblastoma cells transfected with mutant APPswe indicated slight antioxidant activity associated with reduced ROS production
Chronic intake of crude (containing 95.95% caffeine) and pure caffeine prevented memory disorders in APPswe mice model.
However, only crude caffeine reduced the level of Aβ and formation of Aβ plaques in the hippocampus.
Crude caffeine increased the level of ATP (an indicator of cell survival), reduced caspase-3 activity and reduced Aβ-induced neuronal cell death
Crude and pure caffeine increased the number of cholinergic neurons in Aβ-treated cultures
Greater effects of crude caffeine may result from the activity of other than caffeine components.
Phenolic substances (about 1%) may be responsible for antioxidant activity of crude caffeine which exhibited much higher values than pure caffeine in the oxygen radical absorbance capacity (ORAC) assay
Moreover crude caffeine strongly inhibited cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2), whereas pure caffeine did not inhibit the enzyme
The authors concluded that substantial antioxidant and anti-inflammatory effects of crude caffeine are crucial in preventing cognitive and memory impairment in APPswe transgenic mice
Studies on caffeine were also performed on 2xTg and 3xTg animal models.
Double transgenic mice indicate rapid rate and early onset of AD associated with cognitive impairment
For example, the double transgenic APPswe/PS1 mice model is related to Aβ plaque formation in the cortex and hippocampus
In those mice spatial learning and memory assessed in the water maze test worsened
To investigate the effects of acute and long-term treatment with coffee or decaffeinated coffee (to compare the effect of caffeine to coffee) on the plasma cytokine and Aβ levels and behavior (only after long-term treatment) in transgenic mice models of AD.
Acute caffeine intake increased the level of G-CSF and IL-10 in plasma (concentrated and unconcentrated coffee) and IL-6 level in plasma (only concentrated coffee).
Higher plasma caffeine concentrations were related to lower levels of Aβ in plasma.
Single treatment with coffee (concentrated and unconcentrated) increased G-CSF, IL-6 and IL-10 plasma levels also in non-transgenic mice.
Long-term treatment with concentrated coffee (but not decaffeinated coffee) favorably affected cognitive interference task and elevated level of G-CSF (but not other cytokines) in plasma in transgenic mice.
Improvement of cognitive performance was associated with higher G-CSF levels suggesting that elevated G-CSF levels may be associated with possible beneficial effects of coffee against AD.
[136]
APPswe/PS1 mice Caffeine: 0.75 mg/day or 1.5 mg/day p.o. for 8 weeks;

12-month-old mice
To investigate the effects of caffeine intake on the memory deficits, BDNF and TrkB expression in APPswe/PS1 double transgenic mice.
Caffeine at both doses used increased spatial learning ability and memory capability.
Caffeine treatment increased the expression of hippocampal BDNF and TrkB.
Caffeine exerted protective role against memory impairment in APPswe/PS1 mice.
[132]
THY-Tau22 male mice Caffeine: 0. To investigate the effects of long-term caffeine exposure during pregnancy in offspring in THY-Tau22 transgenic mice.
The exposure to caffeine during pregnancy induced physiological disorders and accelerated cognitive disorders in THY-Tau22 transgenic mice model and may be a risk factor for early stages of AD.
[105] Acute intake of caffeine by APPswe/PS1 transgenic mice resulted in a reduced Aβ production (by inhibiting γ-secretase and BACE-1) and reduced Aβ 1-40 and Aβ 1-42 levels in plasma (the same effects were observed in transgenic APPswe mice).
Similarly, long-term caffeine administration to APPswe/PS1 transgenic mice was related to a permanent and sustained decrease in the Aβ 1-40 and Aβ 1-42 levels in plasma and reduced Aβ accumulation in the brain.
Chronic caffeine administration enhanced cognitive performance in the transgenic mice
Acute caffeine use (administered as a coffee constituent) increased the levels of granulocyte-colony stimulating factor-G-CSF, IL-6 and IL-10 in plasma in APPswe/PS1 double transgenic mice and in non-transgenic mice.
Higher levels of plasma caffeine were related to lower levels of plasma Aβ in APPswe/PS1 transgenic mice.
Chronic intake of concentrated coffee improved cognitive performance and increased the level of G-CSF in plasma in APPswe transgenic mice.
The authors concluded that coffee (as a source of caffeine) may protect against AD and that elevated G-CSF levels may contribute to favorable effects of coffee
Also chronic treatment with caffeine in double transgenic APPswe/PS1 mice reversed memory impairment
Caffeine improved spatial learning and memory, which was demonstrated by a decrease of escape latency time and longer time spent in the target quadrant assessed in the water maze test.
The effects of caffeine were dose dependent.
The mechanism of changes could involve the effect on the brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF)-tropomyosin-related kinase receptor B (TrkB) signaling pathway, taking part in the learning and memory processes, since caffeine exerted dose-dependent increase in the expression of hippocampal
In a transgenic model of tau disorders, THY-Tau22 mice, progressively developing memory dysfunction is associated with hippocampal neuroinflammation that promotes tau protein hyperphosphorylation and aggregation
Chronic administration of caffeine to THY-Tau22 transgenic mice prevented behavioral disorders and spatial memory deficits.
The beneficial activity of caffeine on memory was associated with reduced hyperphosphorylated tau protein level in the hippocampus
The deletion of A 2A R improved memory, prevented spatial memory deficits and hippocampal long-term depression in THY-Tau22 transgenic mice
It did not affect the tau protein level and the number of proteolytic tau fragments, which were reduced by caffeine intake in the previous study
It may indicate that mechanism of caffeine in the regulation of taurelated pathology was more complex than only blockade of A 2A R in THY-Tau22 transgenic mice
Moreover, caffeine exerted anti-inflammatory activity (reduced level of proinflammatory cytokines: chemokine ligand factor 4-CCl4, chemokine ligand factor 5-CCl5 and TNF-α) and antioxidant activity (decreased activity of manganese superoxide dismutase-MnSOD and excitatory amino acid transporter 3-EAAT3 involved in the glutathione synthesis) in THY-Tau22 transgenic mice
However, when caffeine was administered to pregnant THY-Tau22 transgenic rats, accelerated physiological and cognitive disorders in offspring were observed.
Those results indicate that exposure to caffeine during pregnancy in rats may be a risk factor for early stages of AD
Effects of caffeine were also studied in 3xTg-AD mice (carrying APPswe, PS1/M146V and tau P301L transgenes).
The effects of long-term intake of caffeine in 3xTg-AD mice were assessed in multiple behavioral tests (lasting 21 days) to evaluate sensorimotor functions, exploratory activity, bizarre movements, emotional and anxiety-like behaviors, risk assessment, visual perceptual learning and reference spatial learning and memory in comparison with normal non-transgenic mice.
Some of the tests were interpreted as tests concerning BPSD-like behaviors
The effects of caffeine treatment in the two models were differential.
Caffeine in control non-transgenic mice improved some behavioral parameters connected with cognition, exploratory and locomotor activity.
Caffeine did not counteract any of behavioral disorders observed in 3xTg-AD mice, moreover some of the behavioral parameters even worsened (mostly those related to the anxiety-like behaviors).
Caffeine increased horizontal locomotor activity in the open field test in non-transgenic mice and reduced it in 3xTg-AD mice; increased emotionality in the open field test, elevated plus maze and hole-board test in non-transgenic mice and reduced these parameters in 3xTg-AD mice; increased total horizontal activity in the open field test in non-transgenic mice and reduced it in 3xTg-AD mice.
Caffeine increased overall spontaneous motor activity (to a greater extent at night) in circadian motor activity test only in 3xTg-AD mice
The authors interpreted their results that anxiogenic effect (associated with anxiety and neophobia) induced by caffeine interfered with beneficial effects of caffeine consumption on cognition (improved visual perceptive learning, spatial learning and memory) in 3xTg-AD mice [135].

Non-Transgenic Rodent Models
Several non-transgenic models of AD have been used to evaluate the effects of caffeine (Table
In a model of AD induced by i.c.v.
administration of Aβ
There was no beneficial effect of the 12-day treatment with caffeine alone
It was concluded that mechanism of caffeine action resulted from the blockade of A 2A R rather than A 1 R, because similar effects were observed after a selective A 2A R antagonist-SCH58261 administration
In other studies, selective A 2A R antagonists also prevented Aβ-induced progressive cognitive impairment and synaptic deterioration in rats
Long-term administration of D-galactose to rats is associated with increased oxidative stress resulting in memory impairment, neuroinflammation and neurodegeneration.
Concurrent caffeine intake improved memory functions and attenuated cognitive decline in the D-galactose-treated aging rats as demonstrated in the Y-maze behavioral test.
Caffeine administration exerted anti-inflammatory activity (reduced level of COX-2, nitric oxide synthase-2 (NOS-2), TNF-α and IL-1β), antioxidant activity (decreased level of oxidative stress marker-8-oxoguanine) and antiapoptotic activity (decreased B-cell lymphoma 2-associated X protein/B-cell lymphoma protein-2 (BAX/Bcl-2) ratio and reduced caspase-3 and caspase-9 expression) in rats with accelerated aging induced by D-galactose administration.
Caffeine treatment alleviated synaptic dysfunction (increasing the level of presynaptic proteins synaptophysin and post-synaptic protein PSD95 in the hippocampus) in D-galactose-treated rats
To investigate the effects of chronic caffeine intake on neurodegeneration induced by D-galactose-aging rat model.
Chronic caffeine intake reduced oxidative stress (decreased 8-oxoguanine level), neuroinflammation, neuronal cells apoptosis, neurodegeneration, synaptic dysfunction and memory deficits induced by D-galactose injections.
[119]
Adult male Wistar rats with AD induced by i.c.v.
administration of STZ (3 mg/kg; single bilateral administration)
Caffeine: 1 g/L in drinking water for 2 weeks before and 4 weeks after STZ administration.

Behavioral tests 4 weeks after STZ administration
To investigate the effects of caffeine intake on the expression and density of adenosine receptors and hippocampal neurodegeneration in STZ-induced rat model of AD.
Caffeine administration prevented the STZ-induced memory deficits, sporadic dementia, neurodegeneration and decreased expression and density of A 2A R in the hippocampus.
[141] Caffeine exerted neuroprotective, antioxidant and anticholinesterase activity against AlCl 3 -induced neurotoxicity in rats.
It reduced oxidative stress parameters (NO level), decreased AChE and Na + /K + -ATPase activity in the cerebral cortex and hippocampus (Na + /K + -ATPase activity also in the striatum).
Caffeine revealed also anti-inflammatory properties by reducing the increased TNF-α levels in the hippocampus and striatum associated with AlCl 3 -induced neurotoxicity.
[143]
Fisher-344 young male rats (3-month-old) treated with LPS (0.250 µg/h i.c.v. by osmotic minipump for 4 weeks); Fisher-344 male aged rats (24-month-old) Caffeine: 0.  Pretreatment with caffeine prevented scopolamine-induced impairment in the acquisition phase when short-term memory was assessed in the inhibitory avoidance task, and in the consolidation phase when short-term and long-term memory were assessed in the inhibitory avoidance task.
Caffeine administration prevented scopolamine-induced short-term and long-term memory deficits (assessed in the novel object recognition task).
Caffeine exerted beneficial effect in the cholinergic-induced memory disruption.
There was no effect of caffeine treatment on the spontaneous locomotor activity assessed in the open field test.
The STZ-induced AD model is associated with impaired brain glucose metabolism, Aβ accumulation and tau hyperphosphorylation. STZ i.c.v.
administration increase oxidative stress, AChE activity and neuroinflammation in the hippocampus and cortex
Chronic caffeine administration prevented STZ-induced progressive memory loss, sporadic dementia and neurodegeneration.
It also decreased the expression and density of A 2A R in the hippocampus (not affecting A 1 R density) in rats
Moreover, caffeine administered to rodents with diabetes mellitus induced by i.p.
STZ injections prevented learning and memory deficits
In the AlCl 3 -induced AD model, administration of aluminum chloride increases level of Aβ, BACE-1, hyperphosphorylated tau protein, proinflammatory cytokines (TNF-α, IL-6) and oxidative stress markers in the hippocampus and cortex
Chronic caffeine intake exerted neuroprotective activity demonstrated by improvement of the histological hippocampus picture (decreased neuronal apoptosis observed in CA1 and CA3 hippocampal regions) in AlCl 3 treated rats.
Moreover, increased proliferation marker protein-Ki-67 immunoreactivity, decreased glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) immunoreactivity, and increased expression of BDNF and TrkB were observed after caffeine intake
Further studies on caffeine showed that neuroprotective activity may have resulted from reduced oxidative stress (reduced levels of NO in the cerebral cortex, hippocampus and striatum and increased level of reduced glutathione-GSH in the hippocampus) and attenuated AlCl 3 -induced lipid peroxidation (reduced level of malondialdehyde-MDA in the cerebral cortex, hippocampus and striatum).
Caffeine decreased activity of Na + /K + -ATPase in the cerebral cortex, hippocampus and striatum, and reduced activity of AChE in the cerebral cortex and hippocampus.
Also anti-inflammatory properties of caffeine were demonstrated (decreased TNF-α level in the hippocampus and striatum) in AlCl 3 -induced neurotoxicity in rats
LPS administration induces chronic neuroinflammation and amyloidosis leading to cognitive deficits and memory impairment, reflecting processes specific for sporadic type of AD
Increased BACE-1 and γ-secretase activity leading to Aβ hippocampal accumulation, elevated proinflammatory cytokines level (IL-1β, IL-6, IL-12, TNF-α), mitochondrial dysfunction, and increased ROS production is observed in LPS-induced model of AD in rats
Caffeine exerted protective effect against LPS-induced and age-related neuroinflammation associated with microglia activation in rats
It has been demonstrated that caffeine may decrease neuroinflammation by a reduction in the number of activated microglial cells in the CA3 hippocampus region and regulation of glutamate neurotransmission
Caffeine administration inhibited LPS-induced oxidative stress, neuroinflammation and synaptic dysfunctions (increasing expression of nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2 (Nrf2), hemeoxygenase 1 (HO-1) and Bcl-2, reducing expression of toll-like receptor 4 (TLR-4), phosphorylated nuclear factor-κB (p-NF-κB), phosphorylated c-Jun N-terminal kinase (p-JNK), BAX, caspase-3, TNF-α, COX-2 and NOS-2) in mice
Intraperitoneal administration of scopolamine, a non-selective, competitive muscarinic receptor antagonist, is associated with acute memory and attention deficits through cholinergic system blockade
Long-term cholinergic dysfunction results in a reduced number of cholinergic neurons, decreased ACh level in the brain, increased AChE activity and suppressed choline acetyltransferase activity.
Moreover, scopolamine increases oxidative stress, apoptosis, mitochondrial dysfunction and neuroinflammation in animal AD models
Although the scopolamine-induced amnesia/memory impairment as a model of AD was widely used in the past, the relevance of scopolamine in current experimental AD studies is very limited
Cholinergic dysfunction observed after acute scopolamine administration is not related to the hallmarks of AD (Aβ or hyperphosphorylated tau protein) and disease progression
The effects of caffeine (or selective adenosine receptors antagonists) were studied only after acute scopolamine administration.
In scopolamine-treated mice, caffeine administration prevented short-term and long-term memory deficits assessed in the behavioral tests (novel object recognition task and inhibitory avoidance task), indicating possible beneficial effect in cholinergic-induced memory disruption
Caffeine ameliorated also scopolamine-induced memory impairment in humans
The beneficial effect of caffeine probably resulted from its dual ability to blockade of A 1 R and A 2A R
Studies conducted in scopolamine-treated rats showed that A 1 R and A 2A R antagonists prevented scopolamine-induced memory impairment

Rabbit Cholesterol-Induced Model
A high cholesterol diet-induced rabbit model of AD is characterized by an elevated Aβ level in the brain, increased tau protein hyperphosphorylation and disturbed BBB integrity (associated with a disrupted brain cholesterol homeostasis) leading to the learning impairment
Chronic caffeine administration to rabbits fed a cholesterol-enriched diet prevented dysfunction of BBB, decreased activation of astrocytes and decreased density of microglia [155] (Table
In another study, caffeine intake decreased Aβ level, Aβ production and Aβ deposition in the hippocampus, reduced hyperphosphorylated tau protein level in the hippocampus (probably associated with the reduction of phosphorylated glycogen synthase kinase-3β (pGSK-3β) enzyme level which is involved in the tau protein phosphorylation), decreased oxidative stress (reduced ROS generation and H 2 O 2 production, and increased reduced/oxidized glutathione (GSH/GSSG) ratio) and restored A 1 R level, reduced by cholesterol.
There was no caffeine effect on the cholesterol concentration in plasma in rabbits

Nematode Models
Nematodes are suitable for experimental studies on AD due to their short lifespan, short generation time, transparent body and simple creation of new transgenic lines.
Many human genes associated with AD have orthologues in nematodes Caenorhabditis elegans
Various strains of the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans with human neurotoxic proteins (Aβ 1-42 , APP, tau protein) expression are used to investigate the cellular and molecular mechanisms of neurodegenerative diseases
After expression of the human APP in Caenorhabditis elegans, only products of α-secretase or γ-secretase cleavage (but not β-secretase) are detected, and APP-induced cholinergic neurodegeneration is observed
Expression of the h-tau protein in Caenorhabditis elegans leads to tau aggregate formation and accumulation, neuronal degeneration and synaptic abnormalities resulting in locomotion defects and behavioral impairment
In studies conducted on the nematode AD models, plant extracts containing caffeine were investigated, including the extracts from Ilex paraguariensis leaves [161], Paullinia cupana (guarana) seeds [158], Coffea beans [160], and Zijuan Pu'er tea [162] (Table
All studied extracts prevented Aβ-induced toxicity in transgenic models of AD in Caenorhabditis elegans, delaying the paralysis progression in worms and extending their lifespan
However, coffee extract (10% v/v, containing 3.6 mM caffeine) treatment did not reduce Aβ aggregation and Aβ distribution.
The authors concluded that beneficial effect of coffee probably resulted from skn-1/Nrf2 signaling pathway activation; similar effects were observed after treatment with decaffeinated coffee (0.032 mM caffeine)
A mixture of Zijuan Pu'er tea water extract ingredients (MCCP), containing (+)-catechins, caffeine and procyanidins, decreased Aβ aggregation and activated the DAF-16 signaling pathway, which was associated with lifespan extension and oxidative stress reduction in Caenorhabditis elegans, and could be mediated by a heat shock factor 1 (HSF-1) and skn-1
Guarana hydroalcoholic extract and decaffeinated guarana extract treatments were also associated with antioxidant activity and protein degradation pathways, partially through skn-1 and DAF
[156]
A 1 R-adenosine A 1 receptor.
Aβ-amyloid β.
AD-Alzheimer's disease.
BBB-blood-brain barrier.
GSH/GSSG-reduced/oxidized glutathione.
GSK-3β-glycogen synthase kinase-3β.
ROS-reactive oxygen species.
RyR-ryanodine receptor.
GHE prevented Aβ-induced toxicity in the transgenic models of AD in Caenorhabditis elegans.
GHE delayed paralysis in nematodes, reduced ROS level and activated protein degradation.
DAF-16 and skn-1 are responsible for the beneficial effect against Aβ-induced toxicity.
[158]
Aβ-amyloid β.
AChE-acetylcholinesterase. AD-Alzheimer's disease.
BBB-blood-brain barrier.
DAF-16-abnormal dauer formation 16. GHE-guarana hydroalcoholic extract.
GSH/GSSGreduced/oxidized glutathione.
hsp-heat shock protein.
IPHE-Ilex paraguariensis hydroalcoholic extract.
MCPP-mixture of three main constituents in Zijuan Pu'er tea water extract.
Nrf2-nuclear factor erythroid 2-related pGSK-3β-phosphorylated glycogen synthase kinase-3β.
ROS-reactive oxygen species.
skn-1-skinhead 1. ZTWE-Zijuan Pu'er tea water extract.
Caffeine alone was investigated only in one study on nematodes
The effect of caffeine treatment in higher concentrations (0.2 mM or 0.4 mM) was weaker than the effect of Ilex paraguariensis hydroalcoholic extract (IPHE) containing lower concentrations of caffeine
IPHE and caffeine reduced Aβ mRNA levels, decreased AChE activity, increased expression of hsp-16.2
(chaperone protein which overexpression causes suppression of Aβ-toxicity), but also activated DAF-16 signaling (IPHE also HSF-1).
It may suggest that beneficial neuroprotective effects may result from different than caffeine constituents of IPHE
Decaffeinated extracts from coffee
In conclusion, the studies on nematode models of AD did not allow the effects of caffeine to be distinguished from those of other constituents of plant extracts

In Vitro Studies
Caffeine administered to the culture medium caused an enhanced release of stored Ca 2+ in the in vitro culture of the cortical neurons of 3xTg-AD mice (Table
The effect was not associated with a change in the endoplasmic reticulum store size, defects in the Ca 2+ extrusion mechanism or expression of Ca 2+ -binding/buffering proteins, but probably with an increased expression of the RyR
Similar results were obtained in later studies showing increased calcium signals within dendritic processes induced by RyRs stimulation by caffeine.
The proper regulation of calcium signaling may be important in the prevention of synapse loss and further cognitive impairment
Beneficial effect of caffeine treatment was demonstrated in vitro in cultures of human neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y cells, to which Aβ was added in order to induce neurotoxicity
Caffeine increased expression of antiapoptotic protein Bcl-2 and reduced expression of proapoptotic protein BAX in the AlCl 3 -induced and Aβ 25-35 -induced neurotoxicity in human neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y cells.
Caffeine inhibited also the increase of AD-related proteins (APP and BACE-1) expression in cells exposed to both AlCl 3 and Aβ
The effects of caffeine were similar to those induced by selective A 1 R or A 2A R antagonists, indicating the role of blockade of both A 1 R and A 2A R. Caffeine reduced also oxidative stress (reducing NF-κB activity, reducing ROS production, increasing superoxide dismutase (SOD) activity and decreasing MDA concentration) induced by AlCl 3 and Aβ
The authors proposed that combined involvement of A 1 R and A 2A R blockade by caffeine in the neuronal cell protection is associated with the restoration of Ca 2+ homeostasis
In another study, the neuroprotective activity of caffeine against Aβ-induced neurotoxicity was confirmed in a neuronal cell line.
The effects were shown to result from complex mechanism of caffeine action-the blockade of A 1 R and A 2A R, direct or indirect blockade of NMDA receptors and activation of RyRs
Viral delivery of mutated human APP and tau protein to primary rat hippocampal neurons and rat dorsal root ganglion (DRG) caused accelerated neuronal cell death and morphological damage (more severe effects were observed in tau transduced cultures).
Also, calcium homeostasis dysregulation was observed in APP-EGFP and tau-DsRed2 transduced hippocampal neurons.
Moreover, a neurite impairment was demonstrated in APP-EGFP and tau-DsRed2 transduced DRG neurons.
Caffeine treatment prevented morphological neuronal damage increasing the number of healthy neurons in APP-induced and tau-induced models
Experiments demonstrated that delivering mutated APP and h-tau protein accelerated neuronal cell death and morphological damage.
Caffeine administration ameliorated APP-induced and tau-induced neuronal damage.
Caffeine treatment exerted neuroprotective effects in APP-induced and tau-induced models (prevented morphological damage in both models, increasing the number of healthy neurons).
[166] 3xTg-triple-transgenic.

In Silico Studies
In silico studies indicated that caffeine may be useful as an anti-amyloidogenic agent in the prevention of AD
Caffeine was studied in silico as a potential molecule that destabilizes preformed Aβ protofilaments.
The molecular dynamics simulations and calculations indicated that the mechanism of caffeine action may be associated with the disruption of inter-chain hydrogen bonds and disorganization of secondary structure conformation of Aβ
In another study, molecular dynamic simulations demonstrated that caffeine inhibited the self-assembly of Aβ oligomerization by interference with the hydrophobic interaction between Aβ 16-22 peptides; the effect was greater when caffeine concentration in the water solution was higher
In silico studies predicted caffeine to be a potential AChE inhibitor
An improvement of cholinergic system transmission was also revealed in silico molecular docking study, where a coffee and green tea constituent-EGCG inhibited AChE and butyrylcholinesterase [170].

Discussion
So far no drugs have been proven to be effective in reversing or stopping AD.
Despite numerous studies having been conducted in recent years, no new drugs have been registered by the FDA for almost
Due to the not fully understood, complex pathomechanism of AD and numerous clinical failures of anti-amyloid and anti-tau drugs, it is necessary to look at strategies involving modifying factors connected with the style of life or dietary factors which potentially would counteract the development of neurodegenerative changes or delay AD progression.
Caffeine, or rather its sources (coffee, tea, yerba mate), are considered factors which may exert beneficial effects in the AD-prevent the risk of developing AD and/or delay the progression of AD
To investigate the effects of caffeine in AD, numerous studies have been undertaken on different experimental models.
In those studies, caffeine was administered in different doses.
Caffeine was administered in drinking water, in the diet, or once/twice daily p.o. or i.p.
The descriptions of the doses (low, moderate, high) used by authors in their reports on in vitro and in vivo studies are not unequivocal.
Caffeine consumption in humans differs in a wide range.
A low caffeine intake is considered to be below 200 mg/day (<2.86 mg/kg/day), moderate between 200 and 400 mg/day (2.86-5.71
mg/kg/day) and high above 400 mg/day (>5.71 mg/kg/day)
Based on the body surface area conversion ratio, the doses administered to humans are converted into animal doses.
Thus, based on the calculations [173], the corresponding rat doses are as follows: low (<17.7 mg/kg/day), moderate
mg/kg/day) and high (>35.4
mg/kg/day).
Equivalent mouse doses under 35.1 mg/kg/day are considered as low, between 35.1 and 70.3 mg/kg/day as moderate and above 70.3
mg/kg/day as high
In most of the issues discussed in the present article about animal studies, caffeine was administered in doses corresponding to the human doses; the exact doses used in particular experiments are shown in Tables
Generally, experimental studies on caffeine effects in AD demonstrated some beneficial influence on cognition.
Its neuroprotective, antioxidant, anti-inflammatory and antiapoptotic activities in the neuronal tissues, led to alleviation of cognitive impairment
Many studies pointed out on favorable effects of caffeine on the hallmarks of the disease: Aβ or hyperphosphorylated tau protein
Since the main mechanism of caffeine action is associated with a non-selective blockade of adenosine receptors (mainly A 1 R and A 2A R), this problem was undertaken in many studies.
In fact, both adenosine receptors (A 1 R and A 2A R) are present in synapses of glutamatergic, GABAergic, cholinergic, dopaminergic, serotoninergic and noradrenergic system, and adenosine is involved in neuromodulation of the central nervous system (CNS)
Adenosine has been shown to reduce the release of various neurotransmitters including glutamate, ACh, dopamine, serotonin and noradrenaline in CNS in experimental models, whereas caffeine, as an adenosine receptor antagonist, to promote the release
In fact, the favorable effects of caffeine were shown to result from the blockade of A 2A R (but probably not A 1 R) in mice with AD induced by Aβ
However, A 1 R may be involved in the protective caffeine activity in cholesterol-enriched diet-induced AD in rabbits
Moreover, the blockade of both A 1 R and A 2A R was responsible for beneficial activity of caffeine in in vitro model of combined neurotoxicity induced by AlCl 3 and Aβ
Dual blockade was also considered a probable mechanism of caffeine neuroprotective activity in Aβ-induced toxicity in human neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y cells
Beneficial effects of caffeine resulting from the blockade of adenosine receptors (A 1 R and A 2A R) have been confirmed by studies with selective A 1 R and A 2A R antagonists.
The studies with use of selective A 2A R antagonists (MSX-3 and SCH58261) demonstrated that A 2A R blockade prevented spatial memory deficits and development of amyloid burden in the double transgenic APPswe/PS1∆E9 mice [177] and improved synaptic plasticity deficits in double transgenic APPswe/PS1 mice
Similar favorable effects of selective A 2A R antagonist administration (SCH58261) were observed also in 3xTg (APPswe, PS1/M146V and tau P301L) mice
Deletion of A 2A R prevented memory impairment and reduced tau protein hyperphosphorylation in THY-Tau22 transgenic mice
Similar effects were observed after caffeine treatment in THY-Tau22 mice
However, SCH58261 did not favorably affect scopolamine-induced and MK-801-induced acute memory impairment suggesting that selective A 2A R antagonist exerts beneficial effects only in slowly progressing memory impairment related to synaptic deterioration
However, blockade of A 2A R (by a selective antagonist-SCH58261), and also A 1 R (by a selective antagonist-DPCPX) led to beneficial effects in a scopolamine-induced model in mice
It should be pointed out that the effects of caffeine on adenosine transmission were not consistent in all studied models.
For example, no influence of caffeine on A 1 R and A 2A R density was observed in APPswe mice
Moreover, chronic caffeine intake did not result in persistent up-regulation of A 1A R in rat brains excluding this mechanism of action as the reason for the neuroprotective effect of caffeine in rats
It should be emphasized that the mechanism of caffeine action on adenosine system is dose-dependent, since, for example, in mice, acute caffeine intake at lower doses (<50 mg/kg) blocks mostly A 1 R and at higher non-toxic doses (<100 mg/kg) A 2A R
Although numerous studies indicate that antagonistic effect of caffeine on adenosine receptors may be responsible for alleviation of memory deficits, it is not the only possible mechanism of beneficial caffeine action in AD.
From among other caffeine mechanisms, the inhibitory effect on PDEs and agonistic effect on RyRs were investigated in in vitro models of AD disorders.
Caffeine inhibited PDE, restoring the mitochondrial functions in vitro in mouse N2a-APPswe cells
Activation of RyRs by caffeine led to an increased Ca 2+ release from intracellular stores in the cortical cultures from 3xTg-AD mice [107] and in the hippocampal cultures from normal rats
However, the caffeine doses required to inhibit PDEs and stimulate the RyRs are not achievable in a normal diet and could exert toxic effects in humans
Numerous mechanisms of caffeine action, which may be relevant to its favorable effects in AD models were demonstrated in studies on cell cultures.
For example, in vitro caffeine decreased Aβ level and Aβ 1-42 deposition, and reduced BACE-1 activity in human neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y cells
Also decreased expression of BACE-1 and APP was demonstrated after caffeine treatment in human neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y cells exposed to AlCl 3 and Aβ
In addition, the beneficial effect of caffeine on Aβ could be associated with antagonism of NMDA receptors or agonism of RyRs
Moreover, brewed coffee reduced Aβ production by a decrease in BACE-1 expression (which was not associated with caffeine activity) in human neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y cells
Brewed coffee increased expression of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)in SH-SY5Y cells, indicating possible neuroprotective effect
The effects of brewed coffee treatment suggest that the neuroprotective activity may result not only from caffeine activity, but also from that of other coffee components.
Since AChE inhibitors (donepezil, rivastigmine, galantamine) currently play the main role in the treatment of AD, the effects of caffeine on AChE were also studied.
In vivo studies demonstrated weak anticholinesterase activity of caffeine in normal rats
In vitro studies on caffeine and donepezil effects in the rat brain tissue homogenate demonstrated that both drugs inhibited AChE, whereas the effect was stronger after the combined treatment (with stronger inhibition at higher caffeine concentration).
On the other hand, in vivo studies did not confirm the augmentation of donepezil anticholinesterase activity by caffeine, moreover administration of high-dose caffeine with donepezil elevated the AChE activity
This may suggest adverse effects of high caffeine consumption during the treatment of AD with AChE inhibitors.
The mechanism of favorable actions of caffeine on AD may be connected with the reduction of neuroinflammation
AD and other neurodegenerative diseases are associated with an increased level of inflammation and oxidative stress parameters.
Numerous studies showed that caffeine reduced parameters of oxidative stress.
Caffeine exerted antioxidant activity in transgenic
Neuroprotective, anti-inflammatory and antiapoptotic activity of caffeine demonstrated in different experimental models of AD in vivo was reflected in in vitro studies.
Caffeine exerted antiapoptotic activity in APPswe transgenic mice
Anti-inflammatory effect of caffeine administration was associated with the reduced level of proinflammatory cytokines in THY-Tau22 transgenic mice [104], in AlCl 3 -induced neurotoxicity in rats
The caffeine effects presented in studies performed in experimental models of AD are presented in Figure
It must be stated that caffeine shares antioxidant and anti-inflammatory effects, leading to neuroprotection, with numerous phenolic compounds, many of them occurring together with caffeine in its dietary sources (coffee, tea, yerba mate).
In fact, crude caffeine (containing 1% of phenolic acids) exerted stronger favorable effects than pure caffeine
Also, other substances present in coffee or tea like chlorogenic acid
It should be pointed out that caffeine did not exert beneficial effects in all experiments on AD experimental models.
Caffeine administration did not favorably affect behavioral disorders studied in the behavioral tests in 3xTg-AD mice.
Intensification of BPSD-like behaviors and anxiety-related behaviors was demonstrated after caffeine treatment in those mice
The adverse effect of caffeine intake during pregnancy in THY-Tau22 transgenic rats was demonstrated in the behavioral tests in offspring, in which caffeine accelerated the occurrence of cognitive deficits
Detrimental effects of caffeine intake rather than that of other coffee components during pregnancy (low birth weight of infant, increased risk of pregnancy loss and childhood acute leukemia) was also confirmed in an umbrella review on the impact of coffee and caffeine on health outcomes
It must be stated that caffeine shares antioxidant and anti-inflammatory effects, leading to neuroprotection, with numerous phenolic compounds, many of them occurring together with caffeine in its dietary sources (coffee, tea, yerba mate).
In fact, crude caffeine (containing 1% of phenolic acids) exerted stronger favorable effects than pure caffeine
Also, other substances present in coffee or tea like chlorogenic acid
It should be pointed out that caffeine did not exert beneficial effects in all experiments on AD experimental models.
Caffeine administration did not favorably affect behavioral disorders studied in the behavioral tests in 3xTg-AD mice.
Intensification of BPSD-like behaviors and anxiety-related behaviors was demonstrated after caffeine treatment in those mice
The adverse effect of caffeine intake during pregnancy in THY-Tau22 transgenic rats was demonstrated in the behavioral tests in offspring, in which caffeine accelerated the occurrence of cognitive deficits
Detrimental effects As was mentioned before, caffeine (as a component of coffee, tea, yerba mate, cola) is the most widely used psychostimulant
The safety of caffeine consumption depends on the dose, age, sex and health condition
Caffeine intake in coffee, tea, yerba mate, cola and other sources at doses up to 400 mg/day is considered safe for healthy adults, except pregnant women (<300 mg/day)
In children and adolescents, caffeine consumption up to 2.5 mg/kg/day was not associated with overt adverse effects
Caffeine intake may negatively affect pregnant women, lactating women, children, adolescents, people with cardiovascular disorders, people with gastric and duodenal ulcer disease and smokers
Caffeine intake before bedtime is associated with negative impact on sleep condition, although sleep avoidance and increased vigilance and arousal may be desirable
The adverse caffeine effects on the behavior observed at higher doses intake are anxiety, jitteriness and mood disorders
Negative effect of caffeine consumption was demonstrated also in children, including reduced sleep time, impulsiveness, greater emotional lability and depression
Experimental studies, reviewed in the present article, indicate rather favorable effects of caffeine in animal models of AD.
However, results of such studies may not be fully relevant to AD in humans.
The AD models have been used to investigate many potential drugs that have proven to be effective in the animals, but this has not necessarily been confirmed in the human studies.
Multiple potential disease-modifying drug candidates (γ-secretase inhibitors, BACE-1 inhibitors, monoclonal antibodies, anti-Aβ antibodies, tau aggregation inhibitors) failed in the further phases of the trials
The studies on transgenic models were limited to the mouse models.
The rat studies, carried out on non-transgenic models, were less numerous.
In many of the experiments caffeine was administered in drinking water or in the diet, the effect of caffeine used in bolus doses at regular time intervals, over a certain period of time may be different.
Another limitation of the experimental studies is that most of them were carried out on male animals (or the animal sex was not stated), whereas human studies indicate that the effect of caffeine on cognition is sex-dependent
For example, caffeine intake was associated with better cognitive performance in older women, but not in men
On the other hand, the beneficial effects of caffeine consumption were observed in older men but not in women
Moreover, contradictory conclusions have been drawn from the analysis of the relationship between the sex-dependent effects of caffeine consumption on different cognitive outcomes: there was no significant association between caffeine administration and cognitive performance in men; significant interaction between caffeine intake and cognitive performance was observed only in women
The sex-dependent effect of caffeine could result from changes in circulating steroid hormones or differences in the caffeine metabolism (probably resulting from higher xanthine oxidase activity in women) in female and male organisms

Conclusions
In conclusion, the studies carried out on experimental models generally support the notion that dietary caffeine consumption may exert some beneficial effects in AD.
However, further studies are necessary to elucidate the role of caffeine in the effects of its sources on cognition and possibly AD risk.


adenosine A 2A receptor.
Aβ-amyloid β.
AChE-acetylcholinesterase. AD-Alzheimer's disease.
AlCl 3 -aluminum chloride.
ATP-adenosine triphosphate.
BAX-B-cell lymphoma 2-associated X protein.
Bcl-2-B-cell lymphoma protein-2.
BDNF-brain-derived neurotrophic factor.
COX-2-cyclooxygenase-2. GFAP-glial fibrillary acidic protein.
HO-1-hemeoxygenase 1. i.c.v.-intracerebroventricularly.
i.p.-intraperitoneally.
LPS-lipopolysaccharide. NOS-2-nitric oxide synthase-2.
Nrf2-nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2. p-JNK-phosphorylated c-Jun N-terminal kinase.
p-NF-κB-phosphorylated nuclear factor-κB.
p.o.-per os.
STZ-streptozotocin.
TNF-α-tumor necrosis factor α. TLR-4-toll-like receptor 4. TrkB-tropomyosin-related kinase receptor B.


A 1 R-adenosine A 1 receptor.
A 2A R-adenosine A 2A receptor.
Aβ-amyloid β.
AD-Alzheimer's disease.
AlCl 3 -aluminum chloride.
APP-amyloid precursor protein.
DRGdorsal root ganglion.
EGFP-enhanced green fluorescent protein.
h-tau-human tau.
MDA-malondialdehyde. NMDA-N-methyl-D-aspartate. ROS-reactive oxygen species.
RyR-ryanodine receptor.
SOD-superoxide dismutase.



Figure 1 .
Figure 1.
Caffeine effects reported in studies performed in experimental models of Alzheimer's disease (AD).
Aβ-amyloid β.
AChE-acetylcholinesterase. BACE-1-β-site amyloid-precursor-protein-cleaving enzyme-1.
BAX-B-cell lymphoma 2-associated X protein.
Bcl-2-B-cell lymphoma protein-2.
BDNF-brain-derived neurotrophic factor.
CCl-chemokine ligand factor.
DAF-16-abnormal dauer formation 16. EAAT3-excitatory amino acid transporter 3. GABAA-γ-aminobutyric acid type A receptor.
GFAP-glial fibrillary acidic protein.
GSH-reduced glutathione.
GSH/GSSG ratio-reduced/oxidized glutathione ratio.
IL-interleukin.
MDA-malondialdehyde. MnSOD-manganese superoxide dismutase.
NF-κB-nuclear factor-κB.
NMDA-N-methyl-D-aspartate. Nrf2-nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2. PDE-phosphodiesterase.
ROS-reactive oxygen species.
RyR-ryanodine receptor.
skn-1-skinhead 1. SOD-superoxide dismutase.
TNF-α-tumor necrosis factor α. TrkB-tropomyosin-related kinase receptor B.



Figure 1 .
Figure 1.
Caffeine effects reported in studies performed in experimental models of Alzheimer's disease (AD).
Aβ-amyloid β.
AChE-acetylcholinesterase. BACE-1-β-site amyloid-precursor-protein-cleaving enzyme-1.
BAX-B-cell lymphoma 2associated X protein.
Bcl-2-B-cell lymphoma protein-2.
BDNF-brain-derived neurotrophic factor.
CCl-chemokine ligand factor.
DAF-16-abnormal dauer formation 16. EAAT3-excitatory amino acid transporter 3. GABA A -γ-aminobutyric acid type A receptor.
GFAP-glial fibrillary acidic protein.
GSH-reduced glutathione.
GSH/GSSG ratio-reduced/oxidized glutathione ratio.
IL-interleukin.
MDA-malondialdehyde. MnSOD-manganese superoxide dismutase.
NF-κB-nuclear factor-κB.
NMDA-N-methyl-D-aspartate. Nrf2-nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2. PDE-phosphodiesterase.
ROS-reactive oxygen species.
RyR-ryanodine receptor.
skn-1-skinhead 1. SOD-superoxide dismutase.
TNF-α-tumor necrosis factor α. TrkB-tropomyosin-related kinase receptor B.



Table 1 .
Transgenic models.Long-term caffeine intake improved cognitive functions in APPswe and APPswe/PS1 mice.
Decreased Aβ levels in the plasma were observed after single administration of caffeine and long-term caffeine treatments in both transgenic mice models.
Chronic caffeine treatment reduced soluble Aβ level in the cortex and hippocampus and insoluble Aβ level in the hippocampus in APPswe mice.
Acute caffeine administration rapidly reduced the Aβ level also in the interstitial fluid in the hippocampus but did not affect Aβ elimination in APPswe mice.



Table 1 .
Cont.



Table 1 .
Cont.



Table 2 .
Non-transgenic models.



Table 2 .
Cont.



Table 2 .
Cont.



Table 3 .
Rabbit model.



Table 4 .
Nematode models.Coffee extract prevented Aβ-induced toxicity in the transgenic models of AD in Caenorhabditis elegans.
It induced also a delay in the paralysis progression in worms.
No reduction in Aβ expression, Aβ aggregation and distribution was observed in coffee-treated group.
The beneficial effect of coffee may result from skn-1/Nrf2 pathway induction.



Table 5 .
In vitro models.