Fiat Lux: The Light Became Therapy. An Overview on the Bright Light Therapy in Alzheimer’s Disease Sleep Disorders
A system of photosensitive retinal ganglion cells provides 'non-visual' information on the circadian sequences of light to the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN), which, as the 'master clock', synchronizes the chronobiological mechanisms of all the biological clocks.
Damage to SCN structure alters circadian behavioral and hormonal rhythms and interferes with a regular sleep-wake pattern.
Several studies have shown that, in aging and in Alzheimer's disease (AD), circadian rhythms change their synchronization with the environment and behavior loses sync with light.
The current overview aims to examine research studies showing the effect of bright light therapy (BLT) on sleep disorders and sleep-wake patterns in AD.
A literature search was conducted, taking into consideration the relevant studies over the last 20 years.
Fifteen studies have been thorough: seven followed an environmental-architectural approach and eight followed a treatment devices approach.
Results: Studies agree in considering BLT as a promising non-pharmacological intervention to compensate for circadian rhythm alterations and they support the need for standardized protocols that allow a comparison between multicenter studies.
Interestingly, in an attempt to contain the spread of the COVID-19 pandemic, health authorities have forced the population to stay home.
Therefore, AD people are not currently able to enjoy exposure to sunlight.
It is predictable that they may experience an exacerbation of circadian disturbances and that the BLT can be an effective response to prevent such exacerbation.

INTRODUCTION
In the biblical story, in the beginning of time, 'lux facta est' and everything is born and lives in the light.
The creative work primarily provided a rhythm, the light following the darkness.
Such rhythm shapes the temporal frame of the life, since the prehistorical example, patients experience an increase in depression during the winter, resulting in resolution in the spring.
Similarly, many depressed patients show a daily pattern of symptoms, the most serious occurring in the morning.
In addition, suicide rates show diurnal and seasonal variations, with an increase proportional to the amount of sunlight intensity
In healthy elderly, circadian rhythms change their amplitude and the synchronization with the environment
Similarly, the number of retinal ganglion cells and their activity as well as the quantity and synthesis of the main peptides, showing a circadian rhythm in the SCN, decrease
Postmortem studies on aging, dementia, and depression showed impaired functioning of the SCN which could be a basic cause of sleep rhythm disorders
In AD patients, a degeneration process of the retinal ganglion cells and a loss of functionality of the suprachiasmatic nuclei results in a distortion of the biological clock and sleep-wake patterns
Circadian rhythms are altered, behavior loses sync with light and dark, and hormones, such as melatonin and cortisol, alter their synthesis activity or suppression.
Reduction of melatonin in the cerebrospinal fluid and the loss of the diurnal rhythm of melatonin has been documented, even in preclinical stages, probably due to a defect in the retino-hypothalamic tract or in the connections between the pineal gland and the SCN
Therefore, increasing dementia severity, sleep-wake rhythm disturbances increase.
In addition, patients with dementia experience reduced exposure to sunlight and to a regular light/dark rhythm as the body's primary circadian stimulus.
They may be underexposed to outdoor activities and to natural light and being less likely to experience the 24-hour light-dark pattern required for circadian entrainment
Furthermore, the environmental lighting often does not provide comfortable light and darkness for the visual and non-visual aspects of light, to maintain a stable circadian rhythm and vital dark-induced functions, such as melatonin secretion.
Sleep disturbances increase so far as to compel the family to hospitalize the patient.
Therefore, the treatment of sleep-wake circadian rhythm in people with dementia appears as a crucial choice to improve both the quality life of patient and caregiver
On these assumptions, and in relation to the side effects of drugs for sleep disorders, non pharmacological therapeutic treatments have been developed providing for a controlled exposure to stimuli that influence biological rhythms, such as bright light therapy (BLT).
Such physiological therapeutic Only just under 30% of the patients were living at home, whereas just over 70% lived in care facilities.
Duration of treatment were rather diversified, ranging from 2 weeks to 2 years.
Equally different were the modalities of BLT administration.
Two different therapeutic settings were used.
A first used an environmental exposure to light by particular lighting architectural systems.
A second exposed the patient to natural light or to treatment devices, such as special lamps, visors, light boxes, or other artificial light sources.
Both methodological approaches reported many positive effects.
Patients were receiving drug therapy, except in the study of Yamadera and colleagues
The majority of the studies documented improving quality and duration of sleep
Not all studies had follow up but only about a half, and most of these documented persistence of improvements even after four weeks

Environmental-architectural approach
Hickman and colleagues
They delivered, for multiple 3-week periods, two different therapeutic range from 2000 to 2500 lux for the three bright light conditions and from 500 to 600 lux for the standard lighting conditions.
Morning light conditions showed significant effects only in one group of patients.
According to the authors, high intensity lighting in public areas may not be suitable for all patients, but it should be given to target people through environmental systems in bedrooms or apartments.
Furthermore, the poor homogeneity of the results had to be attributed to the methods in diagnosing depression, and to the difficulties in the self-rating of demented subjects.
Riemersma-van der Lek and colleagues
They used individual or combined long-term application of two treatments: bright light and melatonin.
For an average of 15 months, patients were treated randomly every the summer months).
According to the authors, a lighting intervention in a more controlled environment, such as care facility, may be more effective than the same intervention in the home
Similarly, Sloane and co-workers


[45], evaluated, in a randomized controlled trial with crossover, the impact of a blue-white light therapy on 17 pairs of patients with moderate or severe dementia living at home and their caregivers.
Over six weeks, two different study conditions and a four-week washout period were applied.
In the 'intervention condition', participants received blue-white light and in the 'control condition' red-yellow light.
The blue-white light was supposed to stimulate the circadian system more than the yellow-white and the blue LED light box would have to stimulate the circadian system more than the red LED.
In the intervention condition, 13000 K compact fluorescent light bulbs were located in table and floor lamps in the area where the patients lived for most of the day and were lit from waking up at 18:00.
In addition, a light-emitting diode light box was placed in the breakfast and lunch area.
In control condition, 2700 K compact fluorescent light bulbs were placed in the table and floor lamps and used during the day, while a red LED light box was used for breakfast and lunch.
Blue-white light improved sleep and stress in caregivers, but not in patients with dementia.
Depression, instead, improved and was more sensitive to treatment and lower levels.According to the authors, the relatively low dose may have been sufficient to target normal caregivers but not people with dementia, probably because the circadian systems of people with dementia may need more time and greater or prolonged circadian stimulation to respond to light and to reach significant effects.
Actually, in a previous study, Van Someren and colleagues[46]  observed positive effect of bright light on sleep parameters in people with dementia only after six months of treatment.Recently, van Lieshout-van Dal and colleagues
They placed in a common area, three special biodynamic lighting armatures, producing direct and indirect light with a high illuminance and bluish color in the morning, and lower levels in the evening, to simulate intensity, spectrum, and temporal characteristics of a natural daylight curve.Lighting level and color temperature were combined and changed gradually during the day: a light intensity from 600 lux at 8 a.m., 1100 lux from 10 a.m.
U n c o r r e c t e d A u t h o r P r o o f and the lack of homogeneity of the sample, where different types of dementia were considered as a single group.
In addition, according to the authors, light treatment might improve sleep only in some types of dementia.
Results were considered clinically favorable because it appears easier to assist patients whose circadian activity patterns are more socially acceptable.
On these results, in a second trial, Ancoli-Israel and colleagues [48] studied a more homogeneous group of 92 patients with possible or probable AD living in nursing home.
Results did not replicate previous study.
Both morning and evening light led to more consolidated sleep at night.
Moreover, evening light increased the quality of the rhythm of circadian activity.
However, no improvement was found on total sleep time.
Therefore, increasing light exposure during the day and evening probably has the most beneficial effect on sleep and circadian rhythms in patients with dementia.
According to the authors, BLT could be the most effective non-pharmacological approach to improve sleep rhythms and circadian activity in patients with AD.
Burns and colleagues [33], underlining that agitation drugs can result in serious side effects and in increasing mortality rate in people with dementia, studied the effects of BLT on agitation and sleep disturbances in order to identify alternative treatments to drugs.
They assessed the effects of BLT on agitation and sleep disorders, by a single-center randomized controlled study on 48 patients living in care facility, with moderate and severe dementia, 26 randomized to standard light, 22 to BLT.
Patients were exposed daily for two weeks to full spectrum BLT 10000 lux or standard fluorescent tube light at 100 lux, for 2 hours in the morning, between 10 a.m. and noon.
BLT resulted in a partial reduction of agitation and improving sleep, especially in the winter.
According to the authors, BLT may be a potential alternative to drug treatment and may reduce the need for medication in agitation.
The wide range of responses to BLT observed were attributed to the heterogeneity of the sample examined.
McCurry and coworkers [39], to investigate the efficacy on improving sleep disorders in dementia, studied 132 AD patients with sleep problems and their caregivers, by a randomized, controlled trial with blinded assessors.
They used three different treatment approach: light exposure (1 hour/day, by a light box, approximately 2500 lux of full spectrum light before going to sleep), walking (30 continuous minutes/day), and a combination treatment (walking, light exposure, sleep education).
Participants were U n c o r r e c t e d A u t h o r P r o o f 10 I. Roccaro and D. Smirni / Bright Light Therapy in AD Sleep Disorders randomly assigned to one of three active treatments or contact control.
AD patients with sleep problems benefited from walking and increased light exposure, either alone or in combination.
Patients with greater adherence to walking and light exposure recommendations had significantly less total wake time and better sleep efficiency at post-test than those with lesser adherence.
Sleep improvements were not sustained at six months.
Onega and co-workers [40], in a first study, assessed in the AD population the effects of bright light therapy compared to low intensity light therapy.
They studied, by a randomized controlled design, 60 patients with dementia, living in a long-term facility.
Participants were randomly assigned to receive either bright light, or low intensity light for eight weeks, for half an hour twice a day (morning and afternoon/evening) for 2 months.
The intense light (10000 lux) elicited a significant improvement in depression and agitation, while low intensity light produced higher levels of depression and agitation or no significant change.
In a second study, Onega and colleagues [32] investigated the effect of BLT in relation to the severity of the dementia.
They found that bright light exposure is an equally effective intervention for depression both in mild/moderate and severe dementia.
However, overall findings showed that BLT alone or with other interventions, both non-pharmacological and pharmacological, improve depression regardless of dementia severity and that patients with severe dementia are most likely to be subject to changes in circadian rhythm or sleep patterns.
In an observational study, Sekiguchi and colleagues [37], to investigate the efficacy of BLT in the different stages of cognitive decline and in the types of dementia, studied 17 patients including Alzheimertype dementia, vascular dementia, and Lewy bodies dementia.
A device for bright light (approximately 5000 lux of full spectrum light), was placed at eye level, every day, for 1 hour/day (from to 9:00 to 10:00) for 2 weeks.
BLT resulted in the improvement of sleep disturbance in four AD patients (on eight) in the mild or moderate stage.
However, dementia patients showed difficulty complying with the light therapy due to attention deficit, their dislike of the therapy, hyperactivity, and a tendency to wander in ward.
None of the vascular dementia and Lewy bodies dementia patients improved nocturnal sleep.
According to the authors, patients with vascular dementia had a higher prevalence of sleep apnea.
Moreover, their poor-quality sleep may reflect the disruptive effects of the lacunes in the internal capsule, in the basal 502 ganglia and in the periventricular white matter of 503 the neural network leading to and from the suprachi-504 asmatic nucleus.
Similarly, sleep disorders in Lewy 505 bodies dementia have been attributed to changes in 506 the arousal system by pathology of the brainstem 507 and limbic region [37].
Therefore, the BLT could 508 be considered as an effective strategy for treating 509 dementia, depending on the type and the severity and 510 should be emphasized as a non-pharmacological ther-511 apy for sleep disorders and a safe form of treatment 512 for patients with dementia.



592
time and not to the endogenous circadian phase of 593 the patients.
Probably, the optimal time for deliver-594 ing lighting depends upon an individual's circadian 595 cycle and relation to a model rhythm that is in 596 sync with the natural light/dark cycle.
Therefore, 597 although all-day light exposure resembles the natural 598 light/dark pattern, in practice, choosing the best time 599 for BLT represents a complex choice, in which multi-600 ple clinical, individual, and environmental variables 601 interact.
Probably, a study protocol that evaluates the 602 multiplicity of variables involved could provide more conclusive data also on timing.
In clinical practice, greater agreement should be reached on the most appropriate procedures to achieve the largest therapeutic advantage.
Actually, non-homogeneous criteria were used in the sample recruitment criteria, in the size sample, in the timing, intensity and duration of exposure of the single therapy session, in the overall duration of the treatment, in the period of the year of therapy.
Many studies have tried various combinations of intensity and duration for best results with more intense exposure in a shorter time, assuming that for people with dementia a short intervention may favor better compliance.
Therefore, future research must aim at the construction of a standardized protocol allowing a more immediate data comparison and overcoming many current inconsistencies.Finally, a relevant outstanding issue concerns interaction between BLT and other therapeutic treatments.Using BLT and melatonin
Similarly, studies
However, future studies should be needed to understanding to what extent improvements are due to each individual therapeutic modality, such as melatonin, or whether different 'zeitgebers' may interact to amplify their efficacy.
Interestingly, recently in an attempt to contain the spread of COVID-19 pandemic, health authorities have forced populations to stay home for an unlimited time.
Therefore, people with AD are not currently able to enjoy exposure to sunlight and they may experience an exacerbation of sleep and behavioral disorders, increasing caregiver's stress; hence, the need to compensate by providing targeted indoor lighting interventions, through an environmentalarchitectural design or special light devices.
Such lighting interventions appear as an answer to a primary problem resulting from a degenerative process of the retinal ganglion cells and suprachiasmatic structures.
Degenerative process can be amplified by the lifestyle of patients who live less outdoors and reduce the time of exposure to sunlight.
The recent U n c o r r e c t e d A u t h o r P r o o f



Table 1
Bright Light Therapy for sleep disorders in Alzheimer's disease: environmental-architectural approach



Table 2 Bright
Light Therapy for sleep disorders in Alzheimer's disease: treatment devices approach Mansfield Agitation Inventory-Frequency; CRBRS, Crichton Royal Behavior Rating; CSDD, Cornell Scale for Depression in Dementia; Ctr, Control; DLB, Dementia with Lewy bodies; DMAS-17, Dementia Mood Assessment Scale-17 Item; DSAOA, Depressive Symptom Assessment in Older Adults; GDS, Geriatric Depression Scale; MMSE, Mini-Mental State Examination; MOUSEPAD, Manchester and Oxford Universities Scale for the Psychological Assessment of Dementia; n.s., not specified; NPI-NH, Neuropsychiatric Inventory,