Relationship between proinflammatory cytokines (Il-1beta, Il-18) and leukocyte telomere length in mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer's disease
Inflammation plays a crucial role in Alzheimer's disease (AD).
AD neurodegeneration and concurrent involvement of the peripheral immune system may promote leukocyte division and telomere shortening.
We examined genotypes and plasma levels of two proinflammatory cytokines, IL-1beta and IL-18, and leukocyte telomere length (LTL) in patients with mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and AD.
We wanted to determine whether changes in plasma IL-1beta and IL-18 levels, together with LTL shortening, could be diagnostic for disease progression from MCI to AD. Median plasma IL-1beta levels were in the order MCI patients (2.2 pg/mL) < AD patients (4.0 pg/mL), both of which differed significantly from the controls (0.0 pg/mL).
In the AD patients, the lowest IL-1beta levels were associated with the presence of the C allele of IL-1beta rs16944 SNP.
Median plasma IL-18 levels were in the order MCI patients (116.3 pg/mL) > AD patients (85.8 pg/mL), both of which were significantly higher than in the controls (17.6 pg/mL).
Analysis of LTL showed a progressive reduction in the order controls > MCI > AD patients (p<0.0001).
Overall LTL reduction was correlated with increased plasma IL-1beta levels, substantiating the hypothesis that inflammatory processes secondary to neuroinflammation may trigger telomere attrition.
Changes in plasma IL-1beta and Il-18 levels, and LTL seem to reflect shifts in AD stage; they may have potential use as blood biomarkers to monitor disease onset and progression from MCI to AD.

Introduction
The importance of inflammatory components in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease
Such plaques are surrounded not only by activated microglia but also by astroglial cells secreting several proinflammatory mediators that may contribute to the synaptic rarefaction and the neuronal loss characteristic of AD. β-amyloid (Aβ) binding to the receptor for advanced glycation end products (RAGE)
Accordingly, a therapeutic strategy entails the use of anti-inflammatory protocols targeting neuroinflammation
Moreover, the microglia from aged mice were found to exhibit increased proinflammatory cytokine production, including IL-6, IL-1beta, and TNF-α
Indeed, activation of the peripheral immune status has been consistently reported during senescence
The increase in inflammatory mediators in the peripheral blood of AD patients may be caused by neuroinflammation and cytokine release through the blood-brain barrier.
Since its integrity is impaired in AD
For the present study, our attention was focused on IL-1beta and IL-18, two proinflammatory cytokines detected in close proximity to amyloid plaques in AD brains, on the basis of the following observations.
Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of IL-1beta and IL18 genes have been found associated with a greater probability of developing the disease
A recent meta-analysis reported that these cytokines number among the specific peripheral inflammatory biomarkers for AD
In line with these observations, NOD-like receptor family pyrin domain (NLRP3) inflammasome activation leading to IL-1beta and IL-18 production is recognized as a central actor in the machinery underlying neuronal death in AD
TNF-α, IL-1beta, and IL-6 act directly on the neuron and induce apoptosis.
Similarly, TNF-α and IL-1beta can activate astrocytes, which release factors that activate microglia, giving rise to an amplification loop of the entire process
The detection of high levels of IL-1beta peripherally in patients with MCI, before the development of established AD
High levels of IL-18 in the cerebrospinal fluid of MCI patients and marked elevation of circulating sIL-1R2 and free IL-18, which is characteristic of MCI and disappears in AD, make them interesting markers for evaluating progression from MCI to AD
A further aim of our study was to clarify the possible role of the two cytokines as peripheral biomarkers for MCI and AD.
In fact discrepancies exist in the data for the variation of plasma levels of IL-1beta and IL-18 as reported by
Several studies reported a non-significant tendency of blood IL-18 levels to increase in MCI and AD patients, while others reported an increase in blood IL-18 levels only in the early stages of AD (mild AD)
The neuroinflammatory state accompanying AD, and the concurrent involvement of the peripheral immune system, may promote leukocyte division and telomere shortening in relation to astrocyte and microglia proliferation
There is urgent need to develop a panel of biomarkers to predict the progression of MCI to AD.
In this study, we examined the relationships between IL-1beta and IL-18 and leukocyte telomere length (LTL), with the aim to determine whether changes in plasma IL-1beta and IL-18 levels and shortening of telomere length could provide reliable predictive markers of progression from MCI to AD
Human telomeres are composed of repeated TTAGGG nucleotide sequences located at the ends of each chromosome.
Because telomere sequences are not fully replicated during DNA replication due to the inability of DNA polymerase to replicate the 3′ end of the DNA strand, telomeres shorten as cells divide.
A cellular ribonucleoprotein enzyme complex, called telomerase, counteracts telomere shortening
Since telomerase is almost absent in adult tissues, including skin, kidney, liver, blood vessels, and peripheral leukocytes, the telomeres of replicating cells shorten progressively, and this mechanism is thought to underlie aging and age-associated diseases.
Studies at the population level of leukocyte telomere length (LTL) have provided ample evidence that leukocyte telomere shortening is associated with aging
The LTL association with cognitive decline/dementia and AD has been widely investigated
Recent studies have suggested that progressive LTL reduction may be a marker of the progression from MCI to AD
We analyzed the link between changes in LTL and IL-1beta and IL-18 levels in MCI and AD patients to gain a better understanding of the relationships between telomere length, AD development, and inflammatory status.
Serum IL-1beta and IL-18 levels and the genotypes of three IL-1beta and IL-18 SNPs were assayed in three samples (controls, MCI, and AD patients) and their relationship with LTL compared.
The ultimate goal of the study was to investigate the pathogenetic mechanisms of AD development from its prodromal phases (MCI) to established disease and to evaluate the interconnections between inflammatory cytokines and LTL, two biomarkers that could provide a potentially useful diagnostic tool to identify patients who may switch from MCI to AD

Materials and Methods

Subjects
LTL was measured in two groups of patients (AD and MCI) and a control group recruited at the Alzheimer's Disease Center of Neurology Division of Verona Hospital (Table
All subjects were Caucasians, born in a limited geographical area in northern Italy (district of Verona and Veneto region).
Cognitive status was quantified using the Mini Mental State Examination (MMSE)
Table
Demographic characteristics of Controls, MCI and AD patients Amnestic MCI (aMCI) diagnosis was established according to internationally accepted criteria
3) normal performance of activities of daily living as evaluated and excluded according to Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR) scale scores and two clinical interviews with both the patient and the informant (Instrumental Activities of Daily Living and Basic Activities of Daily Living)
Exclusion criteria were a history of head injury, psychiatric disorders, neurological diseases or severe sensorial deficits.
The control group was composed mostly of the patients' spouses, unrelated to any of the patients and not demented according to the interview.
The protocol for the collection of biological material for the scientific studies was approved by the institutional ethics committees.
Informed consent was obtained from all subjects.

Laboratory methods
Genomic DNA was extracted from venous blood drawn in EDTANa 2 as anticoagulant according to the salting out procedure described by
IL-1beta(rs16944, -511) genotypes were determined according to Di
IL-18 (rs1946518 and rs187238) genotypes were determined with a tetra-primer amplification refractory mutation system PCR (ARMS-PCR).
For IL18 rs1946518 ARMS-PCR, the external primers were forward5′ CTTTGCTAT CATTCCAGGAA 3′ and reverse: 5′ TAACCTCATTCAGGACTTCC 3′; the internal primers were forward 5′ GTTGCAGAAAGTGTAAAAATTATTAC 3′ and reverse 5' ACGGATACCATCATTAG ATTTTATT 3'.
For IL18 rs187238 ARMS-PCR, the external primers were forward 5′ The average (of triplicate) telomere length in leukocytes was measured by real-time PCR quantitative analysis (qPCR) on a 7300 real-time PCR instrument (Applied Biosystems).
This method allows the determination of the number of copies of telomeric repeats (T) compared to a single copy gene (S), used as a quantitative control ( T/S ratio)
The telomere and single-copy gene βglobin (HGB) were analyzed on the same plate in order to reduce inter-assay variability.
DNA (35 ng)
was amplified in a total volume of 20 μl containing 10 μl of SYBR Select Master Mix (Applied Biosystems); primers for telomeres and the single copy gene were added to final concentrations of 0.1 μM (Tel Fw), 0.9 μM (Tel Rev), and 0.3 μM (HGB Fw), 0.7 μM (HGB Rev), respectively.
The primer sequences were: Tel Fw 5′-CGGTTTGTTTGGGTTTGGGTTTGGGTTTGGGTTTGGGTT-3′; Tel Rev 5′-GGCTTGCCTTACCCTTACCCTTACCCTTACCCTTACCCT-3′; HGB Fw 5′-GCTTCTGACACAACTGTGTTCACTAGCAAC-3′; HGB Rev 5′-CACCACCAACTTCATCCACGTTCACCTTGC-3′
The enzyme was activated at 95°C for 10 min, followed by 40 cycles at 95°C for 15 s and at 60°C for 1 min.
In addition, two standard curves (one for HGB and one for telomere reactions) were prepared for each plate using a reference DNA sample (Control Genomic Human DNA, Applied Biosystems) diluted in series (dilution factor = 2) to produce five concentrations of DNA from 50 to 6.25 ng in 20 µL.
Measurements were performed in triplicate and are reported as T/S ratio relative to the calibrator sample to allow comparison across runs. .
Replicate assays of same sample were carried out to calculate the interassay variation.
The average standard deviation as calculated by measuring relative T/S ratios of a sample repeated over three different assays was 4.2%.
Thus, assuming a normal distribution, samples differing in average telomere length by as little as 8.3% (1.96 X SD) should be distinguishable by this method at the 95% confidence interval
No amplification of the negative controls with both primer sets (HGB and telomeres) used was observed.
Plasma IL-1beta and IL-18 levels were detected by ELISA according to the manufacturer's instructions (Immunological Sciences Cod. IK4152 Human IL-18 (interleukin 18) Elisa Kit, range 15.625-1000pg/ml , sensitivity < 1 pg/ml; Immunological Sciences Cod. IK4141 Human IL-1beta
(interleukin 1 Beta) Elisa Kit, range 1.56-100 pg/ml, sensitivity < 0.15 pg/ml).
IL-1beta and IL-18 Elisa kits intra-assay CV is <8% and inter-assay CV is <10%.

Statistical Analysis
Allelic frequencies were determined by the gene-counting method.
Agreement between the observed genotype distributions of the examined SNPs and those expected according to Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium was verified using a chi square test.
In the three groups (controls, MCI and AD patients) the observed genotype frequencies agreed with those expected according to Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium .
The genotype distributions among the three groups were compared by a chi square test of independence.
Parametric (ANOVA) and nonparametric (Kruskal-Wallis or Wilcoxson rank-sum test) tests were used to compare the distribution of quantitative variables across the three groups, and the distribution of mean plasma IL-1beta/IL-18 levels and the mean T/S ratio across the genotypes of the SNPs examined.
Significance was set at p < 0.05.

Results

Plasma levels and genotypes of IL-1beta and IL-18
Plasma IL-1beta and IL-18 levels were measured in MCI, AD, and control samples.
Prior to further analyses, we examined the relationships of IL-1beta and IL-18 levels with age and gender by multiple regression analysis, and no significant relationship was observed between IL1-beta and gender (p=0.42) or age (p=0.40), and between IL-18 and gender (p=0.54) or age (p=0.83).
Plasma IL-1beta levels, compared by the Wilcoxson rank-sum test (Table
Plasma IL-1beta was detectable in 94.1% of AD patients, 79.6% of MCI patients, and only in 36.8 % of controls, a distribution which was statistically different (chi square=22.9,
p<0.0001), mainly because of the difference between AD patients and controls (Fig.
Genotypes of IL-1beta and IL18 SNPs, were determined in larger samples of controls, MCI and AD patients (Table
It should be noted that genotyped subject samples did not always match serum sample numbers.
No difference was observed in the IL1 beta and IL18 genotype distribution between MCI/AD patients and controls.
A similar analysis for plasma IL-18 levels and IL-18 genotypes could not be performed due to the small number of IL-18 assays in the MCI and AD groups.

Leukocyte telomere length
Leukocyte telomere length was determined in the subjects in which serum IL-1beta and IL-18 levels were assayed.
By using Kruskal-Wallis test, significant LTL differences were found between the controls, aMCI and AD patients (p<0.0001), with mean LTL values (±SD) in the order AD patients (0.71T/S ± 0.14) < aMCI patients (0.80T/S ± 0.13) < controls (0.98T/S ± 0.03).
The relationships between LTL and serum IL-1beta and IL-18 levels were analyzed.
Overall a significant negative linear relationship (p=0.02) was observed between serum IL-1beta levels and LTL (adjusted for age) (y= -0.009x +0.83).
In accordance with this finding, significantly higher mean LTL values (0.88 ±0.13 T/S) ) were observed in the subjects in which IL-beta was not detectable compared to those in which IL-1beta was detected (0.78 ±0.16 T/S, p=0.01).
When we tested the possible association between IL-1beta rs16944 genotypes and LTL in the three groups, we observed no association for the control and MCI groups (Table
Differently, significantly higher LTL values were found associated with CC genotype in the AD patients compared to the LTL values associated with genotypes carrying the IL-1 beta T allele.
Finally, no significant linear relationship was detected between plasma IL-18 levels and LTL in the whole sample.
The effect of IL-18 genetic variation (rs1946518 and rs187238 SNPS) on serum Il-18 levels could not be tested due to the small sample size of serum IL-18 measurements.

Discussion
Inflammatory mechanisms play a key role in the pathogenesis of AD
Because the course of the disease takes several years, even decades, before clinical hallmarks such as loss of memory and alteration of cognitive processes become manifest, there is a need to identify biomarkers that, besides discriminating different stages of the disease, can work as prognostic indicators of the transition from a healthy status to MCI and from MCI to AD.
To date, however, studies measuring serum inflammatory cytokine levels
Inflammation is thought to underlie leukocyte telomere attrition, a phenomenon frequently associated with cognitive decline and AD, which probably reflects the activation of leukocyte proliferation induced by the inflammatory status.
.Accordingly, LTL has been investigated
as an additional indicator of the neuroinflammatory processes accompanying neurodegeneration as it progresses from a prodromal state (MCI) to full-blown AD
Here, we examined IL-1 beta and IL-18, two proinflammatory cytokines, as markers of the inflammasome activation that accompanies the neurodegenerative process, and we sought to determine their relationship with LTL in MCI and AD patients.
Analysis of peripheral IL-1beta concentrations showed higher levels in the MCI compared to the control group, and an even higher level in the AD compared to the MCI group.
This pattern is consistent with previous studies that reported an upregulation of IL-1beta in AD patients.
Published data on IL-1beta levels in MCI patients are scarce and less homogeneous, however
In the current sample, IL-1 beta was detectable in 80% of the MCI patients, with levels falling between those of the controls and the AD patients.
This finding suggests that the increase in IL-1 beta was present from the early stages of disease.
It has been suggested that the increased IL-1beta levels in AD patients may be linked to Aβ formation
It follows then that the detection of serum IL-1beta levels in patients with MCI could signal early neurodegeneration and progressive deposition of amyloid plaques.
Analysis of IL-1beta SNP (rs16944) revealed no association between IL-1beta genotype and susceptibility to MCI or AD.
Previous studies have produced highly heterogeneous results
Based on the genotype frequencies we observed, a very much larger sample would be needed to reach the same statistical power.
Since the IL-1beta rs16944 SNP is located in the promoter region of the IL-1beta gene, we wanted to explore the possible association between IL-1 beta genotypes and serum Il-1beta levels.
We found that, in line with previous observations
This association was not significant, however, and was seen only in the AD group, i.e., in the sample with the highest IL-1beta levels.
Nonetheless, together with evidence from previous studies
A different picture emerges from the analysis of serum IL-18: cytokine levels were higher in the MCI group and lower in the AD group, but still higher than in the controls.
This observation is at variance with previous investigations, as no previous study analyzing MCI patients reported elevation of IL-18
Nevertheless, in a study involving AD patients in which disease severity was classified by MMSE score
Our results seem to reflect these observations: elevated IL-18 levels in very early stages (in the MCI group), followed by a drop in IL-18 levels in the AD group, but still significantly higher than in the controls.
An explanation for this is that the increase in free IL-18 in MCI may imply early IL-18-dependent inflammation-driven alterations in the blood-brain barrier and neuronal damage preceding the development of AD
In AD, increased expression and production of IL-18 in the brain may be the cause of a general and systemic increase in its inhibitor
We observed no association between IL-18 genotype and susceptibility to MCI or AD.
This contrasts with previous studies
The absence of any association in our sample may have resulted from the inclusion criteria in sample collection or the sample size.
Overall, the most significant findings are the results of the serum IL-1 beta and IL-18 assay: compared to the controls, both interleukins showed a distinctive behavior in the MCI group, in which IL-1beta was detectable and IL-18 was very high probably due to NLRP3 inflammsome activation by canonical (involvement of caspase 1) and non canonical pathway (involvement of caspase-11)
Their combined presence is indicative of MCI and provides support for clinical diagnosis.
In a previous study
Also, we observed a positive relationship between LTL and cognitive performance (as measured by MMSE).
The present study showed a difference in LTL between controls, MCI and AD patients, strengthening previous observations
In addition, we observed a relationship between shorter LTL and higher serum IL-1beta levels: LTL was longest in the subjects in which IL-1beta was not detectable and IL-1beta levels were lowest in the AD patients carrying the IL-1beta rs 16944 CC genotype, found to be associated with the lowest IL1beta levels.
These results provide an in vivo link between telomere shortening and serum IL-1beta levels, an inflammation biomarker.
The general picture suggests that activation of peripheral inflammatory processes secondary to neuroinflammation may trigger active leukocyte proliferation and result in telomere shortening.

Conclusions
The use of biomarkers based on cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and neuroimaging has markedly improved the diagnostic accuracy of MCI and AD.
Nonetheless, such biomarkers still have only a partial role in clinical practice owing to limitations in the assay methods or the invasive procedure necessary to obtain CSF.
Hence, novel biomarkers that can be used to monitor additional important molecular mechanisms of AD and that can be obtained through noninvasive procedures are needed
Researchers and clinicians increasingly acknowledge that it is not only important to define a clinically and biologically well-characterized diagnosis of AD but also to identify individuals in the prodromal phases of the disease or at increased risk of developing AD so as to implement prevention, early interventions, and monitoring to improve clinical outcomes
Here we provide evidence that the combined assay of IL-1beta and IL-18, two cytokines, and LTL measurement may be used as blood-based biomarkers for changes in relation to disease stages and to monitor disease onset and progression from MCI to AD.
Further investigations in larger samples are desirable to confirm present results, and studies with a follow-up design would be suitable to determine whether and to what extent LTL and/or IL-1beta and IL-18 assays may predict the clinical course of cognitive decline in MCI and the transition to AD.


Dementia in the AD patients was diagnosed according to Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, fourth edition (DSM-IV) criteria (American Psychiatric Association, 2000).
Probable AD was diagnosed according to National Institute of Neurologic and Communicative Disorders and Stroke and Alzheimer Disease and Related Disorders Association (NINCDS-ADRDA) Work Group guidelines (revised)



Fig. 1
Fig. 1 Box and whisker plots showing the distribution of plasma IL-1beta levels in Controls, MCI , and AD patients.
Controls: median= 0.0, first quartile (q1) =0.0, third quartile (q3): 4.4; MCI: median=2.2,
q1= 0.07, q3= 6.9; AD patients: median=4.0,
q1 = 2.4, q3: 7.4.



Fig. 2 %
Fig. 2 % detectability of plasma IL-1beta in controls, MCI and AD patients



Fig 3 -
Fig 3-Box and whisker plots showing the distribution of plasma IL-18 levels in Controls, MCI , and AD patients.
Controls: median= 17.6, first quartile (q1) =0.0, third quartile (q3): 90.6; MCI: median=116.3,
q1= 85.8, q3= 209.7;
AD patients: median=85.8,
q1 = 29.3,
q3: 158.5.



Fig. 4
Fig. 4 Box and whisker plots showing the distribution of LTL (T/S ratio) in Controls, MCI , and AD patients.
Controls: median= 0.97, first quartile (q1) =0.96, third quartile (q3): 1.0; MCI: median=0.80,
q1= 0.71, q3= 0.90; AD patients: median=0.69,
q1 = 0.59, q3: 0.83.



Table 2 .
Median values of serum IL-1beta and IL-18 in Controls, MCI and AD patientt expressed as pg/mL.
In round brackets 1 st and 3 rd quartile values.



Table 3 .
Genotype distribution of IL-1beta and IL-18 genotypes in controls, MCI and AD patients When we analyzed the relationships of IL1beta genotypes with IL1 beta plasma levels, a trend showing an association of lower IL1beta levels with CC genotype was observed, mainly in AD subjects, although the difference among the mean IL-1beta level and genotype (Table4) was not significant.



Table 4 .
Relationships of IL1beta genotypes with plasma IL1 beta levels



Table 5 .
Relationships of IL1beta genotypes with LTL