Iron and Alzheimer’s Disease: From Pathology to Imaging
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a debilitating brain disorder that afflicts millions worldwide with no effective treatment.
Currently, AD progression has primarily been characterized by abnormal accumulations of β-amyloid within plaques and phosphorylated tau within neurofibrillary tangles, giving rise to neurodegeneration due to synaptic and neuronal loss.
While β-amyloid and tau deposition are required for clinical diagnosis of AD, presence of such abnormalities does not tell the complete story, and the actual mechanisms behind neurodegeneration in AD progression are still not well understood.
Support for abnormal iron accumulation playing a role in AD pathogenesis includes its presence in the early stages of the disease, its interactions with β-amyloid and tau, and the important role it plays in AD related inflammation.
In this review, we present the existing evidence of pathological iron accumulation in the human AD brain, as well as discuss the imaging tools and peripheral measures available to characterize iron accumulation and dysregulation in AD, which may help in developing iron-based biomarkers or therapeutic targets for the disease.

INTRODUCTION
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a debilitating illness which afflicts millions worldwide, but no effective treatment exists.
This is partly due to the lack of understanding of the molecular basis behind the disease.
Presently, AD pathology is typically characterized by an abnormal accumulation of β-amyloid in plaques and phosphorylated tau in neurofibrillary tangles leading to neurodegeneration including synaptic and neuronal loss.
Support for a role of β-amyloid comes from genetic risk factors-mutations in amyloid precursor protein (APP) and presenilin genes lead to βamyloid accumulation and confer risk to early-onset AD
However, despite this accumulation, β-amyloid plaques correlate poorly with memory decline
Interestingly, this correlation does improve for soluble amyloid
In contrast, while a genetic linkage is not established between genes associated with processing tau and AD
Diagnosis of AD requires the presence of both β-amyloid and tau accumulations, although the mechanisms by which they produce neurodegeneration remain unknown (van der
Even FDA-approved amyloid clearance that is thought to address amyloid (including soluble amyloid) does not have a clear clinical benefit
Thus, βamyloid and tau do not seem to provide a complete explanation of the pathogenesis and progression of AD.
Recent work suggests that microglial inflammation also plays an important role in AD, and may link β-amyloid and tau pathology with neurodegeneration.
Genetic analyses demonstrated increased AD risk associated with inflammationrelated genes including TREM2
Gene expression studies show AD associated remodeling of microglial gene regulatory networks
Furthermore, evidence shows microglia interact extensively with β-amyloid and tau.
In vivo preclinical models demonstrate that microglia phagocytize injected fibrillary amyloid
Depletion of murine microglia can also reduce the trans-synaptic spread of tau
Additionally, the importance of inflammation is suggested by cellular responses-pro-inflammatory cytokines are increased in AD
Iron is a key component of inflammation; thus, it is of direct importance to AD.
Additionally, it is important in many other fundamental biological processes in the brain including oxygen transportation, DNA synthesis, mitochondrial respiration, myelin synthesis, and neurotransmitter synthesis and metabolism
As early as 1953, abnormal iron accumulation in the hippocampus has been associated with AD
Since then, much work has been done examining the role of iron and iron homeostasis in relation to AD pathology.
In this review, we will present the existing evidence and mechanistic insights of iron involvement in AD, and discuss novel imaging tools and peripheral measures available to characterize iron accumulation and dysregulation in AD.

BIOLOGICAL EVIDENCE OF IRON ALTERATIONS IN THE ALZHEIMER'S DISEASE BRAIN Iron Cycle in the Brain
Iron normally enters the brain by crossing the blood-brain barrier via transferrin receptor-1 mediated endocytosis of transferrin (an iron transport protein) or non-bound iron
In AD, however, it can also enter without endocytosis when there is breakdown of the blood-brain-barrier (BBB)
Local iron stores are then recycled throughout the brain via export and transport mechanisms which support the diverse functions of various cell types
While these mechanisms have not been fully elucidated, an approximate model of iron cellular physiology in brain cells is depicted in Figure
Transferrins carrying ferric iron (Fe 3+ ) bind to transferrin receptor-1 and are endocytosed.
Fe 3+ is then reduced to ferrous iron (Fe 2+ ) and exported to the cytosol via divalent metal transporter 1 (DMT1).
In the cell, iron may be exported by ferroportin (an iron export protein stabilized by APP and downregulated by hepcidin) and Fe 2+ can be oxidized by ceruloplasmin, a major antioxidant protein, as it re-binds to transferrin.
Iron can also be stored in ferritin (iron storage protein) as Fe 3+ and released when needed.
Additionally, labile iron (free Fe 2+ in the cytosol) can be used by cellular processes, is modulated by iron regulatory proteins (IRP), or generate reactive oxygen species for cell metabolism.

Histological Iron Staining
Multiple validated histological techniques exist for iron as well as iron related proteins.
Perls' Prussian blue iron stain is the bestknown histological technique used to visualize the distribution of iron in AD specimens.
Specifically, potassium ferrocyanide, K 4 [Fe(CN) 6 ], reacts with Fe 3+ ions to give an insoluble, intense Prussian blue pigment, as well as with Fe 2+ , resulting in a white precipitate called Everitt's salt that eventually oxidizes to give a similar blue hue.
Furthermore, treatment of tissue with acid can ionize iron bound to iron metabolism proteins, such as transferrin, hemosiderin and ferritin, allowing visualization of these species, while it cannot highlight iron present in hemoglobin or neuromelanin due to strong covalent bonding and affinities
3,3 -Diaminobenzidine (DAB) can be used to intensify Perls' staining-examples can be seen in Figure
The Turnbull technique is also a common related histochemical method.
This technique consists of applying potassium ferricyanide, K 3 [Fe(CN) 6 ], in association with hydrochloric acid, making it possible to reveal Fe 2+ ions.
Variations of the Turnbull stain using pretreatments can also allow visualization of Fe 3+ ions (de
Ferrous (Fe 2+ , redox-active) iron accumulation is associated with senile plaques and neurofibrillary tangles in human AD
DAB-enhanced Perls' iron staining has shown iron accumulation in the AD hippocampus, as shown in Figure 2
Fe 3+ is reduced to Fe 2+ (4) and exported to the cytosol by DMT-1 (5).
In the cell, iron may have different fates.
It can be exported by ferroportin (6a), which is stabilized by APP (trafficked with the help of tau) and downregulated by hepcidin.
Fe 2+ is oxidized by ceruloplasmin as it re-binds to transferrin (7a).
Iron can also be stored in ferritin as Fe 3+ (6b) and released when needed (7b).
Fe 2+ in the cell can act as labile iron (6c), which is used by cellular processes and generates reactive oxygen species for cell metabolism (which could also trigger inflammation and cytotoxicity).
The extent of the labile iron pool is monitored by iron regulatory proteins (IRP) (7c).
Iron, iron-related proteins and RNAs can also be exported from the cell through exosomes (right side).
Box (i) shows mRNA transcription of iron-associated proteins which is regulated by IRPs and miRNAs.
Box (ii) shows iron regulating activity of furin, which cleaves and activates alpha-secretase, whose sAPP production inhibits beta-secretase-driven amyloidogenesis.
cleavage of APP and increased β-amyloid production
Additionally, DMT-1 is colocalized with β-amyloid in plaques of the AD brain, suggesting its involvement in APP processing and β-amyloid generation
Iron is also linked to tau
High dose iron treatment on APP mice increased tau phosphorylation and treatment of APP mice with deferoxamine, an iron chelator, abolished tau phosphorylation
It is important to note, however, that there are distinct contrasts between human AD brain tissue and the APP mouse model-iron distribution, iron management, and glial response histologically differ between the two

Inflammation
Iron may play a role in microglial driven inflammation, an important process in AD pathology
In fact, microglia in the human AD hippocampus contains increased concentrations of iron storage protein ferritin
This accumulation of iron in microglia occurs by increasing expression of iron import protein DMT-1 and simultaneously decreasing expression of iron export protein ferroportin
Redox-active iron accumulations are associated with glial cells
Similarly, β-amyloid plaque infiltrating microglia in the neighboring middle temporal gyrus show increased ferritin .
On all of these hippocampal slides, iron-containing microglia are evident as brown spots surrounded by blue stain, sometimes but not always associated with β-amyloid plaques.
Figure from
FIGURE 3 | Successive histologic images demonstrating consistent iron and microglia at the subiculum for 4 hippocampal specimens.
Top row: representative magnetic resonance imaging virtual slices from each specimen.
Successive rows: zoomed in histological sections.
Single = 3,3 -diaminobenzidine (DAB)-iron (brown), double = DAB-iron (brown) plus CD163-microglia (blue), triple = DAB-iron (brown) plus CD163-microglia (blue) plus β-amyloid (red).
Brightness, contrast, and color balance were adjusted homogeneously across each image to evenly emphasize iron deposits, microglia, β-amyloid deposits, and neurofibrillary tangles as well as neuropil threads.
Figure from
expression
This microglial accumulation of iron in inflammation is confirmed by in vivo animal models
Treatment of microglia with proinflammatory cytokines causes an increase in iron uptake, while treatment with anti-inflammatory cytokines causes iron retention, further suggesting the association of iron with microglial inflammation
Toxic levels of ferrous (Fe 2+ ) iron in human AD tissue can also promote inflammation by serving as a catalyst for the production of free radicals via the Fenton reaction
A cellular stress protein (coded by the heme oxygenase-1 gene) that oxidizes heme to biliverdin, iron, and carbon monoxide in response to noxious stimuli, is significantly overexpressed in neurons and astrocytes of the AD hippocampus and cerebral cortex, which could produce iron in the AD brain
Glial heme oxygenase-1 expression in the temporal cortex and hippocampus is significantly greater in AD
Additionally, ceruloplasmin, a major plasma antioxidant that converts redox-active iron back to Fe 3+ , is increased in AD, suggesting a responsive increase to oxidative stress

Cell Death and Ferroptosis
Iron may be linked to cell death mechanisms in AD
One such mechanism is iron-dependent ferroptosis
Evidence for ferroptotic mechanisms is found in post-mortem AD tissue
Delaying ferroptosis in mice produces reductions in β-amyloid
Indeed, depletion of these ferroptosis-inhibiting proteins (such as glutathione) in the frontal cortex and hippocampus has been observed in AD
Ferroptosis mechanism and the evidence in AD were also recently reviewed elsewhere

Dysregulation of Iron Homeostasis
Supporting the hypothesis that iron is linked to AD pathology is the abundant evidence of several dysregulated iron-related proteins in AD (Table
Overall activity of transferrin, an iron binding protein responsible for delivery and transport of iron to cells in serum, lymphatic fluid, and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), is decreased in AD.
Concentrations of transferrin are consistently lower in white matter of various cerebral cortical regions
On the other hand, lactotransferrin, a transferrin glycoprotein, and iron scavenger
Moreover, lactotransferrin colocalizes with neurofibrillary tangles in the hippocampal formation and inferior temporal cortex and correlates with antibody stains of β-amyloid and tau
Additionally, transcriptomics on a very large cohort showed lactotransferrin correlated with β-amyloid burden, while in vitro data point to its involvement in amyloidogenesis
Similarly, melanotransferrin (p97) is found in elevated levels associated with microglial cells in senile plaques
Ferritin, the major iron storage protein, seems to be increased in activated microglia in the AD temporal gyrus
Levels of ferroportin, the main iron exporter protein that requires APP for stability in neurons
Also, ferroportin is downregulated in mouse AD models, and its reduced levels are associated with hippocampal atrophy, memory deficits and ferroptotic cell phenotype, while restored levels seem to prevent ferroptosis and memory impairment
Similarly, hepcidin, a peptide hormone that seems to modulate the action of ferroportin, has been found to be decreased in AD hippocampi

Evidence From Risk Factors Linking Iron and Alzheimer's Disease
Iron overload disorders have linked iron to AD and neurodegeneration.
The iron overload disorder hereditary hemochromatosis itself is strongly associated with progression of dementia in both males and females
Patients who underwent blood transfusions, which often results in iron overload and is linked with dysregulated iron metabolism
The apolipoprotein E gene is significantly associated with AD

Integrative Mechanism
An overview of the mechanisms by which iron accumulation occurs in the AD brain and drives neurodegeneration is summarized in Figure
β-amyloid plaques recruit and activate iron containing peripheral macrophages and resident microglia, leading to neuron apoptosis
The reactive monocytes increase their iron content via DMT-1 and downregulation of ironexport pathways
The labile iron directly affects oxidative stress and free radical production in AD by way of β-amyloid protofibrils, which interact with ferric (Fe 3+ ) iron to produce ferrous (Fe 2+ ) iron, a catalyst for toxic free radicals via Fenton chemistry
Overall, the accumulated iron produces reactive oxygen species that can damage DNA

Iron Involvement in Non-Alzheimer's Disease Neurodegenerative Pathology
Iron is also implicated in other neurodegenerative disorders, including Parkinson's disease (PD), Huntington's disease (HD), amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), and neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation (NBIA).
Its role in these diseases appears in some ways to overlap with proposed mechanisms driving neurodegeneration in AD, and in other ways appears secondary.
Iron accumulation is present in the neurons and glia of the substantia nigra in patients with Parkinson's disease-in fact, iron concentrations correlate with disease severity
As in AD, accumulation of iron in PD has been linked to increased BBB permeability
In PD, studies have shown an increase of lactoferrin receptors in neurons
Iron accumulation is identified in the striata and basal ganglia of patients with Huntington's disease
However, it seems to be secondaryhuntingtin (the gene mutated in Huntington's disease) is involved in iron homeostasis regulation
In amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), there is increased iron accumulation by microglia around the motor cortex
The mechanisms underlying this finding are unclear, though abnormal iron homeostasis inducing excessive oxidative stress in motor neurons has been postulated to contribute to disease pathogenesis
Neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation (NBIA) is a group of genetic disorders characterized by the abnormal accumulation of iron in the basal ganglia
There are many variations caused by genetic mutations of proteins involved in various pathways, including iron homeostasis, coenzyme A biosynthesis, lipid metabolism, and autophagy, among others, though the specific role the mutations play in inducing iron accumulation remain unclear
Further study of these disorders may provide insights into the mechanisms linking iron accumulation to neurodegeneration.

Colocalization of Other Elements With Iron in Alzheimer's Disease
Several other transition metals have been studied in relation to oxidative stress in the context of AD.
Overall, high levels of zinc, iron, and copper are found in amyloid plaques and neurofibrillary tangles of AD
In particular, copper, alongside iron, has been shown to induce aggregation of βamyloid
Overall copper levels are decreased in the AD brain
The role of Zn in β-amyloid aggregation is also unclear
Zinc deficiency has been shown to accelerate AD-like memory deficits in brains of APP mice without modifying β-amyloid plaque burden
The association of copper and zinc with plaques is more dependent on metal concentrations in surrounding neuropil than iron, which has a lower affinity to the β-amyloid peptide
MRI and autopsy studies have also found deposits of gadolinium, a paramagnetic heavy metal used for contrast enhancement in MR imaging, in sites of iron accumulation in the brain, particularly in the iron-rich dentate nucleus and globus pallidus.
Gadolinium arrives exclusively because of intravenous administration, and small amount of unchelated gadolinium is presumably absorbed.
Interestingly, different absorption rates are found depending on the exact compound used
Nevertheless, the possible colocalization of these two elements in the brain may motivate research into overlapping mechanisms of accumulation

EX VIVO IMAGING/MEASUREMENT
Ex vivo imaging techniques leveraging specific properties of iron, stemming from its atomic structure or the magnetic properties of its subatomic particles, have been used to visualize abnormal iron accumulation in the brain and elucidate chemical speciation and redox state.
On their own, these methods are not functional measures of iron-thus, they are typically coupled with other methods of iron analysis or histology, which can provide the necessary biological context.
For an overview of the different methods, their working mechanism and resolution (see Box 1).

X-ray Microscopy
The use of X-ray microscopy techniques to visualize iron accumulation in the ex vivo brain is well established.
In particular, X-ray fluorescence (XRF) (Figures
X-ray Absorption Near Edge Structure (XANES) (Figures
XANES has been used to quantify concentrations of ferritin and magnetite (a magnetic iron oxide) in the AD frontal lobe
Micro-PIXE demonstrates a significant increase in iron in the rim and core of neuritic plaques in the AD amygdala
X-ray absorption spectroscopy and transmission X-ray microscopy (which can visualize the structure and composition of β-amyloid aggregates) have been combined with X-ray magnetic circular dichroism spectroscopy (which observes the magnetic properties of metals) and iron assay quantification to show that accumulation of β-amyloid can mediate reduction of Fe 3+ to redox-active Fe 2+ , serving as a direct source of oxidative stress in AD
This has been replicated using XANES and electron microscopy in Fe 3+ ferritin-bound iron being converted to ferrous state in the presence of β-amyloid

Ion Microscopy
Ion microscopy techniques such as inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS) and secondary ion mass spectroscopy (SIMS) have been used to study iron in the AD brain.
ICP-MS can detect metals in samples at very low concentrations, including iron.
ICP-MS analyses show iron concentration elevation in AD brains correlating with Braak stages (classifications of the degree of pathology in AD)
Higher iron (and zinc) content was also found using ICP-MS in the brains of transgenic tau mice
SIMS allows for direct identification of chemical elements with high sensitivity and specificity.
In the context of AD, it permits the visualization of iron distribution on AD hippocampal tissue-NanoSIMS analysis in AD has shown the presence of iron at the periphery of senile plaques and in some glial cells

Neutron Analysis
Neutron Activation Analysis can be used to identify trace metals in ex vivo specimens, with high specificity.
It has shown increased iron concentrations in cortical specimens from AD brains
Moreover, increased iron in the inferior temporal cortex assessed post-mortem was strongly associated with accelerated cognitive decline in the final 12 years of life

Electron Microscopy
Electron microscopy can provide quantifications of iron with nanometer resolution in AD.
Analytical transmission electron microscopy (ATEM) has been used to identify iron related proteins such as ferritin and hemosiderin at the ultrastructural level by combining traditional electron microscopy with high resolution X-ray nanoanalysis to verify presence of iron in molecular cores.
Specifically, both ferritin and hemosiderin are observed in the periphery of senile plaques and glial cells and coincide with NanoSIMS analyses of iron
Other electron microscopy techniques, namely scanning electron microscopy (SEM), energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS), and electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS) have also shown an increase of redox active iron (Fe 2+ ) not present in controls, shown in Figures 6, 7

METHODS BASED ON ATOMIC STRUCTURE X-ray methods

X-ray fluorescence (XRF)
In XRF
Displaced inner shell electrons are replaced by outer shell electrons, with concomitant emission of photons (Figures
The energy of the emitted photons is specific to the element (Figure
Emitted photons are collected by the X-ray fluorescence detector, and the acquired spectrum reveals the sample's elemental content.
Raster-scanning the sample enables generation of elemental (iron) maps (Figure
Resolution depends on the beam diameter, and can reach nanometer-sizes

X-ray Absorption Near Edge Structure (XANES)
In XANES
The incoming beam energy is modulated around the absorption edge of an element of interest (Figure
The resulting spectrum can provide extra information such as the oxidation state of iron deposits (Figure
Resolution depends on the beam size, and, similar to XRF, can reach nanometer range
Proton(/particle)-induced X-ray emission (PIXE) PIXE
Micro particle-induced X-ray emission (micro-PIXE) analysis can provide information on the elemental distribution in tissue with good spatial resolution (on the order of 0.5-50 µm) and excellent multielement capability, including K, Ca, Mn, Fe, Cu, and Zn

Scanning Transmission X-ray Microscopy (STXM)
In STXM
The sample is raster-scanned, and a high-resolution transmission image for this energy is created.
This is performed for multiple incoming beam energies, and in the end a spectrum for each sample point is generated, and the energy range spans the absorption edge of both organic (e.g., C, N) and inorganic elements (e.g., Fe and Ca), without the use of staining.
Spatial resolution can reach several nanometers
Magnetically sensitive STXM X-ray magnetic circular dichroism (XMCD) further allows for detection of alterations related to oxidation state
For all X-ray methods, the sample is typically in the form of thin sections (since fluorescence photons cannot travel very far in tissue) and is raster-scanned by the X-ray beam to create elemental or oxidation state maps.

Ion methods
Inductively Coupled Plasma (ICP) Mass Spectrometry (MS)/Optical(/Atomic) Emission Spectrometry (OES/AES) ICP spectrometry methods use plasma to ionize the sample, and break it into smaller, charged particles.
In ICP-MS
Coupling ICP-MS to methods such as liquid chromatography or capillary electrophoresis can enable element speciation analysis in liquid samples
Alternatively, in ICP-AES
Use of laser ablation (LA) enables raster-scanning the sample, ablating each point before the subsequent ICP-MS/AES analysis (LA-ICP-MS/AES), to create elemental maps of iron (but not oxidation state) with lateral resolution at micrometers range.
Secondary Ion Mass Spectroscopy (SIMS) SIMS
Charged particles are then separated based on the charge-to-mass ratio similar to ICP-MS.
Scanning with the ion beam allows for nanometer-resolution elemental imaging (NanoSIMS) with the ability to detect iron, though not directly discriminate oxidation state

Neutron methods

Instrumental Neutron Activation Analysis (INAA)
In INAA
The emitted gamma radiation is collected and matched to the known element emission spectra, facilitating elemental analysis of the elements that form radionuclides, such as trace metals.
Samples can be very small (in the milligrams range) but also large, and do not typically require any sample preparation, since neutrons and gamma rays are highly penetrating.

Electron methods
Energy Dispersive (X-ray) Spectroscopy (EDS/EDX) The principle of EDS
An X-ray spectrometer, similar to the XRF setup, is needed to analyze the lower energy photons, in order to identify elements in the sample by their characteristic radiation.
Elemental maps can be then created (including Fe, Ca, and Si), with spatial resolution ranging from 10 nm to a few micrometers, though EDS is not able to distinguish iron oxidation states.

Electron Energy Loss Spectroscopy (EELS)
EELS is conceptually similar to XAS, enabling analysis of elements like Fe, but it can also discern properties such as oxidation state.
In a transmission electron microscope (TEM), the electrons impinging on the sample can scatter inelastically, losing energy when interacting with the sample atoms.
An electron spectrometer collects transmitted electrons, with subsequent evaluation of how much energy has been lost compared to the original beam energy.
The loss spectrum has peaks at values corresponding to the energy required for displacing inner shell electrons of the sample atoms.
Resolution is in the nanometer range

METHODS BASED ON MAGNETIC PROPERTIES
Superconducting Quantum Interference Device (SQUID) magnetometry SQUID magnetometry
There are different modes of measurement, such as the magnetization vs. field (M-H) curves, magnetization vs. temperature (M-T) curves, or the isothermal remanent magnetization (IRM) curves, with the latter being most commonly used for measuring iron in tissues.
Combination of the modes can be used to distinguish iron oxidation states and quantify magnetite or ferrihydrite in tissue.
Samples are usually in powder/pellet form.
Electron Paramagnetic Resonance (EPR) or Electron Spin Resonance (ESR) spectroscopy EPR
The resonance frequency is determined by an externally applied field (typically at the microwave range), while the magnetic field is swept until the energy provided to the system by the field matches the energy of the microwaves for the given quantity of free electrons.
The method can analyze iron content of minute pieces of tissue (including oxidation state), down to the micrometer scale.

Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI)
MRI is a tomographic method for imaging larger samples than the other methods.
In MRI, signal depends on the relaxation properties of magnetic spins in the sample, most commonly hydrogen protons, found most abundantly in water molecules.
In the presence of elements such as iron, the relaxation properties of the water protons are altered, most notably the T2 * relaxation, which depends on local field inhomogeneities.
Susceptibility-weighted imaging generates contrast based on phase images and serves as a more qualitative way to display magnetic field variations in tissue
A more quantitative way to potentially image elements such as iron in tissue is to estimate the local susceptibility (quantitative susceptibility mapping, QSM)
By complex mathematical algorithms, QSM reconstructs distributions of magnetic dipoles (representing the local susceptibility of tissue) to match the magnetic field inhomogeneities obtained from the phase image of gradient-echo images.
QSM has typical MRI resolutions in the mm range in vivo, to the hundreds or even tens of micrometers range in ex vivo specimens.
The sensitivity of MRI imaging increases at higher magnetic field strengths
Unlike other imaging methods mentioned, MRI serves as indirect imaging of iron and thus cannot differentiate between molecular forms of iron and cannot provide information about elemental specificity.
Electron nanodiffraction, high resolution transmission electron microscopy, and electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS), which are commonly used in nanoanalysis of materials, can also been used to analyze structure of individual ferritin protein cores in AD
These have shown dysfunction of ferritin with an increase in toxic brain ferrous irons contributing to the production of free radicals, inducing both oxidative stress and myelin breakdown associated with cognitive decline in AD

Magnetometry
Magnetic properties of AD brain tissue can be examined using superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID) magnetometry, a highly sensitive method of precisely measuring extremely small magnetic field changes.
Due to its high sensitivity, this method is appropriate for measuring weakly magnetic materials such as magnetite, a magnetic iron oxide which has been shown to accumulate in AD and produce freeradicals via the Fenton reaction.
Still, estimating concentrations of magnetite is difficult due to interference from diamagnetic signals of tissue, and also ferritin, which has significantly different magnetic properties-as a result, complementary magnetic measurements are often performed to separate magnetite signals from background
When used to examine AD brain samples, SQUID magnetometry showed a significantly higher concentration of magnetite in AD, implicating iron accumulation in AD oxidative stress
Of note, the iron accumulation was on average greater in women.
Increased ferrihydrite, an idrited form of iron, was also observed in severe AD patients compared to controls, although magnetite levels did not differ (van der
On the other hand, combination of SQUID with EPR showed higher ferrihydrite concentration and higher magnetite magnetic moment in AD brains

Magnetic Resonance Imaging
High field magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is sensitive to microscopic iron and can be used to visualize iron deposits in the ex vivo human/critter brain at resolutions ∼100 µm, with the possibility of translation to in vivo imaging.
Increases in the presence of ferric iron in brain tissue cause faster T2 * relaxation in ex vivo 7 Tesla MRI, so regions of high iron content are clearly visible on MR images with varying degrees of signal dropout based on the amount of iron present at that location.
T2 * -weighted 7T gradient echo MR images of ex vivo tissues show a loss of signal that coregisters with histological iron and β-amyloid stains, with iron deposits colocalized around βamyloid
Similarly, QSM was used to show that β-amyloid-rich frontal gray matter had higher susceptibility values, suggestive of higher iron content, compared to plaque-free gray matter
QSM at 9.4T and 14.1T has also been used to identify β-amyloid-rich cortical areas, results which extended to in vivo MR
Similar results but with tau tangles have been shown in mouse models of AD
Along the same lines, R2 * (R2 * = 1/T2 * ) distributions in the AD hippocampus correspond with increased iron deposition
Moreover, 7T MR using a modified FIGURE 5 | X-ray methods' working principle and example outputs.
(A) X-ray fluorescence (XRF) setup, with incoming beam, sample and photon spectrometer collecting emitted photons of all energies.
The same setup can be used in X-ray absorptions spectrometry (XAS) or X-ray absorption near-edge structure (XANES), where the incoming beam energy is modulated and output recorded.
(B) Incoming photons interact with the sample, and displace inner shell electrons, which are emitted as photoelectrons.
When these are replaced by outer shell electrons, the change of energy of the latter leads to the emission of a photon with energy corresponding to the energy difference of the two shells, which is characteristic of the element.
Emitted photons are collected by the photon spectrometer.
(C) XRF spectrum collected by the photon spectrometer in (A).
The photon count in each energy bin can provide elemental concentrations in the sample.
(D) Typical XAS and XANES spectra corresponding to iron.
(E) When the beam raster-scans the tissue section (left) and an XRF spectrum is collected for each point, the output can be an elemental map of the sample (here an iron map of a human hippocampus).
(F) XANES spectra can be collected for multiple identified iron deposits.
balanced steady-state free precession sequence (bSSFP), which allows for a high contrast resolution, alongside a gradient echo (GRE) sequence, both sensitive to iron, coregistered with histologic staining and microscopy found MRI hypointensities in the subiculum corresponding to microscopic iron in activated microglia, shown in Figure 7
This is in support of the inflammatory component to iron's involvement in AD as described above (see section "Proposed Mechanisms of Iron in Alzheimer's Disease").

IN VIVO IMAGING AND BIOMARKERS
In vivo imaging and peripheral measures have been used to quantify iron and iron-related proteins, bridging the gap between central and peripheral processes and suggesting potential for translation to non-invasive biomarkers.

In vivo Magnetic Resonance Imaging
MRI has been extensively used to map iron in AD
Initial efforts with MRI utilized spin-echo T2 relaxation principles (iron deposition shortens T2 relaxation times) to detect possible iron alteration in AD.
In particular, 3T MRI imaging had shortened T2 relaxation times in the AD hippocampus, correlating to increases in iron deposition
Similarly, AD mice (5xFAD) on an ironrich diet showed shortened T2 in somatosensory cortex, while T2 values showed an interplay with inflammation
Still, T2 shortening is not iron-specific-other mechanisms including changes in myelin density can contribute to this phenomenon
Field dependent R2 increase (FDRI) MRI, which can quantify tissue iron by calculating the difference in R2 (inverse of T2) on two different field strengths, found significantly higher iron quantities in AD patients in the caudate and globus pallidus compared to controls (
However, FDRI is not a specific measure of iron, and the mechanism producing it is not clearly understood.
Susceptibility imaging using gradient echo sequences can measure brain iron accumulation in vivo, by quantifying signal and phase changes caused by iron deposition, which is more accurate, sensitive, consistent, and efficient than T2
Phase imaging applied to AD patients found lower phase values in the AD basal ganglia and hippocampus, suggesting increased iron concentrations
Quantitative susceptibility mapping (QSM) can also provide estimation of iron in vivo, by deconvoluting unwrapped phase images and providing a distribution of magnetic susceptibility in the tissue
QSM used alongside β-amyloid positron emission tomography (PET) found that hippocampal iron levels predicted accelerated cognitive deterioration in individuals with β-amyloid pathology (Figure
A comprehensive review of applications of QSM in AD and other neurodegenerative diseases can be found in

Biofluid Measures of Iron
While MRI can potentially demonstrate the levels and distribution of iron in AD in vivo, peripheral measures of iron or iron-related proteins (see Table
Several studies have measured iron related proteins in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), serum, and saliva in relation to AD progression and cognitive decline.
Lower transferrin serum levels are correlated with lower cognitive function scores
Moreover, genetic analysis of blood shows significant associations with AD for single nucleotide polymorphisms in transferrin (TF) and transferrin receptor (TFR2) genes
Similarly, lower CSF melanotransferrin (p97) levels correlate with a reduction in hippocampal volume over time
Patients with dementia caused by AD also differ in serum melanotransferrin (p97) levels-melanotransferrin FIGURE 7 | STEM-EELS dataset acquired from three different AD brain tissue samples.
An EEL spectra overlay of AD specimens, a negative control specimen, and a Fe 2 O 3 standard specimen (99.9%,
Sigma-Aldrich).
All spectra from AD brain tissues exhibit stronger pre-peaks than those from the negative control specimen and the Fe 2 O 3 standard, suggesting higher concentration of ferrous ions in AD brain specimens.
The pre-peak intensity of the negative control specimen is at the same level as the Fe 2 O 3 standard, suggesting that iron deposits in healthy brains are mainly comprised of ferric iron.
The different pre-peak intensities in AD brain tissues also suggest variations of ferrous/ferric iron concentrations of different AD patients and deposits.
Figure from
levels were elevated three to fourfold in AD compared to non-AD dementia and normal controls
Salivary lactoferrin (also known as lactotransferrin), an antimicrobial peptide that can regulate inflammatory response by decreasing iron overload and reactive oxygen formation, shows promise as a biomarker for AD.
In fact, accuracy for AD diagnosis by salivary lactotransferrin levels was greater than diagnosis by CSF biomarkers, including phosphorylated tau
Higher CSF levels of ferritin were found to be associated with worse cognitive performance, and accelerated pathology and cognitive decline
Ferritin is also a promising serum marker: increased serum levels correlate with lower scores of tests of cognitive function (i.e., higher dementia levels)
Multi-element analysis of AD serum using XRF showed lower iron levels in AD vs. controls
A serum iron status profile analysis showed a decrease of iron, ferritin, transferrin, ferroportin, and transferrin receptor concentrations in AD patients
Corresponding with lower ferroportin levels were higher observed levels of hepcidin in AD patient serum compared to controls
While the fluid biomarker studies above generally showed decreased levels of iron-related proteins, a study examining ceruloplasmin to transferrin ratio in serum found that transferrin saturation, and not transferrin itself, actually increased in AD patients

DISCUSSION AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS
The literature supports iron's involvement in AD-evidence of iron alterations has been consistently observed ex vivo, with histology, biological techniques, and imaging, and in vivo, with MR and biofluid measures.
Despite the evidence presented here that iron accumulation and dysregulation is a hallmark feature in the AD brain, it remains an outstanding question whether it is simply the result of other underlying pathologic drivers (which may make it a good biomarker of disease, but not a therapeutically relevant target) or if it has a causative role in driving neurodegeneration (with potential for targeted therapies).
There exists limited evidence supporting iron as a causative factor in AD.
Proteomic studies show that binding of ferrous iron to β-amyloid peptides facilitates aggregation through formation of β-sheet structures
In vitro work has also suggested a causative role for iron in the formation of β-amyloid aggregates-treatment of neurons with ferric citrate facilitated non-amyloidogenic processing of APP
Similarly, treatment of β-amyloid peptides with ferric citrate promotes aggregation
In vivo, increasing the brain iron of APP mice through dietary overload has been shown to potentiate iron accumulation in amyloid plaques and microgliosis
It is important to note, however, that there are distinct contrasts between human AD brain tissue and the APP mouse model-iron distribution, iron management, and glial response histologically differ between the two
However, further research with preclinical AD models and clinical trials of iron modulation in humans are needed to potentially provide evidence for a mechanistic link between iron and Alzheimer's pathology and progression.
Advances in MRI to increase accuracy and specificity of iron detection may possibly reveal early AD pathology.
Initial work has demonstrated the potential of in vivo MRI techniques to detect iron deposition and dysregulation in AD.
Leveraging ultra-high-field (7T) MRI systems, which can produce images with higher signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) and spatial resolution than lower-field strength MR systems (1.5T, 3T), may provide additional research and clinical benefit.
These systems are being used to elucidate novel insights into the pathology of neurological and neuropsychiatric diseases ex vivo
These findings have led to a growing number of in vivo studies performed at 7T, where increased resolution of structural and functional scans has led to enhanced visualization of microstructures
In AD, high-resolution 7T brain imaging, when compared to 3T, has made several advancements in our understanding of disease pathology and pathogenesis and may potentially improve timely diagnosis and management
7T imaging can be used alongside β-amyloid PET-MR and tau PET-MR for a full analysis of AD pathology in vivo.
However, high SNR and resolution requires long scan times resulting in image artifacts caused by patient motion, which limits the clinical interpretability of images and the reliability of quantitative analyses, such as segmentations that estimate volume and thickness.
Thus, work is being done to accelerate scans
Additionally, while evidence of iron dysregulation has been seen with peripheral measures, the current data have not translated to strong diagnostic or prognostic markers.
Extracellular vesicles such as exosomes, which have been linked to AD spread and progression in preclinical models
Hence, they are being increasingly studied as AD biomarkers
Iron related proteins found in exosomes include: transferrin and its receptor
Extracellular vesicles may thus play a role in iron or iron-related protein and RNA (inter-cellular) transport, in neurodegeneration and specifically in AD
Further investigation of iron in AD can elucidate the mechanisms behind AD pathogenesis and progression, while also allowing potential for translation to clinical applications using iron as an AD biomarker or even therapeutic target.



FIGURE 1 |
FIGURE 1 | Iron cycle in brain cells.
Transferrin carrying Fe3+ (1) binds to transferrin receptor (2) and is endocytosed (3).
Fe 3+ is reduced to Fe 2+ (4) and exported to the cytosol by DMT-1 (5).
In the cell, iron may have different fates.
It can be exported by ferroportin (6a), which is stabilized by APP (trafficked with the help of tau) and downregulated by hepcidin.
Fe 2+ is oxidized by ceruloplasmin as it re-binds to transferrin (7a).
Iron can also be stored in ferritin as Fe 3+ (6b) and released when needed (7b).
Fe 2+ in the cell can act as labile iron (6c), which is used by cellular processes and generates reactive oxygen species for cell metabolism (which could also trigger inflammation and cytotoxicity).
The extent of the labile iron pool is monitored by iron regulatory proteins (IRP) (7c).
Iron, iron-related proteins and RNAs can also be exported from the cell through exosomes (right side).
Box (i) shows mRNA transcription of iron-associated proteins which is regulated by IRPs and miRNAs.
Box (ii) shows iron regulating activity of furin, which cleaves and activates alpha-secretase, whose sAPP production inhibits beta-secretase-driven amyloidogenesis.



FIGURE 2 |
FIGURE 2 | Iron-containing microglia in the subiculum.
A1-A5 represent different AD specimens.
Single = 3,3 -diaminobenzidine (DAB)-iron (brown), double = DAB-iron (brown) plus CD163, a marker for microglia (blue), triple = DAB-iron (brown) plus CD163 (blue) plus β-amyloid (red).
On all of these hippocampal slides, iron-containing microglia are evident as brown spots surrounded by blue stain, sometimes but not always associated with β-amyloid plaques.
Figure from Zeineh et al. (2015).



FIGURE 4 |
FIGURE 4 | Proposed mechanistic pathway of iron mediated neurodegeneration.
(1) β-amyloid plaques potentiate activation and recruitment of phagocytic cells in AD. (2) Blood brain barrier (BBB) breakdown leads to extravasation of peripheral monocytes to CNS in AD. (3) Increase in activated inflammatory cells in CNS in AD. (4) β-amyloid potentiates conversion of ferric to ferrous iron.
(5) BBB breakdown allows free iron directly into CNS.
(6) Accumulation of labile iron in CNS (increase in iron levels) in AD. (7) Ferric iron triggers tau phosphorylation and aggregation.
(8) Oxidative damage drives tau pathology.
(9) Excess iron and associated oxidative stress induce ferroptosis, a direct cell death mechanism.



BOX 1 |
Iron imaging/measurement methods.



FIGURE 6 |
FIGURE 6 | Focused ion beam scanning electron microscopy (FIB-SEM) exposing cross-section of an AD specimen (A) with SEM-EDS confirming presence of iron (Fe) and zinc (Zn) (B-D).
(A) Secondary electron SEM (SE-SEM) image of the exposed cross section, with the glass slide/substrate visible below.
The scale bar is the same for (A-C), and is accurate only in the indicated direction as the sample is viewed at an angle.
(B) EDS iron map at 6.4 keV acquired on the boxed region from (A), confirming the presence of an iron-rich feature.
(C) EDS zinc map at 8.6 keV acquired on the boxed region from (A), confirming the partially overlapping presence of a zinc-rich feature.
(D) Overview EDS spectrum integrated across the tissue cross section, showing iron as well as zinc.
Peaks for common organic elements [carbon (c), phosphorus (P), sodium (Na), sulfur (S)] are present, as well as silicon (Si) and oxygen (O) from the glass.
The blue box indicates the energy space relevant for identifying iron and zinc.
The blue line depicts a background fit. Figure from Madsen et al. (2020).



FIGURE 8 |
FIGURE 8 | Relationship between QSM, β-amyloid, and longitudinal cognitive outcomes.
(A) Heat map of average difference in QSM between β-amyloid positive subjects β-amyloid negative subjects.
(B) Graphical representation of the impact of baseline QSM upon change of cognition, measured by cognitive composite scores of episodic memory (California Verbal Learning Test-delayed, Logical Memory Test-delayed, Rey Complex Figure Test-Long Delay).
Annual rate of cognitive decline was calculated for each individual based on his or her trajectory of decline for the entire period they were included in the study.
This is plotted against baseline QSM value.
Baseline QSM in the hippocampus was negatively associated with annual rate of change in episodic memory in β-amyloid positive subjects (P = 9.2*10 -7 ), and positively associated with rate of change in β-amyloid negative subjects (P = 0.014).
Figure from Ayton et al. (2017b).



TABLE 1 |
Alterations in measures of iron-related proteins.