The Synthetic Retinoid Acitretin Increases IL-6 in the Central Nervous System of Alzheimer Disease Model Mice and Human Patients
These days, the important role of retinoids in adult brain functionality and homeostasis is well accepted and has been proven by genomic as well as non-genomic mechanisms.
In the healthy brain, numerous biological processes, e.g., cell proliferation, neurogenesis, dendritic spine formation as well as modulation of the immune system, have been attributed to retinoid signaling.
This, together with the finding that retinoid metabolism is impaired in Alzheimer's disease (AD), led to preclinical and early clinical testing of natural and synthetic retinoids as innovative pharmaceuticals with multifactorial properties.
Acitretin, an aromatic retinoid, was found to exert an anti-amyloidogenic effect in mouse models for AD as well as in human patients by stimulating the alpha-secretase ADAM10.
The lipophilic drug was already demonstrated to easily pass the blood brain barrier after i.p. administration and evoked increased nest building capability in the 5xFAD mouse model.
Additionally, we analyzed the immune-modulatory capacity of acitretin via a multiplex array in the 5xFAD mouse model and evaluated some of our findings in human CSF derived from a pilot study using acitretin.
Although several serum analytes did not display changes, Interleukin-6 (IL-6) was found to be significantly increased in both-mouse and human neural material.
This demonstrates that acitretin exerts an immune stimulatory effect-besides the alpha-secretase induction-which could impact the alleviation of learning and memory disabilities observed in the mouse model.

INTRODUCTION
In a meta-analysis, significantly lower vitamin A plasma levels were found in Alzheimer's disease (AD) patients (Lopes da
Pre-clinical data support that retinoids might contribute to development and progression of AD: for example, vitamin A deficiency evoked in adult rodents cognitive impairment
Additionally, marginal vitamin A deficiency (MVAD) that has also been correlated with cognitive decline in the elderly, led to enhanced Aβ synthesis, plaque formation, and cognitive deficits in APP/PS1 mice
Moreover, rats fed on a MVAD diet with combinatory injection of Aβ showed cognitive impairment
This indicates that retinoic acid deficiency may lead to enhanced risk of developing AD and has given rise to the idea of using retinoids as therapeutics
Severe unwanted side-effects from systemic retinoid-intake mainly comprise teratogenicity
Nevertheless, retinoids can also lead to symptoms such as bone fractures
Moreover, retinoids might also exert psychiatric side-effects such as those reported for isotretinoin application in acne-treatment and depression or aggression
This makes it absolutely mandatory to monitor side-effects and identify further potential molecular targets of retinoidtreatment.
We hypothesized that treatment with acitretin, a synthetic retinoid that already has proven anti-amyloidogenic effect in AD patients
This can consequently also impact retinoic acid metabolism in a sort of vicious cycle: for example, pro-inflammatory activation can result in increased retinoic acid catabolism as demonstrated for primary mouse microglia
Therefore, we analyzed immunological markers in serum and brain samples from AD model mice treated with acitretin and evaluated the finding of elevated brain Interleukin-6 (IL-6) in human CSF samples.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Animals
5xFAD mice (Jackson Laboratory;
All experimental procedures were carried out in accordance with the European Communities Council Directive regarding care and use of animals for experimental procedures and was approved by local authorities (LUA Rhineland-Palatinate; G14-1-087).

Treatment of Mice
Mice were injected intraperitonally [daily dosage: 10 mg acitretin (LGC Promochem) in corn oil (Sigma Aldrich)/kg] for 7 days including a 2-day break (see treatment schedule, Figure

Nesting Test
Nest building ability was assessed as modified from

ADAM10 Activity Assay
A fluorescent enzyme assay (Sensolite 520 ADAM10 Activity Assay, Anaspec) was used according to the manufacturer's recommendations.
Brains were homogenized in ice-cold PBS supplemented with protease inhibitor cocktail (without EDTA, Roche).
Homogenates were centrifuged at 3,000 g (3 min, 4 • C); the resulting pellet was washed and resuspended with assay buffer.
For each sample, a solvent control and a GM6001-treatment were measured at 480/520 (exc./em.) using the FluostarOmega (BMG; 1 measurement per minute).
Usage of the metalloprotease inhibitor GM6001 ascertains control for unspecific signals obtained by the in vitro assay.
Forty minutes from the linear range were used to calculate the fluorescence increase per minute.
Specific RFU (relative fluorescence units) were calculated by subtracting the values from each GM6001-treatment sample from its corresponding solvent control.

APP Processing Product Quantitation
Brain samples were prepared as described before for APPs-alpha quantitation
For APP full length, CTFs and Aβ, homogenates from activity assay were used.
Twenty micrograms of protein were subjected to SDS polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis.
Proteins were blotted onto nitrocellulose membrane and blocked with 0.2% I-Block (Thermo Fisher Scientific) solution including 0.05% Tween20.
As primary antibodies 6E10 (Covance, Madison, WI, USA), 6687 (APP CT,
Signals were obtained by SuperSignal West Femto chemiluminescent substrate (Thermo Scientific, Karlsruhe, Germany) and exposure in a CCD-camera imaging system (Raytest, Straubenhardt, Germany).
Densitometric analysis was performed by Aida Image Analyzer v4.26 (Raytest).

MSD Multiplex Array for Cytokine/Interleukin Serum Level Quantitation
The V-PLEX Proinflammatory Panel 1 Mouse Kit (Sulfo-tag antibodies, K15048D-1, Meso Scale Discovery) was used as recommended by the vendor with mouse serum diluted 1:2.75.
IL-12p70, IL-2, and IL-4 from this multiplex assay were not detected in sufficient amounts (below LOD) to perform analysis.

Interleukin-6 Measurement
Brain homogenates were centrifuged for 10 min at 10,000 g, and at 4 • C. The supernatant was used for IL-6 measurement following the manufacturer's protocol (IBL International, Hamburg, Germany).
Values were normalized to protein content of the supernatant.

Quantitation of IL-6R and gp130
Quantitation of IL-6R and gp130 was done via ELISA (R&D Systems) and normalized to the protein amount of the tissue lysate.

Clinical Study
The acitretin-treatment study has been described in detail in
In brief, men as well as women aged over 50 years with mild to moderate dementia and a diagnosis of probable AD were randomized to either placebo or acitretin group.
Thirty milligrams of acitretin were taken daily.
CSF was collected at two time points: before start of treatment (''baseline'') and after 30 days (''treatment'').
IL-4 and -6 in CSF were analyzed by ELISA following the manufacturer's instructions (IBL International, Hamburg, Germany).
The study is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov
(NCT01078168).
Patients provided written informed consent before enrolment.

Statistics
Testing of statistical significance was performed using one way ANOVA followed by appropriate post-test or by unpaired Student's t-test (Graph Pad Prism6, San Diego, CA, USA).
In case of the nesting test (ordinal scale), Mann Whitney test was used.

RESULTS

Acitretin Activates ADAM10 in the Brain of 5xFAD Model Mice and Ameliorates Cognitive Deficits
In a previous study, a single stereotactic acitretin-injection was sufficient to balance APP processing towards the non-amyloidogenic pathway in APP/PS1 AD model mice
Here, we wanted to examine if peripheral (i.p.) injection in the 5xFAD mouse model also suffices to achieve this effect.
We treated 30-week-old 5xFAD mice with acitretin over 10 days (treatment schedule shown in Figure
40% as compared to wild type littermates (Figure
This deficiency could be partially restored by acitretin-administration (131% of control-treated 5xFAD, Figure
Moreover, acitretin-treatment was able to ameliorate cognitive impairment as demonstrated by nest building test (Figure

Acitretin Has Only Minor Effect on Peripheral Immune Markers but Increases Cerebral IL-6 Amount
No significant differences in serum interferon gamma, IL-5, KC/Gro, TNF alpha, and IL-1beta could be measured in acitretin-treated vs. control-injected animals (Figure
Only anti-inflammatory IL-10 increased significantly, reaching similar levels as in wild type littermates.
All-trans retinoic acid has been shown to suppress IL-6, an important cytokine of the aging brain
We, therefore, assumed that IL-6 should also be unaltered or diminished in the brains of acitretin-treated mice.
Astonishingly, we observed the contrary: IL-6 was increased to 125% of control animals (Figure
IL-6 exerts its biological function via two molecules: IL-6 receptor (IL-6R) and gp130 (reviewed e.g., in Garbers and Rose-John, 2018, Figure
Therefore, subsequently to IL-6 quantitation, we analyzed the amount of both receptors.
Neither IL-6R nor gp130 was significantly changed on protein level (Figures

Acitretin-Treatment of Alzheimer Patients Increases CSF Levels of IL-6
In a formerly published clinical study, we demonstrated general feasibility of ADAM10-enhancement by acitretin in patients with mild to moderate AD by measuring APPs-alpha in CSF
As representatives of anti-and pro-inflammatory markers, IL-4 and IL-6 were measured in CSF (Figure
While IL-4 remained unaffected (placebo group: 1.09 ± 0.09; acitretin group: 1.19 ± 0.08; p = 0.44), IL-6 levels increased in the acitretingroup about 40% as compared to placebo-group (placebo group: 1.02 ± 0.10; acitretin group: 1.39 ± 0.13; p = 0.04).

DISCUSSION
Acitretin was able to increase non-amyloidogenic APP processing and AD-related impaired brain function in mice due to short-term treatment.
This is in accordance with previous publications reporting on beneficial cognitive effects of retinoids in AD models
In addition to its impact on secretase expression, retinoic acid has been shown to control inflammation e.g., in the central nervous system
Almost all investigated peripheral immune molecules remained unaffected in the acitretin-treated animals despite IL-10.
Interestingly, IL-10 has been found to be increased in brain samples derived from humans with intermediate probability of AD in the absence of dementia, designated as resilient
IL-10 measurements were not considered in the initial clinical study; therefore, the potential effect of acitretin on this IL in human patients still has to be analyzed.
IL-6 has been suggested as a plasma biomarker for AD (e.g.,
However, we observed no change in peripheral IL-6 in mice but only increase in brain IL-6 in both, mice and human patients.
In regard to AD, the impact of IL-6 has been found to be multi-faceted: the neurotoxic peptide Aβ induces inflammatory molecules such as IL-6 in glia cultures and in stereotactically injected animals
Additionally, the administration of IL-6 to cultured cortical neurons exacerbates toxicity of the peptide
However, in vivo, IL-6 showed beneficial effects in early stages of disease due to induction of plaque clearance
The difficulties in deciphering the exact role of IL-6 might be due to the fact that IL-6 may stimulate a response in its target cell in two different manners-the classical signaling and the pathogenicitydriving trans-signaling pathway
The first involves binding of IL-6 to the membrane-bound IL-6R, which initiates dimerization of gp130 and subsequent downstream signaling (reviewed in
Alternatively, the IL-6 receptor may be shed by proteases such as ADAM10
Here, we observed an increase in brain IL-6 in mice (and humans) treated with the synthetic retinoid acitretin while IL-6R and gp130 were not significantly impacted.
Reports on basal IL-6 secretion or production in brain of 5xFAD mice are somehow controversial (e.g.,
This indicates that the comparably small increase of IL-6 due to acitretin-administration may have functional relevance.
As the measurement of IL-6R and gp130 was not able to distinguish between soluble and non-soluble forms, we cannot decide which pathway was triggered by acitretin-treatment.
Nevertheless, as cognitive function of the mice increased, we could conclude that induction of IL-6 signaling due to acitretin-treatment was not detrimental for the model mice and, therefore, further supports its future therapeutic application in human patients.

ETHICS STATEMENT
This study was carried out in accordance with the recommendations of the Landesärztekammer Rheinland-Pfalz with written informed consent from all subjects.
All subjects gave written informed consent in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki.
The protocol was approved by the ethics committee of the Landesärztekammer Rheinland-Pfalz.
The trial was monitored by the Interdisciplinary Centre for Clinical Trials Mainz (IZKS, University Medical Centre, Mainz) and registered with ClinicalTrials.gov
(NCT01078168).
This study was, in regard to animal experiments, carried out in accordance with the recommendations of the European Communities Council Directive regarding care and use of animals for experimental procedures and was approved by local authorities (Landesuntersuchungsamt Rheinland-Pfalz; approval number G14-1-087).

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
MSG quantified CTFs and Aβ, helped with writing the manuscript, interpreted, and visualized the data.
NS performed ELISAs, calculated and analyzed the results and conducted the nesting tests.
SR-J and CG edited the manuscript and contributed to interpreting the results.
CG performed IL-6R and gp130 measurements.
AF conducted the clinical trial and edited the manuscript.
KE initiated the study, interpreted results, and wrote the manuscript.

FUNDING
The works of KE and NS was supported by the Stiftung Rheinland-Pfalz für Innovation (961_386261/1129).
The work of MSG was supported by the Boehringer Ingelheim Stiftung and the clinical trial by the Alzheimer Forschung Initiative e.V. (09813).



FIGURE 1 |
FIGURE 1 | Effect of acitretin on alpha-secretase activity, nest building ability, and immunological serum markers in 5xFAD mice.
Mice were treated as depicted in the scheme (A, black dot: injection) with a daily dosage of acitretin or with corn oil as solvent-control.
As a control, wild type littermates injected with corn-oil were included.
In parallel, the nesting test was conducted (1, habituation to nesting material; 2, habituation to nesting material as the sole bedding; 3, depletion of nesting material; 4, nest-building).
(B) ADAM10 catalytic activity was measured in brain homogenates using a FRET-dependent assay.
Values obtained for control-treated animals were set to 100%, mean + SEM are presented (for each group: n = 4; Student's unpaired t-test; * p ≤ 0.05; * * p ≤ 0.01).
(C,D) Amyloid precursor protein (APP) processing products were measured by western blot and normalized to GAPDH (APPs-alpha) or to full length APP (Aβ).
For CTFs, a ratio was calculated without further normalization.
Values obtained for control-treated animals were set to 100%, mean + SEM are presented (n = 3-5 for control, n = 4-5 for acitretin; Student's unpaired t-test; * p ≤ 0.05).
(E) Nests were scored following a rating scale (for each group: n = 7-8; Mann Whitney test; * p ≤ 0.05; * * p ≤ 0.01).
(F) Analysis of peripheral immune markers by multiplex analysis.
Serum samples from n = 4-6 animals were analyzed (one way ANOVA; Sidaks multiple comparison test; * p ≤ 0.05).



FIGURE 2 |
FIGURE 2 | Impact of acitretin-treatment on Interleukin-6 (IL-6) signaling in murine cortex and human CSF.
IL-6 dimers bind to IL-6 receptor and, together with gp130, induce downstream classical signaling (A).
5xFAD mice were treated as depicted in Figure 1 and brain homogenates analyzed for IL-6 (B; means indicated), IL-6 receptor (IL-6R, C), and gp130 (D).
n = 5 per group; Student's unpaired t-test; * p ≤ 0.05).
IL-6 and -4 were measured before and after 30 days of acitretin-administration in CSF of Alzheimer patients (E, for details of the clinical study see Endres et al., 2014).
To account for the inter-individual differences in the small sample size [n = 8 (IL-6) and 9 (IL-4) for placebo and n = 9 for acitretin], ratios were built [value after treatment/value at baseline (t/b); Student's unpaired t-test; ns, p ≥ 0.05; * p ≤ 0.05].