Experimental Evidence of the Benefits of Acupuncture for Alzheimer's Disease: An Updated Review
As the global population ages, the prevalence of Alzheimer's disease (AD), the most common form of dementia, is also increasing.
At present, there are no widely recognized drugs able to ameliorate the cognitive dysfunction caused by AD.
The failure of several promising clinical trials in recent years has highlighted the urgent need for novel strategies to both prevent and treat AD.
Notably, a growing body of literature supports the efficacy of acupuncture for AD.
In this review, we summarize the previously reported mechanisms of acupuncture's beneficial effects in AD, including the ability of acupuncture to modulate Aβ metabolism, tau phosphorylation, neurotransmitters, neurogenesis, synapse and neuron function, autophagy, neuronal apoptosis, neuroinflammation, cerebral glucose metabolism, and brain responses.
Taken together, these findings suggest that acupuncture provides therapeutic effects for AD.

INTRODUCTION
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the most common neurodegenerative disease among elderly populations and accounts for nearly 80% of all dementia diseases.
AD is characterized by progressive memory decline, executive dysfunction, personality and behavioral changes, and other neuropsychiatric syndromes
The pathological hallmark of AD is extracellular senile plaque deposition containing Aβ and intracellular neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs) composed of hyperphosphorylated tau proteins
However, the pathogenesis of AD is complicated and remains largely unclear.
It is widely accepted that the occurrence of AD is closely related to aging
As the global population ages, the morbidity of AD is thus also increasing.
As a result, it is estimated that by 2050, there will be 138 million people with AD worldwide, posing a tremendous challenge to global healthcare
Although acetylcholinesterase inhibitors have been approved by the US FDA for the treatment of AD, their efficacy at improving cognitive function and preventing AD progression is less than satisfactory
Sodium oligomannate (GV-971), a marine algae-derived oral oligosaccharide, able to recondition the gut microbiota and alleviate neuroinflammation
However, more experimental and clinical evidence is needed regarding the mechanism of action, long-term efficacy, and safety of sodium oligomannate.
Therefore, there remains a great clinical need for effective strategies for preventing and treating AD.
Acupuncture, a crucial practice in traditional Chinese medicine, is one of the most popular complementary and alternative therapies and is accepted by the World Health Organization and National Institutes of Health.
Acupuncture is a relatively safe procedure in which stainless steel needles are inserted into acupoints to achieve the sensation of deqi and produce therapeutic effects.
The effects of acupuncture can be further enhanced by electrical stimulation or manual manipulation.
In electroacupuncture (EA), electrical stimulation is applied via acupuncture needles at a certain current and frequency accurately.
In China, acupuncture has a long history of use in the treatment of neurological diseases.
Mounting evidence supports that acupuncture provides satisfactory effects for various neuropsychiatric disorders including vascular dementia
Notably, there is also accumulating clinical and experimental evidence for acupuncture as a potential treatment for AD.
Several systematic reviews and meta-analyses have concluded that acupuncture alone
However, to our knowledge, the proposed mechanisms of action of acupuncture for AD have not been systematically reviewed and discussed.
Here, we comprehensively summarize and review the current experimental evidence of the therapeutic effects of acupuncture for AD.
Based on the findings, significant issues for future studies are then put forward.

EFFECTS OF ACUPUNCTURE ON THE PATHOGENESIS AND PATHOLOGICAL PROCESS OF ALZHEIMER'S DISEASE Aβ Metabolism
Extracellular senile plaque (SP) deposition due to dysregulated amyloid-β (Aβ) metabolism is a typical pathological change associated with AD.
Aβ is a small peptide fragment formed by proteolytic cleavage of amyloid precursor protein (APP), a transmembrane protein that can be cleaved in a nonamyloidogenic or amyloidogenic pathway
In the non-amyloidogenic pathway, APP is catabolized by αsecretase to the APP-α precursor (sAPPα) and the C83 αsubunit (C83), followed by the p3 fragment and APP intracellular domain (AICD) cleaved by γ-secretase.
By contrast, in the amyloidogenic pathway, APP is first cleaved by β-secretase 1 (BACE1) into the APP-β precursor (sAPPβ) and C99 β-subunit fraction (C99).
Additional processing of C99 by γ-secretase leads to the generation of either Aβ 1-40 or Aβ 1-42 peptides, which are considered to be responsible for the formation of toxic SP (Figure
According to the amyloid cascade hypothesis of AD, the formation, aggregation, and deposition of Aβ peptides result in a series of pathogenic processes including neuroinflammation, mitochondria damage, neuron apoptosis, and tau hyperphosphorylation.
These events can, in turn, aggravate Aβ deposition and result in a vicious cycle, triggering cascade amplification effects and ultimately leading to neurodegeneration
Thus, targeting Aβ formation and clearance is a potential therapeutic approach for treating AD.
Accumulating evidence supports that acupuncture can decrease Aβ deposition in AD patients and in AD-like animal models.
In addition, EA was shown to decrease the hippocampal Aβ plaque load in APP/PS1 mice via downregulation of APP and BACE1 levels to alleviate cognitive deficits
It was suggested that activation of PPAR-γ can reduce Aβ generation via inhibition of BACE1
PPARγ activation can also reduce the number of activated microglia, resulting in lower release of pro-inflammatory cytokines
Thus, PPAR-γ is a potential therapeutic target for AD
Several kinases related to Aβ clearance are also involved in EA-induced decreases in Aβ deposition, namely, ApoE, lipoprotein lipase
Taken together, these findings support that acupuncture reduces Aβ deposition via effects on cleavage and degradation pathways.
The existing studies investigating the effects of acupuncture on Aβ have mainly focused on whether acupuncture reduced Aβ plaque or the effects of acupuncture on molecular proteins involved in the amyloidogenic pathway.
Fewer studies have examined effects on the pathological process resulting from βamyloid accumulation and deposition, which could be a more convincing mechanism for explaining acupuncture-induced neuroprotection.
Besides, the investigated pathways associated with acupuncture-induced decreases in Aβ load are not indepth.
Additional signaling pathways involved in the cleavage and degradation of Aβ, as well as the interaction with Aβ, warrant further research attention.

Tau Phosphorylation
Tau protein is a microtubule-associated protein (MAP) that is highly enriched in neurons located in frontal, temporal, hippocampal, and entorhinal regions.
Its main biological function is to promote microtubule assembly and stabilize microtubules, which are significant for normal axonal transport and synaptic plasticity
Tau protein undergoes various posttranslational modifications, including phosphorylation, acetylation, methylation, ubiquitination, SUMOylation, nitration, glycosylation, truncation, and splicing.
Tau phosphorylation is the main posttranslational modification event (D'
Normal tau phosphorylation plays a significant role in hippocampal neurogenesis
It is wellestablished that imbalanced regulation of tau phosphorylation and dephosphorylation results in tau hyperphosphorylation due to dysregulation of protein kinases and protein phosphatases (Figure
These protein kinases and protein phosphatases include glycogen synthase kinase (GSK-3β), cyclin-dependent kinase 5 (CDK5), janus kinase (JAK), mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK), extracellular signal-regulated protein kinases 1 and 2 (ERK1/2), protein kinase A (PKA), calmodulin kinase II (CaMKII), microtubule affinity-regulating kinase (MARK), protein phosphatase type 2A (PP2A), among others.
Neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs), which are composed of hyperphosphorylated tau in the form of paired helical filaments (PHFs), are a hallmark of the AD brain, and the formation of NFTs is positively correlated with the degree of dementia
Thereby, tau hyperphosphorylation-based therapies could be a promising strategy for AD.
Yang et al. reported that 2 Hz EA treatment at GV20, BL23, and GV14 reduced hippocampal phosphorylation levels at the Ser202 and Thr231 sites of tau and decreased tau mRNA expression in SAMP8 mice.
Behaviorally, these mice showed improvements in learning and memory ability in the Morris water maze test
Wang et al. reported that EA significantly reduced phosphorylation levels at the Ser199 and Ser202 epitopes via inhibition of CDK5 activity in Aβ 25-35induced AD rats
In addition, EA at a low burst frequency of 2 Hz decreased phosphorylation levels at the Ser396/404, Ser202, and Ser262 epitopes in the cortex and hippocampus of streptozotocin-induced diabetic rats.
Inhibition of GSK-3β and p38 by EA is involved in the counteraction of streptozotocin-induced increases in tau phosphorylation
As the main protein kinase associated with tau phosphorylation, GSK-3β is able to phosphorylate a number of phospho-tau epitopes including Thr205, Thr231, Ser396, Ser404, Ser202, Ser262, and Ser214
Furthermore,
Mounting evidence supports a correlation of the p38 MAPK signaling pathway with both Aβ deposition
The ability of acupuncture to alter the activity of other protein kinases to influence tau phosphorylation levels in AD requires further research.
Of the protein phosphatases implicated in tau dephosphorylation and aggregation, PP2A plays the largest role
Thus, the effects of acupuncture on protein phosphatases that are able to dephosphorylate tau protein should be investigated.
Factors besides protein kinases and protein phosphatases are also known to promote tau hyperphosphorylation, including other posttranslational modifications.
It has been demonstrated that SUMOylation of tau at K340 promotes tau phosphorylation at multiple sites
Future studies should aim to expand our understanding of how acupuncture affects other posttranslational modifications of tau protein, which in turn affect tau phosphorylation.

Neurotransmitters
According to the cholinergic hypothesis, the cholinergic system plays a significant role in the pathogenesis of AD.
The cholinergic system is involved in primary physiological processes such as attention, learning, memory, sleep, and stress response
Loss of cholinergic function is associated with decreased synthesis of acetylcholine (ACh) in the basal forebrain, which contributes to memory loss in AD
In the cytoplasm of cholinergic neurons, choline and acetyl-coenzyme A (acetyl-CoA) are synthesized into ACh by choline acetyltransferase (ChAT).
ACh is then transported from the cytoplasm into synaptic vesicles via the vesicular acetylcholine transporter (VAChT) and hydrolyzed by acetylcholinesterase (AChE) in the synaptic cleft into choline, which is eventually reuptaken into presynaptic cholinergic neurons (Figure
Disordered regulation of the synthesis, storage, transportation, or degradation of ACh can all result in cognitive dysfunction
It is well-recognized that reduced CAT contributes to behavioral dysfunction, and reduced CAT has been reported in the hippocampal and neocortical regions of AD brains.
Thus, ACh supplementation therapy has been proposed as a treatment for AD.
Accumulating research has reported that acupuncture alters ACh levels via modulation of its metabolism.
In addition, EA has been shown to counteract LPS-induced decreases in α7nAChR, ACh content, and ChAT activity and to prevent LPS-induced increases in AChE activity, thus improving both working and spatial memory
Glutamate (Glu), the most abundant excitatory neurotransmitter in the central nervous system (CNS), plays significant roles in modulating synaptic transmission, neuronal survival and differentiation, synaptic plasticity, learning, and memory
Glu receptors exist in the form of G-protein-coupled receptors (GPCR, also termed metabotropic receptors) and ionotropic receptors, such as the N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor (NMDAR) and α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid receptor (AMPA receptor)
Glu mostly binds to ionotropic NMDAR receptors to modulate calcium and sodium influx into neurons.
Overaction of Glu due to disordered reuptake can result in excessive calcium influx within neurons, leading to dysfunctional synaptic transmission, neuron damage, and neurodegeneration
Clinical evidence suggests that memantine, an NMDA receptor antagonist, can hinder AD progression
Enhanced hippocampal Glu metabolism, as measured by magnetic resonance spectroscopy, and an increased number of surviving neurons were also observed, implying that EA ameliorated memory impairment via reduction in Glu content.
Similarly, 2 Hz EA was demonstrated to improve learning and memory ability in vascular dementia rats by inhibiting Glu-NMDAR-mediated excitotoxity
Additional neurotransmitters to those described above have been implicated in synaptic plasticity and neuroinflammation in AD, including serotonin, noradrenaline, dopamine, and GABA.
Pathological changes in monoaminergic nuclei, particularly the serotonergic dorsal raphe nucleus, noradrenergic locus coeruleus, and dopaminergic nuclei, have been observed during the early course of AD and are thought to influence symptoms and pathogenesis
However, few studies have investigated the effects of acupuncture on these neurotransmitters in AD animal models.
Since alterations in monoaminergic systems appear to play a significant role in AD, neurotropic virus-mediated neural circuit tracing technology and chemogenetic techniques could be used to explore the effects of acupuncture on monoaminergic systems and their interactions with the hippocampus, cholinergic system, or prefrontal cortex.

Neurogenesis
In various AD mouse models, it has been shown that adult hippocampal neurogenesis is impaired
Hippocampal neurogenesis is also decreased in human AD patients, but abundant in the dentate gyrus of neurologically healthy subjects
In a recent study,
Thus, promoting adult hippocampal neurogenesis could be a therapeutic strategy for AD
NGF plays critical roles in cell survival and is implicated in memory deficits in AD
It has been proven that NGF can prevent cholinergic neuron degeneration.
Interestingly, it has been suggested that exogenous NGF supplementation enhances the APP nonamyloidogenic cleavage pathway and reduces the Aβ burden in the APP/PS1 mice brain
Furthermore, biodelivery of NGF to the basal forebrain has been shown to reduce brain atrophy in AD patients
Thus, it is reasonable to assume that increasing NGF content could be a treatment for AD.
There is evidence that acupuncture can increase NGF levels and alleviate cognitive dysfunction in animal models of cerebral ischemia
Brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), part of the neurotrophic factor family, plays important roles in modulating neuronal differentiation, proliferation, nutrition, and synaptic plasticity
BDNF activates tyrosine receptor kinase (TrkB), which then stimulates several intracellular signaling cascades including the MAPK/ERK, PLCγ, and PI3K/Akt signaling pathways
As BDNF has been implicated in AD pathology, BDNF-based therapy could be a promising strategy for treating AD
Acupuncture-induced rescue of cognitive dysfunction in AD mice is associated with elevation of BDNF levels
Acupuncture has also been reported to promote the proliferation and differentiation of neural stem cells (NSCs) in the hippocampus of SAMP8 mice following NSCs transplantation treatment.
Furthermore, it was demonstrated that acupuncture upregulated the expression of hippocampal cytokines involved in NSC proliferation and differentiation, including BDNF, basic fibroblast growth factor, and epidermal growth factor, thereby promoting the repair of injured neurons and improving cognitive function
At present, a few studies have examined the effects of acupuncture on neurogenesis in AD and the underlying mechanism.
Multiple extrinsic and intrinsic factors that are involved in regulating neurogenesis are also altered in AD.
These extrinsic modulators include metabolic growth factors, such as VEFG
The intrinsic modulators include Wnt signaling
However, whether acupuncture can regulate these modulators to promote neurogenesis in AD remains unknown.
Studies of the effects of acupuncture on the extrinsic and intrinsic factors mentioned above could provide further evidence of how acupuncture alters neurogenesis in AD.

Synapse and Neuron Damage
It is well-established that synapse and neuron loss are strongly correlated with cognitive dysfunction in AD, suggesting a causal role of compromised synaptic and neuronal integrity in AD pathogenesis.
In addition, AD animal models show deficits in both synaptic morphological plasticity and synaptic transmission
Accumulating evidence has demonstrated that acupuncture may ameliorate synapse and neuron damage caused by ischemic stroke
In addition, acupuncture increased the number and total length of apical and basal dendritic branches in the hippocampal CA1 region in the mouse model
EA stimulation at an alternating frequency of 2 and 15 Hz was found to attenuate neuronal injury in Aβ 1-42 -induced AD rats.
Interestingly, this effect was accompanied by reduced levels of reactive oxygen species (ROS), malondialdehyde (MDA), and 8-OH-dG and increased total antioxidant capacity (T-AOC), suggesting a correlation between EA-induced neuron protection and anti-oxidative stress.
Further study demonstrated that inhibition of NOX2-related oxidative stress, as evidenced by decreased NOX2 expression, contributed to the EA-induced neuroprotective effects
Also, it was suggested that EA's inhibitory effect on GSK-3β activity
Our recent findings
Several studies have found that EA enhances synaptic transmission.
In addition, 2 Hz EA at ST36 and SP6 enhanced LTP of perforant path-DG granule neurons
Although these findings suggest that EA can enhance synaptic transmission in AD animals, the molecules and pathways involved in this neuroprotective effect remain unclear.
Notably, acupuncture was found to enhance LTP in the hippocampus by increasing norepinephrine levels and activating β1-adrenergic receptors in a vascular dementia animal model
As the noradrenergic system is also implicated in AD pathogenesis

Autophagy
Autophagy is an essential lysosomal degradation pathway in which misfolded or aggregated proteins and damaged organelles are cleared from the intracellular space
Autophagy acts in the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR)-dependent pathway or mTOR-independent pathway to maintain cellular homeostasis.
Accumulating evidence has implicated dysfunctional autophagy in the pathogenesis of neurodegenerative diseases such as AD, Parkinson's disease, and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
By mediating degradation and clearance of Aβ and tau, autophagy plays a neuroprotective role in AD.
Alteration of the PI3K/Akt/mTOR signaling pathway, one of the mTOR-dependent autophagy pathways, has been reported at the early stages of AD together with increased Aβ 1-42 levels and reduced LC3II and Beclin-1
Microtubule-associated protein 1 light chain 3 (LC3) and Beclin-1 are vital for phagophore elongation and autophagosome biogenesis
Conversion from a nonlipidated form (LC3 I) to a phosphatidylethanolamine-conjugated form (LC3 II) is necessary for the formation of complete and functional autophagosomes.
An elevated LC3 II/LC3 I ratio indicates enhanced autophagy activity
Increased autophagic vacuoles containing Aβ 1-40 , Aβ 1-42, and APP have been observed in AD brains
Therefore, targeting autophagy modulators may be an effective AD treatment.
In addition, EA at GV20 and BL23 increased the autophagy-related protein Beclin-1 level and LC3 II/LC3 I ratio, but decreased Aβ plaque and neuronal apoptosis in the hippocampal CA1 region
However, a few studies have investigated the effects of acupuncture on specific autophagic pathways, such as mTORdependent or mTOR-independent signaling pathways.
Previous studies have indicated that acupuncture can modulate autophagy via several pathways including the mTOR-independent autophagy lysosome pathway
Thus, the pathways and molecules involved in acupuncture-induced changes in autophagy in AD warrant specific study.
Of the studies that have examined these topics, all have reported that acupuncture enhanced autophagy activity in AD and promoted clearance of mutant or misfolded proteins.
These "positive" results should not be misunderstood to mean that stimulation of autophagy by acupuncture is purely neuroprotective in AD.
Notably, excessive autophagy could be detrimental to neurons with underlying dysfunctional proteostasis, since it is still debated whether accumulation of uncleared autophagosomes may be a cause or the consequence of the dysfunction of autophagy induction pathways.
By contrast, "negative results" of acupuncture on autophagy activity and the ultimate effects on pathologies and cognition deficits in AD have received little research attention.
Thus, the effects of acupuncture with varying stimulus parameters on the promotion or inhibition of autophagy in AD should be examined and compared in future studies.

Apoptosis
Apoptosis refers to the process of programmed cell death, which is distinct from necrosis
Normal apoptosis plays a significant role in self-renewal and the maintenance of homeostasis, whereas hyperactive neuronal apoptosis can result in neurodegenerative diseases such as AD and Parkinson's disease
Aβ deposition, NFTs, neuroinflammation, and oxidative stress in the AD brain can all result in neuronal apoptosis, which may further aggravate AD pathology
Increased apoptosis-associated markers have been observed in AD brains
Several studies have shown that EA can suppress hippocampal neuron apoptosis by acting on apoptosis-associated proteins, including Bcl-2, Bax, Caspase-3, and Caspase-9
The antiapoptotic effects of EA have been reported in other neurological disease.
Activation of the PI3K/Akt-ERK signaling pathway is also strongly correlated with anti-apoptosis mediated by acupuncture in spinal cord injury
Additional specific signaling pathways involved in the antiapoptotic effect of acupuncture in AD require validation in future studies.

Neuroinflammation
The critical role of neuroinflammation in the pathogenesis of AD has been extensively discussed in previous reviews
Inflammatory cytokines overexpressed in proximity to Aβ plaques and NFTs are known to promote the production of Aβ peptides
These inflammatory cytokines, such as interleukin-1β (IL-1β), tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α), and interleukin-6 (IL-6), aggravate neuroinflammation via deposition of Aβ plaques and thus exert neurotoxic effects
Activation of neuroinflammation and immune pathways is closely related to abnormal levels of proinflammatory cytokines in the cerebrospinal fluid and blood in AD
Activated glia surrounding Aβ plaque is considered a hallmark of neuroinflammation.
Chronic and sustained glial activation, as well as pro-inflammatory cytokine release, can lead to neurodegeneration and cognitive deficits
However, whether neuroinflammation is a cause or consequence of AD remains under debate, as microglia and astrocyte activation and Aβ deposition are strongly correlated with cognitive dysfunction in AD
Thus, attenuation of neuroinflammation could be a promising AD treatment.
Acupuncture has been shown to yield anti-inflammatory effects in various diseases such as pain
In recent years, several studies have reported that acupuncture can also alleviate inflammation in AD.
Downregulation of the JAK/STAT3 pathway was also found to contribute to EA-induced anti-inflammatory effects in Aβ 1-42 induced AD rats
Mounting evidence supports the role of NLRP3 inflammasome activation in mediating neuroinflammation
Several studies have reported that acupuncture ameliorated hippocampal neuroinflammation via downregulation of the NLRP3 inflammasome and decreased production of downstream pro-inflammatory cytokines like IL-1β and Caspase-1
Furthermore, EA-induced inhibition of NLRP3 inflammasome activation via CB2 receptors has been shown to relieve inflammatory pain
Acupuncture also has inhibitory effects on glia activation.
Similarly, EA was reported to attenuate microglia-mediated Aβ 1-42 deposition in the prefrontal cortex, as supported by a reduction in colocalized Aβ 1-42 and CD68 (a microglia marker).
In addition, EA can attenuate reference memory deficits in APP/PS1 transgenic mice, likely via inhibition of the astrocytic N-myc downstream-regulated gene 2
Taken together, these findings support that acupuncture can attenuate neuroinflammation and rescue cognitive impairments in AD animal models.
However, these studies have focused specifically on the CNS, and few studies have investigated the effects of acupuncture on systemic inflammation.
Notably, systemic inflammation can have downstream effects on brain function via neuro-immune communication
For example, a recent study demonstrated that EA activated distinct sympathetic pathways and modulated systemic inflammation in a somatotopic manner in a lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced inflammatory model that can be considered an AD-like inflammatory model
Circulating inflammatory proteins outside of the CNS can increase inflammatory signaling within the CNS, promoting activation of astrocytes and microglia and thus neurodegeneration
In light of these findings, it would be interesting for future studies to investigate the effects of acupuncture on peripheral-central neuroimmune communication in AD.

Glucose Metabolism
Diabetes is known to be a significant risk factor for AD
Hippocampal insulin resistance is commonly observed in both AD patients
Accumulating evidence supports alterations in glucose metabolism and blood flow in cognition-related brain regions in AD patients
Decreased glucose metabolism in the hippocampus, precuneus, and cingulate gyrus appear to be closely related to the severity of cognitive impairment
Dysregulated glucometabolism has also been observed in the hippocampus, hypothalamus, insular cortex, and striatum of AD rats
Identifying and assessing changes in CNS glucose metabolism may be a potential strategy for early and accurate diagnosis of AD
Furthermore, reversal of low cerebral glucose metabolic activity and insulin resistance has been shown to restore learning and memory in an AD mouse model
It is recognized that acupuncture can regulate metabolic processes via effects on the neuroendocrine system
Mounting evidence supports the role of acupuncture treatment in increasing glucose metabolism and alleviating insulin resistance.
Activation of the SIRT1/PGC-1α pathway can enhance mitochondrial oxidative function, which is significant for the maintenance of intracellular metabolic homeostasis
EA has also been found to improve insulin sensitivity in diabetic animal models through activation of the SIRT1/PGC-1α
Decreased activity of triose phosphate isomerase (TPI), a key enzyme in glucose metabolism, may result in abnormal accumulation of dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP), thereby inhibiting the glycolysis process
Glycometabolism disorder resulting from abnormal TPI activity is associated with learning and memory impairment
In addition, EA-induced improvement in cognition function in SAMP8 mice is associated with activation of AMPK
Activation of AMPK has been shown to improve altered metabolism in the CNS as well as learning and memory in AD model animals
This finding further supports the activation of AMPK and AKT in EA-induced increases in cortical and hippocampal glucose metabolism
Using brain imaging technologies such as positron emission tomography (PET), it is now possible to visualize ADinduced changes in brain glucose metabolism and regional brain blood flow changes in an objective way.
Increased glycolysis in the hippocampus after EA treatment was also observed in APP/PS1 transgenic mice
Furthermore, EA has been shown to improve glycolysis in several cognition-related brain regions including the limbic system (pyriform cortex), temporal lobe (olfactory cortex), amygdala, and hippocampus in AD-like pathology rats
Enhanced glucose metabolic activity in the hippocampus, thalamus, hypothalamus, and frontal/temporal lobes, accompanied by restored memory, following acupuncture treatment was observed in SAMP8 mice
Using microPET, 2 Hz EA stimulation was shown to increase glucose metabolism in the frontal cortex and hypothalamus in 5xFAD mice
In summary, these findings suggest that enhancement of glucose metabolism in cognitionrelated brain regions could be an important mechanism of the beneficial effects of acupuncture in AD.
However, few studies have examined the underlying mechanisms of acupunctureinduced glucose metabolism increases in AD.
Rescuing brain energy failure is seen as an emerging therapeutic approach for aging-related neurodegenerative disorders.
The gut-brain axis, neuroendocrine crosstalk, interactions among neuronal loops, and mitochondrial function are all known to regulate brain energy metabolism and could be useful directions for future studies of the underlying mechanisms of therapeutic acupuncture for AD.

Brain Response
In recent years, functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) has been used to examine acupuncture-associated changes in brain activity.
It is known that regional blood flow, oxygen consumption, and the blood oxyhemoglobin/deoxyhemoglobin ratio all change after increased neuronal activity.
Thus, changes in regional blood flow measured by fMRI are thought to represent changes in integrated neuronal activity.
fMRI measures regional increases or decreases in neuronal activity based on increases or decreases in the blood-oxygen-level-dependent (BOLD) signal contrast, an objective measure that provides high temporal and spatial resolution without the requirement for an exogenous contrast medium
It has been demonstrated that fMRI brain responses to acupuncture stimulation vary when different acupoints are stimulated.
In a trial investigating differences in fMRI brain responses to acupuncture between healthy subjects and AD patients, Fu et al. observed that both the frontal and temporal lobes were activated by EA at PC6 in normal subjects.
In contrast, the frontal and temporal lobes, cingulate gyrus, and cerebellum were activated in AD patients
In addition, stimulation at the LI4 and LR3 acupoints induced extensive activation and deactivation in cognition-related regions, vision-related regions, sensorimotorrelated areas, basal ganglia, and cerebellum in patients with AD or mild cognitive impairment (MCI), but not in healthy controls
However, other studies have reported inconsistent results.
Zheng et al. confirmed that acupuncture at the LI4 and LR3 acupoints not only increased neuronal activity in the hippocampus and precentral gyrus, but also enhanced functional connectivity between these two regions in AD patients.
In addition, correlation analysis indicated strong relationships between functional activity, connectivity, and clinical performance
Liang et al. reported that default mode network (DMN) connectivity between the left cingulate gyrus and right inferior parietal lobule was significantly compromised in AD patients.
Acupuncture at the LI4 and LR3 acupoints not only increased impaired DMN connectivity but also enhanced DMN connectivity among the left posterior cingulate cortex, right middle temporal gyrus, and right inferior parietal lobule.
In addition, the acupuncture effect on the middle temporal gyrus was strongly correlated with the severity of cognitive impairment
Acupuncture at the Tiaoshen Yizhi acupoints, a combination of acupoints based on Chinese acupuncture theory comprising EX-HN1, EX-HN3, PC6, KI3, ST40, and LR3, improved cognitive function in patients with MCI by increasing functional connectivity among cognition-related brain areas including the insula, dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, hippocampus, thalamus, inferior parietal lobule, and anterior cingulate cortex
In a functional near-infrared spectroscopy (fNIRS) study investigating the longitudinal effects of acupuncture in MCI patients, increased functional connectivity in the prefrontal cortex induced by acupuncture contributed to improved cognitive function
In summary, the neuroimaging findings provide relatively objective evidence for the therapeutic effects of acupuncture for AD.
As the responding brain areas are inconsistent among the studies, it can be concluded that acupuncture can induce a wide range of cognition-related brain responses in AD and increase functional connectivity.
The differences in responding brain areas could be due to the various acupoints stimulated, acupuncture method (electrical or manual), EA stimulation parameters (frequency, current, or wave type), or heterogeneities among the included participants.
The underlying mechanism of increased functional connectivity among the activated brain areas has not yet been fully explained.
In the future, investigating the specific types of activated neurons, as well as the projections and innervations of the responding brain nuclei, may provide a clearer and more specific understanding of the brain responses induced by acupuncture in AD.

CONCLUSION
From this updated review of the literature, we conclude that the underlying mechanisms of the beneficial effects of acupuncture in AD likely involve modulation of Aβ metabolism, tau phosphorylation, neurotransmitters, neurogenesis, synapse and neuron function, autophagy, neuronal apoptosis, neuroinflammation, cerebral glucose metabolism, and brain response.
Together, these studies provide a base of scientific evidence to promote the clinical application of acupuncture as treatment for AD.
However, several issues remain.
First, as the pathogenesis of AD is complicated and remains unvalidated, the involved pathophysiologies are intertwined and may even coexist as a cause-consequence relationship.
Previous studies investigating the mechanisms of acupuncture for AD mainly focused on a single factor, such as inflammation or dysregulated neurotransmitters, with less consideration of the links with other pathophysiologies or the impacts of parallel pathophysiologies, which may, to some degree, undermine the evidence.
As illustrated in Figure
Therefore, it may be preferred to study the mechanisms of acupuncture in AD from a holistic view or systematic biology perspective.
Multi-omics technologies, such as transcriptomics, proteomics, and metabolomics, could be adopted to explore the potential mechanisms of action of acupuncture in AD.
Second, as acupuncture involves peripheral stimulation of sensitized points to regulate neural and visceral functions via multiple neural feedback systems, mapping the peripheralneural circuits associated with AD using chemogenetic or optogenetic techniques could expand our understanding of the underlying mechanisms of acupuncture's benefits in AD.
Third, the efficacy of acupuncture in AD cannot be validated based on the current evidence.
Since AD is insidious, progressive, difficult to reverse, and had several nongenetic risk factors, the preventive effects of acupuncture for AD should be examined in future studies.
Animal models that show AD-like pathologies caused by nongenetic risk factors, such as aging, diabetes, hypercholesterolemia, hyperhomocysteinemia, gastrointestinal microbiota, etc., could be adopted to study the preventive effects of acupuncture.



FIGURE 1 |
FIGURE 1 | Schematic representation of APP metabolism via non-amyloidogenic and amyloidogenic pathways.



FIGURE 2 |
FIGURE 2 | Schematic representation of tau phosphorylation and formation of NFTs.



FIGURE 3 |
FIGURE 3 | Schematic representation of synthesis of ACh and cholinergic transmission.



FIGURE 4 |
FIGURE 4 | Mechanisms of action of acupuncture in AD.