Cerebrospinal Fluid Biomarkers for Understanding Multiple Aspects of Alzheimer's Disease Pathogenesis
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a multifactorial age-related brain disease.
Numerous pathological events run forth in the brain leading to AD.
There is an initial long, dormant phase before the clinical symptoms become evident.
There is a need to diagnose the disease at the preclinical stage since therapeutic interventions are most likely to be effective if initiated early.
Undoubtedly, the core cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) biomarkers have a good diagnostic accuracy and have been used in clinical trials as end point measures.
However, looking into the multifactorial nature of AD and the overlapping pathology with other forms of dementia, it is important to integrate the core CSF biomarkers with a broader panel of other biomarkers.
These include proteins reflecting different aspects of pathology such as neurodegeneration, neuroinflammation and synaptic dysfunction.
The combination of biomarkers would not only aid in preclinical diagnosis, but would also help in identifying early brain changes during the onset of disease.
Successful treatment strategies can be devised by understanding the contribution of these markers in different aspects of disease pathogenesis.

INTRODUCTION
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a neurodegenerative disease whose pathology starts decades before the clinical symptoms appear
The preclinical stage represents a dormant phase where neuropathological changes are accumulating but the person has normal cognition
Numerous biochemical pathways have been described to explain the pathogenesis of AD.
Starting with the identification of amyloid beta (A in 1985, as the main component of amyloid plaques
Thorough research has been carried out to understand other aspects of AD pathogenesis and thereafter, numerous hypotheses have been put forth.
AD may therefore be considered a result of a number of pathological changes in the brain, such as amyloidosis, neurodegeneration, inflammation, synaptic dysfunction, disruption of neuronal signaling and neuronal membranes, oxidative stress and mitochondrial dysfunction
These changes direct the trajectory of preclinical AD to AD dementia, and make AD a multifaceted disease.
Several AD drug trials have failed, probably because the treatments are initiated at an advanced stage where damage is too severe, and the drug is not able to demonstrate a clinical benefit because the brain is too compromised to benefit from a treatment
It is imperative to initiate an early treatment, and ensure that the correct patient population is included in the clinical trials.
Therefore, there is an urgent need to diagnose AD and initiate treatment at the preclinical stage, so as to obtain a clinical benefit.
The first step in devising successful treatment strategies is to identify biomarkers for accurate diagnosis of AD, and thereafter develop therapeutic strategies.
It is essential to find an ideal biomarker that should also help in monitoring the mechanism of action and the biochemical effects of the treatment drug
As per the regulatory bodies such as Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and European Medicine Agency (EMA), exploration and validation of a biomarker should be integrated with drug development in order to accelerate the journey towards development of an effective therapeutic intervention
Clinical trials that aim at evaluating the effectiveness of therapeutic strategies can come up with reliable results when the therapeutic effect of these agents is monitored using markers that reflect over the molecular changes of the disease.
As far as AD is concerned the promising markers in this context are the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) markers
The CSF biomarkers are the potential candidates to facilitate early diagnosis of AD because the AD pathological hallmarks start decades before the appearance of cognitive symptoms
The core CSF biomarkers (CSF A-42, T-tau (Total tau) and P-tau (Phosphorylated tau)), have been extensively studied and validated in relation to AD pathology, conversion and progression.
There is a further need to explore and evaluate additional CSF biomarkers, which can aid in early and accurate diagnosis of AD, as well as in monitoring the downstream effects of a therapeutic intervention.
As seen from the high failure rate of AD drug trials, it is extremely essential to explore additional CSF biomarkers which reflect on individual pathologies, meet the regulatory qualification and can help to enrich the clinical trial populations.

THE CSF BIOMARKERS AS A PART OF AD DIAGNOSTIC CRITERIA
The biomarkers of AD have been divided into two main categories; the biomarkers of A accumulation and the biomarkers of neuronal degeneration or injury
The biomarkers of A accumulation include abnormal tracer retention on amyloid positron emission tomography (PET) imaging and CSF A-42.
The biomarkers of neuronal degeneration include CSF T-tau and P-tau, 18F-2-fluoro-2-deoxy-D-glucose positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) and brain atrophy via magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).
The brain imaging techniques have been successfully used as end points in clinical trials
However, the limited accessibility, lack of molecular specificity, exposure to radioactivity and cost factor involved in neuroimaging markers particularly A imaging, restricts their use in routine analysis
Therefore, the CSF is being extensively studied worldwide, in AD biomarker research.
The CSF is in direct contact with the brain and the biochemical changes occurring in the brain are reflected in it
The CSF biomarkers have a causal relation to AD pathology and may provide an insight into the different aspects of AD pathogenesis.
The core CSF biomarkers (decreased CSF A-42 and elevated T-tau and P-tau), have shown a high specificity and sensitivity for AD diagnosis.
CSF Aβ-42 correlates well with Aβ pathology (PMID: 29902934), whilst the correlation of the tau markers with pathology is less clear; recent data indicate that CSF T-tau and P-tau may be markers of a neuronal reaction to Aβ pathology, which with time will translate into full-blown pathology (neurodegeneration and tangle pathology) (ref: PMID: 29772204).
In any case, these markers are quite specific for identifying an individual with preclinical AD
In the recent years, with the advances in our understanding of AD pathophysiology, it has become evident that the relation between clinical symptoms and disease pathology varies and the cognitive impairment evolves gradually.
As a result, in 2011 the National Institute on Aging (NIA) and the Alzheimer's Association (AA) revised the diagnostic and research criteria for AD and included the CSF biomarkers in addition to the imaging markers
In 2014, the International Working Group (IWG) reanalysed the pathological and topographical biomarkers of AD.
Diagnostic changes were proposed for typical, atypical, mixed and preclinical AD.
According to this, the pathological markers such as decreased CSF A-42 and elevated T-tau and P-tau were considered as specific makers of disease pathology

THE NEED OF ADDITIONAL CSF BIOMARKERS
The research on core CSF biomarkers (CSF A-42, T-tau and P-tau) began nearly two decades ago.
Reduced CSF A and elevated T-tau and P-tau were found in the CSF of AD patients.
This created a pathway for further research to look over into the diagnostic potential of these biomarkers, which reflect upon brain amyloidosis and neurodegeneration.
Today, these biomarkers are extensively used in diagnosis and clinical trials.
These core CSF biomarkers, exhibit a typical AD signature (high concentration of T-tau, P-tau, and low A-42)).
They have a high enough diagnostic accuracy and reflect upon the neuropathological hallmarks of AD; the neurofibrillary tangles and amyloid plaques
Additional biomarkers are still needed to complement the core biomarkers for early diagnosis and prognosis of AD and get a better insight into the different pathogenic pathways associated with the AD.
The core CSF biomarkers are relatively stable in clinical AD and therefore, do not serve as good markers in studying disease progression
The CSF A-42 is sharply reduced in in the preclinical phase of AD while the levels are found to be constant in the subsequent phases
The altered levels of these core markers do not predict the rate of cognition decline as they do not correlate with the Mini Mental Status Examination (MMSE)
In another multi-centre longitudinal study it was found that, there was lack of association between the changes in CSF biomarkers and the rate of change or decline in cognition over a period of four years
Also, these markers do not perform well enough in differentiating AD from other forms of dementia due to partially coinciding pathologies
The therapeutic strategies that aim at reducing amyloid load have failed to show a clinical benefit in spite of clearing A
The inter laboratory and inter assay variation in the measures of core CSF biomarkers necessitates the need of additional CSF biomarkers
Studies have shown that that the reduced levels of CSF A negatively correlate with the brain amyloid load
However, this association does not match with the clinical diagnosis of AD.
The discordance has been found mainly in the cognitively normal participants, which have reduced CSF A but are amyloid negative as seen by PET.
Therefore, CSF A levels are altered in the preclinical stage
This has led to the contamination of cohort groups due to the inclusion of CSF A positives in the control group.
This necessitates the need for exploration and evaluation of additional or novel biomarkers that aid in accurate diagnosis, correlate with cognitive function, but also help in better understanding the disease progression and different aspects of AD pathology.
AD is a multifaceted disease, and AD dementia is a result of a number of pathological changes in the brain (Figure
Numerous proteins or other biomolecules play significant roles in these pathological pathways.
A reduction or elevation of their levels in the CSF is associated with the pathological change.
Elevation or reduction of their levels can directly highlight upon the extent of damage or can occur as a protective response against the damage.
CSF biomarkers directing different AD associated pathologies can serve as targets for therapeutic agents aimed to combat the same, and a detailed understanding of disease pathogenesis at molecular level can help in designing new efficacious chemical entities for treatment.
In context of a clinical trial a biomarker can serve as a surrogate end point.
The time consuming end points associated with the ongoing trails in AD can be reduced with the application of additional makers
An early diagnosis aided through CSF biomarkers would ensure cohort uniformity through recruitment of correct patient population.
This would help in improving clinical trial design and interpretation
The clinical stages of AD are well defined and understood, but it is important to identify and understand the different pathophysiological stages of AD.
CSF biomarkers associated with different pathologies would help in understanding and identifying these stages.
In order to bring advancement in the field of AD biomarker and therapeutic research it is of utmost important that new biomarkers in relation to AD pathogenesis be explored in the CSF and their potential to diagnose AD at preclinical stage be evaluated in well-established cohorts.

THE BIOMARKERS OF AMYLOIDOGENESIS AND BRAIN AMYLOIDOSIS

APOLIPOPROTEIN E (APOE)

ROLE IN AD PATHOGENESIS
ApoE is a glycoprotein, which is highly expressed in the liver and the Central Nervous System (CNS)
In the CNS it is mainly expressed by astrocytes and to some extent by the microglia
It is a constituent of lipoproteins, and in the CNS it is mainly confined to the HDL (high density lipoproteins)
In the brain, apoE plays a vital role in regulating cholesterol metabolism and transport
ApoE plays a significant role in AD pathogenesis by affecting amyloid and tau pathology, and the isoforms have a differential role in pathogenesis (Figure
In response to neuronal injury, the expression of apoE is upregulated
The three isoforms of apoE (E2, E3, E4), differentially affect cholesterol transport, metabolism and synaptic plasticity, repair and neurite growth.
The E4 isoform, is least effective in regulating cholesterol transport, efflux and synaptic plasticity
ApoE mediates the cellular uptake and degradation of A.
Lipidated apoE binds to A, and thereby influences plaque formation and A transport
The cellular uptake of Ais facilitated via apoE, through the endocytosis A lipoprotein complexes.
Due to the differential affinity of different isoforms with A, the endocytosis is isoform dependent
ApoE also modulates the accumulation and clearance of Ain an isoform dependent manner.
The E4 isoform modulates least clearance of and also promotes a greater fibrilization of A
Neurodegeneration in AD is also influenced by apoE.
ApoE affects neuroinflammation, and tau-mediated neurodegeneration.
ApoE4 exacerbates neuronal death and modulates microglial activation
Recent data also suggest intriguing interactions between apoE isoforms and the activation state of disease-associated microglia, which may be part of the disease-promoting effect of apoE4 (PMID: 30140051).

CSF BIOMARKER STUDIES PERTAINING TO APOE
ApoE is a major apolipoprotein found in the CSF
Numerous studies have evaluated the levels of apoE in the CSF, so as to establish it as a potential marker (Table
To evaluate the CSF levels researches have used methods such as enzyme linked immuno sorbent assay (ELISA), mass spectrometry, multiplex assays and flow cytometry.
Studies on CSF levels of apoE in AD show inconstant results, with either decreased (REF) or elevated
As per some studies APOE genotype may influence CSF ApoE levels.
Higher CSF levels of apoE have been reported in individuals having APOE 4 alleles
Strong positive correlations have been found between CSF apoE levels and CSF tau in AD patients as compared to controls
The correlation between CSF apoE levels and CSF tau are also APOE genotype dependent
The correlation between the two markers suggest that altered apoE levels in CSF could be attributed to the neurodegeneration in AD or vice versa.
ApoE binds to protein tau in an isoform dependent manner
The association of apoE CSF levels with genotype, and genotype dependent correlation between ApoE and CSF Tau, suggest that neurodegeneration is isoform influenced.
Thus, quantification of apoE levels can highlight upon state of amyloid and tau pathology in AD brains.
Owing to the a significant role of apoE in AD pathogenesis, further studies should be conducted in well-established cohorts in order to establish apoE as a potential CSF diagnostic and theragnostic biomarker.
There have been inconsistencies with regard to CSF apoE levels.
However, these inconsistencies could be attributed to a number of factors such as sample variability, variability in method or technique of analysis or unequal gender distribution in study groups.

ROLE IN AD PATHOGENESIS
Clusterin also called apolipoprotein J, is a stress induced chaperone glycoprotein which can stabilize stressed protein structures.
It does so by binding to the hydrophobic surfaces of the partially unfolded proteins
In the brain, it is highly expressed by astrocytes
It plays varied roles in AD pathology.
Clusterin affects amyloid pathology in multiple ways.
It interacts with the A peptides to form complexes.
The antibodies specific to clusterin strongly stain the amyloid deposits in AD brain
This interaction keeps A solubilized and prevents its fibrillation, and also regulate its transport across the BBB
The levels are significantly increased in frontal cortex and in the hippocampus in AD
The elevated levels are localised to the regions abundant in A
This could be attributed as a protective response to combat the excessive A deposition within the brain tissue.
It likely suppresses A deposition in conjunction with ApoE.
This is evident by the elevation of A in the CSF and brain interstitial fluid of both APOE and CLU knockout mice
It acts as a neuroprotectant by combating oxidative stress and apoptosis
It prevents the mitochondrial transfer of activated Bcl-2 associated X (Bax) protein, a member of Bcl-2 protein family, which is known to accelerate apoptosis.
Clusterin is also involved in double stranded DNA break repair
Clusterin also influences inflammation and immune response.
The expression of clusterin by astrocytes is increased on treatment with Interleukin 2
It
inhibits the membrane binding of membrane attack complex and regulates the nuclear factor kappa light chain enhancer of activated B cell (NF-B) pathway
Therefore, clusterin plays varied roles in AD pathology and serves as neuroprotectant by combating apoptosis, regulating inflammation and immune response and

CSF BIOMARKER STUDIES PERTAINING TO CLUSTERIN
Numerous studies have evaluated the diagnostic potential of clusterin in CSF by using different methods such as ELISA, mass spectrometry and multiplex assays.
Most of the studies have reported that clusterin is significantly increased in CSF of AD patients (Table
The increased levels of clusterin could be attributed as a defence against neurodegeneration.
CSF clusterin levels correlate well with the core CSF biomarkers (T-tau and P-tau and A-42), and are also significantly associated with CSF tau/A ratio
CSF clusterin levels were found to be associated with the entorhinal cortex atrophy rate among CSF Aβ-42 positive individuals.
These correlations very likely suggest that CSF clusterin levels are elevated in relation to the pathological changes in the brain.
Elevation in CSF levels of clusterin and the correlation with core biomarkers suggest that, elevated levels of clusterin could be attributed as a protective response to the amyloidosis and increased neurodegeneration in the AD brain.
Looking at the role of clusterin in AD pathogenesis, a further exploration of its role as an AD biomarker is needed in the CSF.

ROLE IN AD PATHOGENESIS
YKL-40 is a glycoprotein belonging to the family of 18 glycosyl hydrolases.
It is also called human cartilage glycoprotein-39 (HC gp-39) or chitinase-3-like-1 protein (CHI3L1).
It binds with chitin but does not have a chitinase activity
It is secreted by the chondrocytes, synovial cells, vascular smooth muscle cells, macrophages and neutrophils
It is named based on the first three terminal amino acids: tyrosine (Y), lysine (K), leucine (L)
YKL-40 plays a key role in inflammation, therefore influences AD pathology.
In response to neuroinflammation the expression of YKL-40 is increased and is localized to astrocytes in the region of inflammation
It is expressed by the microglia and the expression of YKL-40 mRNA is increased in AD
Microglia and astrocytes are associated with senile plaques in AD and play a key role in immune response in the brain (Rubio-Perez & Morillas-Ruiz, 2012).
The microglia are activated in response to neurodegeneration.
The plaque associated activated microglia are large and mostly phagocytic
They constantly scavenge the plaques, damaged neurons, infectious agents and promote inflammation in damaged tissue
A, either alone or together with inflammatory mediators, sets up an activation cycle to activate the microglia and thereby, generate an immune response in the brain
Microglial activation thereby plays an important role in AD
Therefore, microglial expressed protein YKL-40 is a potential marker of neuroinflammation, and plays a significant role in AD pathogenesis.

CSF BIOMARKER STUDIES PERTAINING TO YKL-40
The CSF levels of YKL-40 are elevated in AD.
Through numerous studies it has been have found that increased levels of YKL-40 in CSF have prognostic and diagnostic utility as a biomarker for AD.
YKL-40 aids in preclinical AD diagnosis and discriminating cognitively normal individuals from mild cognitive impairment (MCI) or AD patients (Table
The role of YKL-40 is also seen in differential diagnosis of dementia
The levels of YKL-40 have been found to significantly correlate with MMSE scores
Studies suggest YKL-40 is elevated early in the AD continuum and can serve as a valuable neuroinflammatory marker to detect early pathological changes and can even be used to study disease progression.
The association of CSF YKL-40 with CSF T-tau and P-tau (Table
Being a potential diagnostic and prognostic marker it can serve as a target to combat AD associated neuroinflammation.
YKL-40 levels are consistently increased with age.
This suggests that neuroinflammation occurs normally with aging.
However, the still higher increase in 4 carriers suggest that neuroinflammation is exacerbated with amyloidosis and neurodegeneration
On the contrary, a recent study also indicates that inflammation could be driven by amyloidosis but, independent of the APOE4 status.
In this study the CSF levels were elevated in A positive individuals, who were APOE 4 non carriers
Therefore, YKL-40 can be used a potential marker to stage the neuroinflammation associated with AD.

ROLE IN AD PATHOGENESIS
Chemokines are low molecular weight cytokines.
They are secondary inflammatory mediators induced by the primary mediators such as interleukin-1.
These act as chemoattractants and direct leucocytes to the site of inflammation.
They express their action through guanine nucleotide associated proteins (G protein) coupled receptors.
There are approximately 50 cytokines which are classified into four families; CC cytokines (have two adjacent cysteine residues at the N terminal), CXC cytokines (have two terminal cysteine residues separated by one amino acid), C cytokines (have two cysteine residues in total, one at N terminal and other at the downstream) and CX3C cytokines (have two cysteine residues separated by three amino acids at the N terminal)
Inflammation plays a significant role in AD pathogenesis.
The cytokines and chemokines, being inflammatory mediators are involved in AD pathogenesis.
They are released by the astrocytes, which play a role in A generation and degeneration
The astrocytes proliferate in response to neurodegeneration and increase the deposition of toxic A

 itself increases the expression of chemokines and cytokines by astrocytes, by reactivating
them.
There is a continuous cycle of activation and reactivation of astrocytes leading to inflammation and neuronal injury.
Therefore, the chemokines being mediators of inflammation, play a significant role in AD pathogenesis.

CSF BIOMARKER STUDIES PERTAINING TO MCP-1
Many studies have demonstrated the role of CC chemokine, MCP-1 or CCL2 in AD diagnosis.
Studies have reported elevated CSF levels of MCP-1 in AD (Table
MCP-1 levels in CSF are positively correlated with the decrease in MMSE scores and higher baseline levels predict a faster rate of cognitive decline in AD
Therefore, MCP-1 could serve as a marker of cognitive decline along the AD continuum.
MCP-1 plays an important role in AD associated neuroinflammation and can serve a potential biomarker to track the same.

ROLE IN AD PATHOGENESIS
Neurogranin is a calmodulin-binding, postsynaptic protein found in the dendrites
It plays an important role in memory potentiation.
It binds with calmodulin and releases the same when intracellular concentration of calcium increases.
The released calmodulin binds with the calcium ions and activates a signal transduction pathway
Synaptic dysfunction is linked to decline in cognition and occurs prior to neuronal degeneration (DeKosky &
The brain levels of synaptic proteins including neurogranin are reduced in AD at an early stage.
The synaptic dysfunction in terms of reduction in synapses is also seen in MCI which is higher in mild AD.
Thus, synaptic dysfunction occurs early in AD and indicates disease progression
Neurogranin regulates the calcium-dependent postsynaptic signalling triggered by calmodulin
Reduced brain levels of neurogranin can cause a dysregulation of post synaptic signalling.
The expression of neurogranin is reduced in hippocampal and retrosplenial regions of brain in aged mice
Therefore, a reduction of synaptic proteins such as neurogranin in the brain relates to synaptic dysfunction and the CSF levels of such proteins can be used for disease diagnosis and monitor the progression.

CSF BIOMARKER STUDIES PERTAINING TO NEUROGRANIN
In the past few years, a number of researchers have evaluated the diagnostic and prognostic potential of the biomarker neurogranin.
A number of assay methods have been developed to quantify neurogranin in the CSF and have reported elevated neurogranin levels are elevated in AD (Table
In a study conducted on various synaptic proteins including neurogranin in post-mortem brain samples, it was found that synaptic proteins discriminated dementia cases from controls with over 90% sensitivity and specificity
The CSF neurogranin levels correlate with brain atrophy and amyloid load and also help in predicting decline in cognition.
The CSF levels differ significantly between stable MCI (sMCI)
and MCI to AD converters and between sMCI and AD
Increased CSF levels of neurogranin are specific to AD and not seen in other neurodegenerative diseases
Therefore, it is a promising biomarker for early AD diagnosis, predicting progression and distinguishing AD from other forms of dementia.
It can act as a theragnostic marker, which can help in monitoring biochemical effects of drugs used to improve synaptic function.
Since, synaptic dysfunction is associated to cognitive decline, neurogranin can help in staging the rate of cognitive decline along the AD continuum.
However, large longitudinal studies are needed to further validate the role of neurogranin in AD diagnosis and prognosis.

BIOMARKER OF ALTERED MICROGLIAL ACTIVITY

SOLUBLE ECTODOMAIN OF TRIGGERING RECEPTOR EXPRESSED ON MYELOID CELLS (sTREM2)

ROLE IN AD PATHOGENESIS
Ectodomain of triggering receptor expressed on myeloid cells (TREM2) is a transmembrane glycoprotein immune receptor expressed in a number of cells such as dendritic cells, osteoclasts, tissue macrophages and the microglia.
It contains an ectodomain with three N-glycosylation residues, a transmembrane sequence and a short intracellular tail.
Its functions are mediated via DNAX activating protein of 12 kDa (DAP12) signaling
In the brain, it is expressed on the microglial cells and regulates microglial mediated phagocytosis and clearance of apoptotic neurons
It plays an important role in regulating immune responses in the brain and the production of inflammatory cytokines
Therefore, the role of TREM2 has been widely studied in AD in relation to down regulating inflammation and clearing out apoptotic neurons via microgliosis.
TREM2 is up regulated in mice with mutant APP and amyloid deposition
The mutations associated with the TREM2 gene are associated with an increased risk for AD.
Rare variants of the gene increase the risk of developing AD by twofold
It has also been found that mutations in TREM2 reduce Aclearance
TREM2 undergoes regulated membrane proteolytic processing by ADAM 10 (A disintegrin and metalloproteinase domain containing protein 10) and secretaseand releases the soluble ectodomain sTREM2 into the extracellular space
The sTREM2 is detectable in the CSF and the levels have been quantified in different neurological disorders such as AD, fronto temporal dementia (FTD) and mutiple sclerosis
Since, TREM2 regulates microgliosis, the soluble fragment of the protein, sTREM2, could play a role in regulating TREM2 mediated microgliosis.
The exact biological role of the soluble fragment is unclear.
However, using in vitro and in vivo models,
Therefore, sTREM2 likely plays a role in microgliosis, but further studies are needed to affirmatively elucidate the exact role of sTREM2.

CSF BIOMARKER STUDIES PERTAINING TO STREM2
Numerous studies have revealed that CSF levels of sTREM2 are altered in AD (Table
The levels are elevated in dominantly inherited AD cases years before the onset of symptoms
This signifies that microgliosis occurs prior to the onset of symptoms and later to brain amyloidosis.
The Nasu-Hakola disease (NHD) TREM2 mutation carriers have lower CSF levels of sTREM2
This signifies the altered protein production in mutation carriers.
Studied have found the CSF levels of TREM2 are increased in AD at early stage and correlate well with the markers of neurodegeneration and tau pathology.
Therefore, microgliosis is most likely an early event that occurs along the AD and occurs in response to neurodegeneration.
The CSF levels are lesser in AD as compared to MCI who later developed AD (MCI-AD).This signifies that microgliosis increases from the preclinical AD to MCI-AD and there after reduces in AD, probably due to reduction in immune response
Higher CSF levels in MCI patients are associated to increased gray matter volume.
This reflects upon the protective response of microglia in response to neurodegeneration
The role of TREM2 in regulating brain immune response, microgliosis and inflammation needs to be further explored.
The CSF levels of sTREM2 can help in tracking the altered microgliosis along the disease trajectory and can serve as a potential stage biomarker for identifying early stages of AD and as theragnostic marker to monitor therapeutic effects of drugs administered at an early stage.

ROLE IN AD PATHOGENESIS
The fatty-acid-binding proteins (FABP's) are transport proteins for fatty acids and other lipophilic biomolecules.
FABP3 is mainly expressed in the heart and skeletal muscles but has also been isolated from the brain
In the brain FABP's bind to long chain polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFA), such as docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) and arachidonic acid (ARA) and is involved in the transport of these fatty acids.
These fatty acids are indispensable for maintaining neuronal membrane integrity, neurite growth and synapse formation.
The DHA and ARA modulate neural membrane fluidity and permeability
The dietary supplementation of DHA has been found to improve spatial memory and reduce A deposition in mice
DHA also prevents A induced neuronal damage in vivo and in vitro
Since HFABP or FABP3 regulates the transport of DHA and other fatty acids, it is likely to be associated with AD pathogenesis.
The brain levels of FABP3 are reduced in such neurodegenerative diseases, which could be associated to altered signal transduction and membrane integrity
FABP's are released following a cellular injury
Therefore, like other FABP's, HFABP is likely to be associated with cellular dysfunction associated with AD.
FABP3 is also associated with dopaminergic system and changes in dopaminergic system are likely to be associated with AD.
It binds and regulates the dopaminergic D2 receptors, and over expression of FABP3 promotes -synuclein oligomerization
The association of FABP3 with dopaminergic system also signifies the role of FABP3 in AD pathogenesis.

CSF BIOMARKER STUDIES PERTAINING TO FABP3
The CSF levels of FABP3 are elevated in AD and is a potential diagnostic marker for differential diagnosis of neurodegenerative diseases (Table
The elevated levels are significantly associated with brain atrophy in cases with low A-42 and reflect on lipid dyshomeostasis in the CNS
Therefore, elevated FABP3 levels in CSF might be associated to brain amyloidosis.
The diagnostic accuracy of the core CSF biomarkers has been found to be increased in conjunction with FABP3.
Also, FABP3 and the ratio of FABP3/A-42 is useful in predicting the progression of MCI subjects to AD.
In a recent study involving healthy aged individuals the CSF levels of FABP3 were significantly elevated in A positive individuals compared to negative individuals
Therefore, it is a good biomarker for predicting disease progression in early stages of disease and can help in identifying healthy aged individuals at risk of developing AD.
The elevated CSF levels correlate with core markers of neuro degeneration (Table
The elevated levels in AD could likely be associated to the destruction of neurons.
Neurofilaments are the proteins particularly found in neuronal axons.
They are 10 nm in diameter and are essential for the axonal growth and the transmission of impulses along the axons
These are heteropolymers composed of four subunits, namely neurofilament heavy, medium and light polypeptides and α-internexin
Being elastic and fibrous they maintain the shape of neurons and act as neuroskeletal supports
NFL plays a role in protecting neurites from dystrophy and regulates pathways generating A
Neurofilaments are likely to be released from neuronal axons in response to neuronal damage in neurodegenerative diseases.
NFL is mainly located in myelinated axons and white matter changes are associated with increased NFL levels in the CSF.
Therefore, elevated levels of NFL in the CSF reflect on axonal degeneration
NFL is a specific biomarker of axonal degeneration, whose levels have been found to be elevated in a wide range of neurodegenerative diseases including AD.
It is not a disease-specific biomarker but can aid in differential diagnosis of neurodegenerative disorders since its levels are elevated in FTD as compared to AD
High CSF NFL levels predict high hippocampal atrophy rate in cognitively healthy older adults as well those at risk of AD
In case of AD it can help in help in tracking the different dynamic changes along the disease continuum.
The CSF levels of NFL are elevated in a wide range of neurodegenerative diseases including AD as compared to normal controls (Table
NFL levels are significantly elevated in AD compared to sMCI and higher CSF levels in AD are associated with cognitive decline, white matter change, brain atrophy, lower FDG-PET.
The change in CSF levels and these associations are independent of Apositivity
Therefore, NFL reflects upon neuronal or axonal degeneration independent of A pathology.
Since the CSF levels of NFL are significantly elevated in AD compared to sMCI and associated to brain atrophy and cognitive decline; it can be used as potential biomarker to study disease progression and severity along the AD continuum.
Also, the diagnostic performance of core CSF biomarkers in differential diagnosis of early onset Alzheimer's disease (EOAD) and FTD is improved in conjunction with the CSF levels of NFL
Hence, it also has a potential to differentially diagnose a range of neurodegenerative diseases.
But, the potential of NFL to identify individuals at risk of developing AD or its potential to identify preclinical AD needs to be further explored.

VISININ LIKE PROTEIN 1 (VILIP-1): MARKER OF NEURONAL INJURY

ROLE IN AD PATHOGENESIS
VILIP-1 belongs to a large family of calcium binding proteins called neuronal calcium sensors (NCS's)
The VIPIL-1 protein is encoded by the visinin like 1 (VSNL1) gene and contains 191 amino acids and weighs 22 kDa
VILPI-1 is distributed in different regions of the brain
The Calcium ions (Ca 2+ ) are involved in neuronal signalling and the NCS's mediate the action of these ions.
In response to a high intracellular concentration of Ca 2+ , VILIP-1 gets reversibly translocated to the membrane components of the cell.
This reversible interaction of VILIP-1 modulates signalling cascade in the neurons via activation of specific membrane bound targets
Therefore, VILIP-1 plays an important role in neuronal signalling.
The VILIP-1 regulates neuron ion channels, neuronal growth, survival, synaptic plasticity and activates cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) and cyclic guanine monophosphate (cGMP) signalling pathways
Neurodegenerative disorders such as AD are associated with disturbed Ca 2+ homeostasis in the neurons, which affect neuronal signalling by causing excessive activation of receptors, weakening the Ca 2+ buffering capacity of neurons and deregulating the Ca 2+ channels
A modulates this disturbed Ca 2+ homeostasis by increasing the influx of Ca 2+ by forming channels
The NCS's such as VILIP-1 play a significant role in AD pathogenesis.
The intracellular expression of VILIP-1 is reduced in AD brains as compared to controls.
VILIP-1 has been found to be associated with extracellular plaques and NFT's in the brains of AD patients and its expression is associated with enhanced hyper phosphorylation of tau protein and cell death
In mild AD there is a considerable loss of neurons in the entorhinal cortex
The levels of VILIP-1 are reduced in the entorhinal cortex of AD patients
Therefore, it is a marker of neuronal injury.
Figure
This signifies that VILIP-1 is neurotoxic under a disturbed Ca 2+ homeostasis.
In AD its intracellular expression is reduced.
Increased expression promotes hyperphosphorylation and cell death which is reduced by calcium buffer protein.
A disturbed Ca 2+ balance causes the loss of vulnerable neurons and thereby, the release of VILIP-1 extracellularly.

CSF BIOMARKER STUDIES PERTAINING TO VILIP-1
Numerous studies have been conducted to illustrate its role as a potential CSF diagnostic, prognostic and a differential biomarker.
CSF levels of VILIP-1 aid in the early diagnosis of AD, distinguish AD from MCI, helps in identifying the patients with MCI likely to progress to AD, and in differentiating AD from other forms of dementia (Table
When used in combination with the core CSF markers the diagnostic performance is improved
VILIP-1 and VILIP-1/A-42 ratio negatively correlates with MMSE
Baseline CSF levels of VILIP-1 are associated with rate of whole brain and regional brain atrophy in AD.
VILIP-1 and the ratio of VILIP-1/A-42 correlate significantly with the brain amyloid load.
Therefore, VILIP-1 and the ratio of VILIP-1/A-42 help in predicting the future cognitive decline.
VILIP-1 can be used as a surrogate marker of neurodegeneration but, larger longitudinal studies are needed to validate the same.
It can help in tracking the protective effects of neuroprotective therapeutic interventions.
(VLP-1 and VILIP-1 is the same protein)

CONCLUSION
The multifaceted AD dementia is an amalgam of different pathological changes in the brain.
The different pathological changes may represent a hierarchy of events that occur one after another or may follow their own trajectory, which ultimately leads to dementia due to AD.
In order to get a deeper insight into different aspects of disease pathogenesis biomolecules/proteins involved in the associated biochemical pathways need to be explored and evaluated as disease biomarkers for disease diagnosis, prognosis and therapy.
The CSF biomarkers would serve as reliable measures, to assess the time course of AD and the associated pathological changes along the continuum of the disease.
A number of biomarkers in relation to different AD associated pathological changes have been discussed in the current manuscript.
They together or alone can aid in an accurate AD diagnosis starting from the preclinical phase and thereby, can give a clear picture of the pathological changes that occur across the disease continuum.
The use of multiple biomarkers can help in understanding the association of individual pathologies
Hence, these biomarkers in conjunction can improve the accuracy of diagnosis.
It has been found that a biomarker model consisting of the biomarkers T-tau, NFL, neurogranin reflecting upon neurodegeneration, axonal damage and synaptic dysfunction respectively; has a higher diagnostic accuracy (area under the receiver operating curve (AUC) 85.5%) in classifying AD and controls
The combination of CSF biomarkers, including YKL-40 could distinguish cognitively normal participants with clinical dementia rating (CDR) score of 0 from those with CDR > 0 with AUC 0.896
The CSF levels of these biomarkers change likely with the pathological change or event in the AD brain.
The elevated CSF levels of clusterin can highlight upon the role of clusterin in binding with A and preventing its fibrillization or its role in promoting the formation of soluble toxic A oligomers.
An elevated CSF levels of biomarkers YKL-40 and MCP-1 highlight upon neuroinflammation as a protective response to brain damage.
These proteins are expressed by the astrocytes, which are activated in response to neurodegeneration and thereafter, release inflammatory mediators.
Elevated levels of sTREM2 highlight upon brain microgliosis as a response to phagocytise accumulated A.
Therefore, these novel biomarkers can help in tracking inflammatory processes related to AD neurodegeneration.
They can help in tracking stage and state associated neuroinflammation in AD and combating the same with the therapeutic agents.
Inflammation is associated with a number of psychiatric disorders
These biomarkers can help in understanding the association of psychiatric disorders such as depression with AD.
The dynamic changes in levels of VILIP-1, a biomarker of neuronal injury and NFL, a biomarker of axonal damage can alone or in conjunction provide an insight into the longitudinal cognitive changes associated with neurodegeneration.
The cognitive decline associated with synaptic degeneration can be well accounted via CSF measure of neurogranin.
Hence, it can be concluded that the CSF biomarkers will certainly benefit in diagnosing AD at an early stage with much higher diagnostic accuracy either alone, together or in conjunction with the core CSF biomarkers.
This would also aid in understanding the disease pathogenesis and progression.
They can account for the lag between preclinical and clinical AD, and can act as indices of pathological change.
They can serve as end point measures in



FIGURE 1 :
FIGURE 1: Alzheimer's disease: A multifaceted disease



FIGURE 2 :
FIGURE 2: CSF biomarkers for AD diagnosis and understanding different aspects of



FIGURE 3 :
FIGURE 3: Role of apoE in the pathophysiology of AD.
AD: Alzheimer's disease; ApoE:



FIGURE 4 :
FIGURE 4: Varied roles of clusterin in AD pathology.
Bax protein: Bcl-2 associated X protein;


Lidström AM, Hesse C, Rosengren L, Davidsson P, Blennow K. Normal levels of clusterin in cerebrospinal fluid in Alzheimer's disease, and no change after acute ischemic stroke.


Bjerke M, Gobom J, Brunhage E, Vanmechelen E, Andreasen N, Hansson O, Minthon L, Zetterberg H, Blennow K. Neurogranin in cerebrospinal fluid as a marker of synaptic degeneration in Alzheimer's disease.
Brain Res 2010;1362:13-22.



FIGURE 5 :
FIGURE 5: Role of NFL in AD pathogenesis.
NFL: Neurofilament light chain; CSF:


Rosengren L, Karlsson JE, Sjögren M, Blennow K, Wallin A. Neurofilament levels in CSF are increased in dementia.
Neurology 1999;52:1090-1093.
Sjögren M, Blomberg M, Johnson M, Wahlund LO, Edman Å, Lind K, Rosengren L, Blennow K, Wallin A. Neurofilament protein in cerebrospinal fluid -a marker of white matter changes.
J Neurosci Res 2001;66:510-516.



FIGURE 6 :
FIGURE 6: The role of VILIP-1 in AD pathogenesis.
A: Amyloid beta, AD: Alzheimer's



TABLE 1 Studies conducted to evaluate the role of apoE as a potential CSF biomarker Study Study groups CSF levels in AD/study groups Association with APOE genotype/core markers Analysis method



TABLE 2 Studies conducted to evaluate the role of clusterin as a potential CSF biomarker Study Study groups CSF levels in AD/study groups



TABLE 3 Studies conducted to evaluate the role of YKL-40 as a potential CSF biomarker



TABLE 4 Studies conducted to evaluate the role of MCP-1 as a potential CSF biomarker



TABLE 5 Studies conducted to evaluate the role of neurogranin as a potential CSF biomarker



TABLE 6 Studies conducted to evaluate the role of sTREM2 as a potential CSF biomarker



TABLE 7 Studies conducted to evaluate the role of FABP3 as a potential CSF biomarker Study Study groups CSF levels in AD Association with core biomarkers/AP OE genotype Analysis method



NEURONAL STRUCTURE AND SIGNALING DISRUPTION (MARKERS OF NEURODEGENERATION) 9.1 NEUROFILAMENT LIGHT CHAIN PROTEIN (NFL): MARKER OF AXONAL DEGENERATION 9.1.1 ROLE IN AD PATHOGENESIS



TABLE 8 Studies conducted to evaluate the role of NFL as a potential CSF biomarker



TABLE 9 Studies conducted to evaluate the role of VILIP-1 as a potential CSF biomarker Study Study groups CSF levels in AD vs other study groups Association with core biomarkers Analysis method