Early Detection and Prevention of Alzheimer’s Disease: Role of Oxidative Markers and Natural Antioxidants
Oxidative stress (OS) contributes to Alzheimer's disease (AD) pathology.
OS can be a result of increased reactive oxygen/nitrogen species, reduced antioxidants, oxidatively damaged molecules, and/or a combination of these factors.
Scientific literature is scarce for the markers of OS-specific for detecting AD at an early stage.
The first aim of the current review is to provide an overview of the potential OS markers in the brain, cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), blood and/or urine that can be used for early diagnosis of human AD.
The reason for exploring OS markers is that the proposed antioxidant therapies against AD appear to start too late to be effective.
The second aim is to evaluate the evidence for natural antioxidants currently proposed to prevent or treat AD symptoms.
To address these two aims, we critically evaluated the studies on humans in which various OS markers for detecting AD at an early stage were presented.
Non-invasive OS markers that can detect mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and AD at an early stage in humans with greater specificity and sensitivity are primarily related to lipid peroxidation.
However, a combination of OS markers, family history, and other biochemical tests are needed to detect the disease early on.
We also report that the long-term use of vitamins (vitamin E as in almonds) and polyphenol-rich foods (curcumin/curcuminoids of turmeric, ginkgo biloba, epigallocatechin-3-gallate in green tea) seem justified for ameliorating AD symptoms.
Future research on humans is warranted to justify the use of natural antioxidants.

INTRODUCTION
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the most common dementia of the elderly
The discovery that memory decline often precedes other neuropathological signs of AD
Oxidative stress (OS) underlies MCI
Various antioxidants have been suggested to prevent or even cure AD
Major biomarkers of oxidative damage in AD have been identified
Several antioxidants have been proposed for ameliorating oxidative damage in humans and non-human models of AD
Among these, some are preventive while others are touted to have a curative effect in AD.
A discussion on the rigor of the evidence favoring the purported antioxidants in preventing or treating human AD is scarce.
Therefore, our objective is to highlight potential oxidative markers that can be used for early diagnosis of human AD and to evaluate the evidence for the natural antioxidants currently proposed to prevent or treat AD in humans.
Primary research on OS and antioxidants in the context of human MCI and/or AD was analyzed.
The studies on early detection of AD, preclinical AD, or MCI in humans in terms of oxidative damage and the research on antioxidants useful in these conditions were selected for review.
It should be noted that the animal studies, the discussion on effects of any non-dietary intervention like exercise on MCI/AD

OXIDATIVE STRESS MARKERS FOR EARLY DETECTION OF AD
Studies have reported various products derived from proteins, lipids, DNA, or RNA that indicate OS in the brain.
For example, OS damage to the protein can be determined by measuring 3nitrotyrosine, protein carbonyls, methionine sulfoxide or highly reactive aldehydes; lipid damage by determining isoprostanes and lipid and cyclic peroxides; DNA damage by estimating 8hydroxy-deoxyguanosine (8OHdG); and RNA damage has been determined by measuring 8-hydroxyguanine (8OHG;

Oxidative Damage to Proteins
Elevated levels of protein carbonyls and 3-nitrotyrosine in the MCI lymphocyte mitochondria
Oxidative inactivation of several proteins in the hippocampus leads to the progression of AD from MCI
The oxidatively modified proteins in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) of MCI, as determined by redox proteomics, remain oxidized in the disease progression to AD
Both MCI and AD patients show increased plasma levels of advanced oxidation protein products
Increased carbonyl groups content in the plasma of early AD subjects have been reported
Carbonyl proteins in the plasma can be roughly three times higher in MCI/AD relative to the age-matched healthy controls
The specificity of plasma carbonyl proteins is still questionable since one cannot differentiate between AD and other dementias like vascular dementia based on carbonyl proteins alone
Likewise, caloric restriction itself reduces oxidative damage to the brain proteins, measured by protein carbonyl levels
Further investigations are warranted that record patient's dietary habits whilst evaluating the link between plasma carbonyl proteins and early AD.

Role of Lipid Peroxidation
The plasma, CSF, and urine of MCI subjects exhibit higher levels of isoprostane 8,12-iso-iPF(2alpha)-VI, a marker of in vivo lipid peroxidation, as compared to cognitively normal elderly controls
Plasma and whole blood levels of thiobarbituric acid reactive substances, an index of lipid peroxidation, are likewise high in early AD
Lipid hydroperoxides are the unstable products of lipid peroxidation that undergo non-enzymatic decomposition to generate aldehydes like malondialdehyde (MDA) and 4-hydroxynonenal (4-HNE); latter form covalent adducts to alter physiological proteins.
High serum hydroperoxide levels are associated with MCI and AD
The OS detected in the serum (high hydroperoxides with low residual antioxidant power) is more pronounced in MCI and AD as compared to vascular dementia
Elevated levels of MDA and 4-HNE have been reported in the brains of subjects with MCI or early AD
Mitochondria isolated from MCI lymphocytes show increased levels of HNE-bound proteins
Plasma production of MDA shows a gradation: AD > MCI > healthy controls
It should be noted that covalent adducts of 4-HNE are elevated in the brain and body fluids of other neurodegenerative diseases as well including Parkinson's disease and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
The level of F2-isoprostanes, indicating lipid peroxidation, is enhanced in the brain and CSF of MCI and AD patients, but plasma and urinary isoprostanes are normal in AD
A prospective populationbased study failed to confirm the association between systemic isoprostanes and the risk of AD
Despite being touted as ''gold standard'' biomarker of lipid peroxidation

Oxidative Damage to Nucleic Acids
Nucleic acid damage also occurs early in AD.
Significantly elevated levels of 8OHG and 4,6-diamino-5formamidopyrimidine have been reported in the post-mortem MCI brains relative to the age-matched controls
Oxidized RNA nucleoside 8OHG in the neurons of the cerebral cortex is an age-associated phenomenon, but a more prominent RNA damage correlates with MCI and AD
Peripheral leukocytes from MCI and AD patients show enhanced oxidative DNA damage including higher amounts of oxidized purines and pyrimidines relative to the healthy controls
Certain nuclear (but not mitochondrial) oxidative phosphorylation genes are upregulated in the hippocampus of MCI patients relative to both AD and normal controls
What pattern of oxidative damage and gene expression can best distinguish AD at an early stage from other dementia is an open question.

Reduced Antioxidant Defenses
In addition to oxidative damage, reduced antioxidant defenses have been reported in MCI and early AD
Plasma glutathione levels and antioxidant enzymes such as glutathione peroxidase, catalase, and superoxide dismutase (SOD) are significantly decreased in early AD
Apolipoprotein E4 (APOE4) is the major genetic risk factor in AD.
The E4 carriers MCI exhibit significantly reduced plasma SOD activity relative to non-APOE4 carriers
Plasma SOD activity follows gradation: healthy controls > MCI > AD
Decreased SOD has also been reported in blood peripheral mononuclear cells of MCI and AD patients (Arce-Varas et al., 2017; Table
In other words, reduced antioxidant potential can be detected in both the extracellular and intracellular blood compartments.
Serum analysis of MCI and AD patients have revealed a low residual antioxidant power
Albumin is considered a major endogenous antioxidant in serum because of its free radical-trapping ability.
OS in MCI and AD can increase the serum levels of ischemia-modified albumin (IMA), a form of albumin in which the N-terminal is structurally changed
The levels of selenium, an essential trace element, were found to be lower in both MCI and AD relative to the controls, but plasma selenium was the lowest in the AD group
Higher serum levels of gamma-tocopherol, beta-tocotrienol, total tocotrienols, and gamma-tocopherol/cholesterol ratio are associated with a lower risk of MCI or AD in the older adults
Levels of 5-nitro-gamma-tocopherol, a marker of vitamin E damage, show a significant positive correlation with protein carbonyls, protein-conjugated HNE, and protein-bound 3-nitrotyrosine
The limited specificity of OS and antioxidant markers must be kept in view.
The serum, urine, or CSF concentrations of these biomolecules are associated with several cardiometabolic conditions
Therefore, OS markers must always be combined with family history and other imaging techniques to detect AD at early stages.

NATURAL ANTIOXIDANTS FOR ALZHEIMER'S DISEASE PREVENTION AND TREATMENT

Vitamins
Plasma antioxidant defenses are depleted in MCI and AD
So, antioxidant intake may be a reliable strategy to prevent or even reverse MCI/AD symptoms.
In this regard, vitamin E (tocopherols/tocotrienols) and vitamin C (ascorbate) is considered the scavenging and chain-breaking molecules called direct antioxidants
Dietary vitamin E can dictate OS outcomes
Although vitamin E supplementation cannot stop the progression from MCI to AD, it does delay the onset of AD symptoms
Combining vitamin E with vitamin C is better at decreasing F2-isoprostane in the CSF in mild-to-moderate AD than the vitamin E alone
The therapeutic importance of the latter observation is yet to be explored.
The risk of AD appears to be decreased in elderly subjects with high plasma levels of vitamin E (tocopherols and tocotrienols;
Almond supplementation on an empty stomach has been found to enhanced memory in animal models of AD
This can partly be explained by high amounts of antioxidants like vitamin E and selenium in almonds
However, a clinical study reported that supplementation with vitamin E and selenium does not ameliorate human dementia
The result of this underpowered study

Polyphenols
Polyphenolic agents, such as curcuminoids found in turmeric, work through multiple pathways and have shown improvements in AD symptoms in animal models
Gingko Biloba extract contains antioxidant flavonoids among other chemicals.
Meta-analyses of human studies have shown promise in AD
Like curcumin, the neuroprotection by flavonoid-rich foods may not entirely be due to antioxidant effects since only a limited amount enters the brain.
The additional mechanism behind neuroprotection includes flavonoid-induced improvement in brain vascular function
Catechins flavonoids are considered the active, therapeutic components of green tea.
The ester of epigallocatechin and gallic acid called epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG) is the main bioactive polyphenol in green tea extract that has neuroprotective effects partly owing to its antioxidant activities
Green tea consumption seems to improve cognitive performance in the healthy
However, the results of a long-term clinical trial of EGCG in the early stages of AD are yet to be published (ClinicalTrials.gov
Identifier: NCT00951834).
The EGCG dose and frequency needed for AD prevention and/or reversal must be explored further.
Other natural antioxidants tested extensively in animal models but only limitedly in humans for AD include: resveratrol, a polyphenol in grapes and red wine

CONCLUSION
Biomolecules predicting oxidative damage before the onset of clinical systems in AD can help in the diagnosis of this dreaded neurodegenerative disease.
AD cannot be detected at an early stage based on oxidative markers alone because of the limited sensitivity and specificity of available options.
Among the non-invasive choices, lipid peroxidation (high serum peroxides) holds the most promise in the early detection of AD.
It is unlikely, however, that a single non-invasive and cheap biomarker could detect AD at early stages.
AD is a complex disease involving multiple pathways.
OS is a part of normal aging, but a high OS can be one of the earliest signs of AD.
The antioxidants offered to tackle oxidative damage in AD have limited efficacy partly because of the dose, duration, unbalanced monotherapy, and the presence of blood-brain-barrier that does not allow liberal amounts of antioxidants to enter the brain.
By the time antioxidants are prescribed in humans, it is already too late.
So, a balanced diet and lifestyle modifications can be the only long-term solution to prevent or reverse cognitive impairments associated with the heterogeneous disease that we call AD.


(2010) MCI (n = 70) Serum MDA levels have been correlated with the progression of MCI into AD Cervellati et al. (2013) HC (n = 99) MCI (n = 134) AD (n = 101) Serum High hydroperoxides levels associated with MCI and ADCervellati et al. (2014a) HC (n = 118) MCI (n = 111) AD (n = 105) Serum High hydroperoxide levels associated with MCI and AD.
Antioxidant capacity in AD and MCI is lower than that of HC Cervellati et al. (2014b) HC (n = 48) MCI (n = 103) AD (n = 89) Serum High hydroperoxides with low residual antioxidant capacity are more pronounced in MCI and AD as compared to HC. Chico et al. (2013) HC (n = 63) MCI (n = 34) AD (n = 85) Plasma Both MCI and AD patients have increased levels of advanced oxidation products.
APOE4 carriers MCI have reduced plasma SOD activity relative to non-APOE4 carriers.
Plasma reducing capacity AD < MCI < HC Di Domenico et al. (2016gamma-tocopherol, beta-tocotrienol, total tocotrienols, and gamma-tocopherol/cholesterol ratio are associated with a lower risk of MCI or AD in the older adults Martinez de Toda et al. (2019) HC (n = 30) MCI (n = 20) AD (n = 20) Blood Higher TBARS and lower glutathione peroxidase and reductase activities in both sexes can be a marker for prodromal AD Nunomura et al. (2012) HC (n = 5) MCI (n = 6) AD (n = 5) Brain tissue Oxidized RNA nucleoside 8OHG in the neurons of the cerebral cortex is an age-associated phenomenon, but a more prominent RNA damage correlates with MCI and AD Picco et al. , thiobarbituric acid reactive substances (index of lipid peroxidation) MCI > HC Plasma glutathione levels and antioxidant enzymes such as glutathione peroxidase, catalase, and superoxide dismutase (SOD) HC > MCI Rita Cardoso et al. protein carbonyls and 3-nitrotyrosine, and 4-hydroxy-2-nonenal-bound proteins in MCI lymphocyte mitochondria relative to HC Torres et al. (2011) HC (n = 26) MCI (n = 33) AD (n = 29) Red blood cells and plasma Plasma production of MDA and catalase activity AD > MCI > HC Glutathione reductase/glutathione peroxidase ratio HC > MCI > AD AD, Alzheimer's disease; APOE4, Apolipoprotein E4; CSF, Cerebrospinal fluid; HC, Healthy control with no cognitive impairment; IMA, Ischemia-modified albumin; MCI, Mild cognitive impairment; MDA, malondialdehyde; 8OHG, 8-hydroxyguanosine; SOD, superoxide dismutase; TBARS, thiobarbituric acid-reactive substances.



TABLE 1 |
Oxidative markers for early detection of Alzheimer's disease.