Loss of midbrain dopamine neurons and altered apomorphine EEG effects in the 5xFAD mouse model of Alzheimer's disease
F r a n k a n d Bo b k ov a, N a t ali a 2 0 1 9. Los s of mi d b r ai n d o p a mi n e n e u r o n s a n d al t e r e d a p o m o r p hi n e E EG effe c t s in t h e 5xFAD m o u s e m o d el of Alzh ei m e r ' s di s e a s e .
Jou r n al of Alz h ei m e r ' s Dis e a s e 7 0 (1) , p p . 2 4 1-2 5 6.

Introduction
Alzheimer's disease (AD), characterized by neurodegeneration, pathological formation of extracellular amyloid plaques and intraneuronal aggregation of hyperphosphorylated tau into neurofibrillary tangles in the brain, is associated with a gradual decline of cognitive abilities (for review, see
Synaptic dysfunction and an imbalance between coordinated activities of different brain structures is hypothesized to be the main cause of abnormal functioning of the diseased brain
Cognitive decline in AD is thought to be associated with alterations in synaptic transmission and thus in neuronal network function that is accompanied by modification of oscillations in the affected circuits
Superimposed extracellular fields arising from synaptic transmembrane currents of neurons involved in the circuits are supposed to form the electroencephalogram (EEG)
Substantial changes in the interhemispheric asymmetry in cortical EEG frequency spectra, demonstrated in AD patients
Furthermore, changes in EEG recorded from the frontal cortex and/or the hippocampus, key brain areas in learning and memory processing, have been shown in an amyloid rat model of AD
Among transgenic mice, the 5xFAD line is distinguished by expressing multiple familial AD (FAD) mutations that additively increase amyloid-beta42 (Aβ42) production, the main hallmark in AD, and by causing dissociation between cortical and hippocampal synaptic plasticity
5xFAD mice have been shown to exhibit intraneuronal Aβ accumulation at 1.5 months, Aβ deposition at 2 months, and memory deficits at 4 months of age
Despite a significant Aβ accumulation, the overall numbers of neurons in the frontal cortex and hippocampus in 5xFAD mice have been shown to equal those in age-matched controls, with the exception of a neuronal loss in cortical layer 5
Interestingly, before this specific structural dystrophy, synaptic deficits in layer 5 neurons were observed
Thus, a deeper insight into the activities of different brain networks and their changes in the 5xFAD mice promises to aid effective analysis of the AD pathogenesis
In a number of recent studies on AD transgenic mice (and 5xFAD, in particular), substantial attention has been paid to neuronal networks within/between the cortex and the hippocampus
Furthermore, the role of cholinergic, monoaminergic, and GABA-ergic transmission in the functioning of these networks has been shown
In our previous study on an amyloid AD model, involvement of the dopaminergic (DA) system in the cortexhippocampus EEG interplay has been revealed
However, we are still lacking detailed information how this system is affected in the AD transgenic mice.
This needs to be clarified given data demonstrating a role of the DA system in both neuronal plasticity and amyloid-beta transformations in AD
In this study on 5xFAD and non-transgenic (control) adult mice, we recorded EEGs from the secondary motor cortex, dorsal hippocampus, and from two DA-producing areas, the substantia nigra and ventral tegmental area, before and after systemic injection of a DA receptor agonist, apomorphine.
Significant differences between 5xFAD and control mice were revealed in frequency spectra of both baseline and APO-evoked EEG activities in and between the brain areas.

Materials and Methods
Twelve six-month old male transgenic (Tg) mice with five familial AD mutations (5xFAD mice, B6SJL-Tg(APPSwFlLon,PSEN1*M146L*L286V)6799Vas/J) were maintained on the C57BL/6J genetic background and fifteen non-transgenic (nTg, wild type control) littermates were used in this study.
The 5xFAD mice were originally obtained from the Center for Collective Use of the Institute of Physiologically Active Compounds RAS (Chernogolovka, Russian Federation).
Up to the age of five months, the mice were housed in groups of five per cage, while, thereafter, each of them was kept for 1.5 months in an individual cage.
Mice were housed in a standard environment (12-h light/dark cycle, 22-25°C room temperature, 50-55% relative humidity) with food and water ad libitum.
The procedures were carried out in accordance with the "Guidelines for accommodation and care of animals.
Species-specific provisions for laboratory rodents and rabbits" (GOST 33216-2014) and in compliance with the principles enunciated in the Directive 2010/63/EU on the protection of animals used for scientific purposes, and approved by the local Institute Ethics Review Committee.
All efforts were made to minimize both the number of the animals and their suffering.
All mice were genotyped using PCR analysis of DNA obtained from the ear/tail biopsy, followed by separation of the reaction products in the agarose gel.
Mice with a transgene cassette in the genome were combined into Tg group, whereas those with lacking transgene were placed into nTg group.
Post-mortem verification of the amyloid plaques in the brain slices (Suppl.
1), stained with thioflavin-S

Electrodes implantation and EEG recording
After one month of adaptation to the individual cage, each of six 5xFAD mice (29.7 ± 0.5 g) and nine nTg mice (33.0 ± 1.1 g) was anesthetized with subcutaneous (s.c.) injection of a combination of dissolved tiletamine/zolazepam (Zoletil®, Virbac, France) and xylazine solution (Rometar®, Bioveta, Czech Republic) at doses of 25 mg/kg and 2.5 mg/kg, respectively.
Four recording electrodes were implanted into the left secondary motor cortex (MC; AP: +1.9, ML: -0.4,
DV: -2.0), over the left dorsal hippocampus (HPC; AP: -2.8, ML: -2.7, DV: -1.7), into the left ventral tegmental area (VTA; AP: -3.1, ML: -0.4,
DV: -4.5), and into the right substantia nigra (SN; AP: -3.2, ML: +1.3, DV: -4.3)
Within areas analyzed in this study, the opposite hemisphere for SN was chosen, firstly, because of its proximity to VTA which meant we could not exclude possible mutual damage during electrode implantation in the same hemisphere.
Secondly, it is well known that the contralateral SN is the dominant source of DA in the opposite (here: left) hemisphere.
Custom made electrodes were constructed from two varnish-insulated nichrom wires (100-µm diameter) glued together (3M Vetbond TM Tissue Adhesive, MN, USA) with tips free from insulation for 100 µm.
Thus, prepared electrodes were sufficiently inflexible, and had higher effective surface/volume ratio than a monowire electrode of 200-µm diameter.
The reference and ground electrodes (stainless steel wire, 0.4 mm in diameter) were placed symmetrically into the caudal cavities behind the cerebrum (AP: -5.3, ML: ±1.8, DV: -0.5).
All electrodes were positioned using a computerized 3D stereotaxic StereoDrive (Neurostar, Germany), fixed to the skull with dental cement and soldered to a dual row female connector (Sullins Connector Solutions, CA, USA).
Both nichrom wires of the deep electrode were soldered to one of the connector's pins.
After electrode implantation, animals were housed individually.
Post-mortem verification of the electrode tip location included several steps: an anodal current (80-100 µA, 1 s) coagulation of the adjacent tissue, extirpation of the brain and fixation of the cerebrum in 4% paraformaldehyde.
The brain was cut in 30-µm sections using a freezing microtome (Reicher, Austria).
Coronal sections were examined to specify the electrode tip locations; EEG recordings from those, which did not meet placement criteria, were excluded from further analysis.
Effective electrode targeting of the chosen brain areas was based on the use of the stereotaxic manipulator and on precise measurement of bregma and lambda coordinates.
This high-tech manipulator allows the drilling of the holes for the electrodes exactly in the selected points on the skull.
Precise estimations of an individual's bregma-lambda distance provides the correction of the coordinates for the brain areas, taking into account that the value used for preparation of the stereotaxic atlas
In several cases, when the electrolytic marker was relatively enlarged, the electrode tip position was assigned to the point where the effect of electrolysis within the coagulated area was maximal.
The frozen slices with the most effective electrode position were Nissl stained with cresyl violet acetate
2).
Three days after electrode implantation, each mouse was adapted for four days (1 h/day) to an experimental cage (Perspex, 15x17x20 cm) located in an electrically shielded chamber and to a cable (five 36-gauge wires, Plexon Inc, Texas, USA) plugged in a digital Neuro-MEP amplifier (Neurosoft Ltd, Ivanovo, Russian Federation).
On day 8, a baseline EEG was recorded for 60 min, starting 20 min after placing the animal into the box.
EEG recordings were continued for 120 minutes after s.c.
injection either saline (control) or, on the next day, apomorphine (APO, Sigma, Milan, Italy), at a dose of 1.0 mg/kg.
To minimize the effect of oxidation only freshly dissolved APO was used.
All experiments were performed from 9 am to 6 pm in daylight combined with an artificial light source keeping illumination at a relatively stable level.

Computation of EEG frequency spectra
Monopolar EEG signals measured between the active and reference electrodes were amplified, filtered (0.1-35 Hz) and sampled (1 kHz) on-line using the amplifier and kept in memory of an operational computer for further analysis.
The frequency spectra of successive 12-sec EEG epochs were studied using a modified version of period-amplitude analysis
The absolute values of the half-wave amplitudes with periods/frequencies in each of selected narrow EEG frequency subbands were summed followed by their normalization to the summarized values.
In this study, twenty subbands in the 0.48 -26.25 Hz range were analyzed: 0.48 -0.53 (0.5), 0.87 -0.97 (0.9), 1.29 -1.43
The subbands are marked in figures by their centre (mean) frequency values (see in brackets, above).
The terms "lower" and "higher" in "classical" EEG bands delta (0.5 -3.6 Hz), theta (3.8 -8.4 Hz), alpha (8.6 -12.4 Hz), and beta (12.9 -26.2), are used below to differentiate corresponding frequency subbands of each band relative to its centre frequency (for more details, see
The frequency spectra of 12-sec EEG epochs were averaged for every successive 10-min interval for each mouse and for all of them separately from nTg and Tg groups.
Relative differences in the averaged EEG spectra, obtained in the experiments with saline (day 1) and APO (day 2) in each group, were estimated as (APO -Saline) / Saline, in percentages, which providing the evaluation of APO effects in nTg and Tg groups.

Immunohistochemical techniques
In additional groups of 5xFAD and nTg mice (n = 6 in each group), the animals were deeply anaesthetized with ether and transcardially perfused consecutively with ice-cold saline and 4% paraformaldehyde in phosphate-buffered solution (PBS).
Afterwards, the brains were promptly removed from the cranium and kept in the paraformaldehyde/PBS solution at 4 o C for further histochemical analysis.
For each animal, coronal brain sections (20-µm thick) at the level of VTA and SN were prepared using a freezing microtome (Reicher, Austria) and stored at -20°C in a cryoprotective solution (30% glycerol, 30% ethylene glycol in 0.05M PBS).
To evaluate tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) immunoreactive cell populations in VTA and SN the slices were washed with water and subsequently incubated overnight with rabbit polyclonal anti-TH antibodies (1:500, Chemicon, Woburn, MA, USA).
Afterwards, they were incubated for one hour at room temperature with biotinylated goat secondary antibodies against rabbit's immunoglobulin (1:200, Abcam, UK) and with avidin-biotin-peroxidase complex (1:400, Sigma, USA).
Peroxide content in the slices was measured after their incubation in a composition of 3,3'-diaminobenzidinetetrahydrochloride (DAB; Sigma, St. Louis, USA) and H2O2 (at 0.05% and 0.02%, respectively) for 3-3.5 min at 20°C, followed by washing with PBS and fixation on gelatine-coated glass slides.
Images of the brain slices were magnified (20x) and digitized (Nikon Eclipse E200 microscope and DXM1200 camera, respectively, Japan) for the count of the DA-producing neurons in the VTA and SN borders outlined using the atlas of TH-positive cells distribution
The number of tyrosine hydroxylase immunopositive (TH+) cells was manually counted inside of symmetrical VTA and SN contours on each slide.
Within thirty consecutive sections at the level of VTA and SN, five of them (every sixth one) were used for this analysis.
Thus, the total statistics data were based on 2 x 5 x 6 = 60 contours of VTA or SN, meaning two symmetrical areas on one slide, five slides, and six animals, respectively.
Averaged data obtained on ten contours per mouse were used in the final statistics on all animals.
The brain sections at the level of MC and HPC from the same mice were washed in PBS with Triton X100 and treated with H2O2 to inactivate endogenous peroxidase.
They were consequently incubated with rabbit polyclonal anti-dopamine transporter antibody (MilliporeSigma, USA), with Biotin-conjugated goat secondary antibody (MilliporeSigma, USA), and, finally, with ExtraAvidin-Peroxidase (Sigma, USA), all diluted 1:300.
After staining with DAB (Sigma, USA) and mounting on the pre-coated glass slides (Superfrost-plus Menzel, Germany), the slices were cover-slipped (Coverquick, Labonord, France) and analyzed at magnification of 20x using the microscope (Nicon E200, Japan).
Dopamine transporter (DAT) levels were assessed symmetrically in both MC and HPC (the dentate gyrus, CA1-CA2, and CA3-CA4 areas) in five coronal sections (every sixth of thirty ones) per animal.
Digitized images of 0.25 mm 2 in the target brain areas were analyzed by use of the Picture Analyzer Software, ImageJ, which estimated the DAB staining area.
Averaged data obtained in ten 0.55 mm x 0.45 mm frames (0.25 mm 2 ) per mouse were used in final statistics on all six animals.

Statistics
Differences in the averaged EEG spectra were evaluated by a two-tailed non-parametric Mann-Whitney U-test for individual frequency subbands, and by ANOVA for repeated measures when progression of EEG effects in the frequency ranges was analyzed either separately in different brain areas (one-way ANOVA) or between them (2-way ANOVA).
Immunohistochemical data were analysed by a two-tailed non-parametric Mann-Whitney U-test with Bonferroni correction.
The group data were expressed as the means ± SEM; differences were considered significant at p < 0.05.
For ANOVA and U-test analyses, STATISTICA 10 (StatSoft, Inc., Tulsa, OK, USA) was used, whereas power and effect size were calculated by use of G*Power 3.1.9.4 (www.psycho.uni-duesseldorf.de/abteilungen/aap/gpower3).
At the effect size of 0.75 -0.9 and power of 0.8, G*Power showed that the sample sizes chosen for nTg and Tg groups (9 and 6 mice, respectively) were reasonable for our EEG study (see below).

Results

Baseline EEG from different brain areas
During baseline EEG recordings, both non-transgenic (nTg) and transgenic (Tg) 5xFAD mice were behaviorally active and characterized by intensive exploration of the experimental box that was very rarely (1-2/60 min) interrupted by short (< 60 sec) sleep-like bouts.
Baseline EEGs in freely moving and behaviourally active nTg and Tg (5xFAD) mice (Fig.
In the EEG from VTA, these patterns were also observed in Tg mouse, whereas powerful slow waves of 3 -7 Hz were characteristic for nTg mouse.
In the EEG from SN in nTg mouse, oscillations of 6 -12 Hz predominated.
The EEG patterns from MC and HPC were represented in their frequency spectra by peaks in theta and beta bands (Fig.
EEG spectra from VTA and SN in nTg mouse were characterized by wide peaks in the ranges of theta and theta-alpha, respectively, whereas, in Tg mouse, the peaks were found in the lower theta and higher alpha-beta (Fig.
These differences between the groups were stable in EEG spectra averaged over consecutive 10-min intervals and, thus, evidently observed in the spectral profiles that characterised the whole (60-min) baseline period (Fig.
In 5xFAD mice, EEG activity in MC was enhanced during this period in both delta and alpha bands and suppressed in beta band, compared to those in nTg mice (Fig.
In HPC, the EEG differences in delta and beta bands between the groups were similar to those in MC (Fig.
In VTA of 5xFAD mice, relatively slow oscillations in deltatheta range were attenuated, whereas beta activity was enhanced, compared to those in nTg mice (Fig.
In SN (Fig.
All mentioned above differences were characterised by reasonable power and effect size measures (see Suppl. 3).
Averaged EEG frequency spectra in MC were identical to those in HPC in both groups of mice (Fig.
EEG differences between VTA and SN (Fig.
In nTg mice, EEG differences between VTA and MC (Fig.
The profiles of relative differences between EEG spectra in SN and MC in nTg mice (Fig.
In 5xFAD mice, the EEG spectral differences between SN and MC (Fig.
All mentioned above differences were characterised by reasonable power and effect size measures (see Suppl. 4).

Apomorphine effects
After APO injection, behavioral reactions of both Tg and nTg mice were stereotyped: shortlasting freezing (1.5-2 min), followed by uninterrupted licking of the lower sides of the box that was accompanied by raising the tail.
The behavioral response was comparable between Tg and nTg mice.
Sleep-like bouts were very rare and short, and occurred at variable times.
In several pilot/supporting experiments on four nTg and three Tg mice, variations in EEG spectra after saline injections in two consecutive days were evaluated.
In spite of visible scattered fluctuations in the EEG spectra averaged over consecutive 10-min intervals, no significant regularities in the frequency-time domain were observed (see Suppl. 5).
Given these preliminarily obtained findings and obvious advantage of the experimenting on the same mouse, the sequence of saline and APO injections in day 1 and day 2, respectively, was chosen as preferable.
APO produced significant changes in cortical EEG activities in delta and beta bands (Fig.
APO-induced delta suppression and beta enhancement in the cortex were observed for 50 min after injection and both were more powerfully expressed in 5xFAD mice, compared to those in nTg mice (2-way ANOVA for 15 samples x 5 repeats: F1,65 = 5.4, p < 0.05 and F1, 65 = 9.8, p < 0.01, for delta and beta bands, respectively).
Similar APO effects revealed in hippocampal EEG (Fig.
In EEG from VTA, APO suppressed delta activity for 50 minutes to a similar extent in both groups (Fig.
In contrast, beta activity was significantly enhanced in 5xFAD mice compared to that in nTg mice (Fig.
p < 0.01).
The profiles of APO effect in SN (Fig.
The main differences between APO effects in nTg and Tg mice were predominantly observed for 50 minutes after APO injection and characterised by reasonable power and effect size measures (see Suppl. 6).
After APO injection, the main interregional differences between the groups were revealed in MC and VTA (Fig.
In nTg mice, APO suppressed delta activity in VTA for 50 min after injection to significantly higher extent than in MC (Fig.
In 5xFAD mice (Fig.
p < 0.001).
After APO injection, beta activity in MC was increased for 50 minutes in both nTg and 5xFAD mice (Fig.
In nTg mice, APO produced phasic response in beta activity in VTA that was tended to be lower relative to that in MC (Fig.
In 5xFAD mice, beta activity in VTA was significantly suppressed by APO, compared to that in MC (Fig.
p < 0.01).
The differences in APO effects revealed in EEG from VTA and MC in nTg and Tg mice (Fig.

DA cells and dopamine transporter (DAT) distribution
To investigate the impact of possible differences in the DA system in Tg and nTg mice on their EEG spectra, we stained brain sections with antibodies against TH or DAT at the levels of VTA-SN or MC-HPC areas, respectively (see Materials and Methods).
The approaches revealed a significant decrease of both TH-positive (TH+) cells in the DA-producing areas and DAT vesicle density in the forebrain areas in 5xFAD mice (Fig.

Discussion
In this study, we have shown significant differences between transgenic, 5xFAD, and nontransgenic (nTg), control, mice in baseline and apomorphine-modified EEGs recorded from different brain areas: secondary motor cortex (MC), hippocampus (HPC), ventral tegmental area (VTA), and substantia nigra (SN).

Baseline EEG
In baseline EEG from MC and HPC in 5xFAD mice, delta and alpha oscillations were more powerfully expressed than in nTg mice whereas those in beta band were suppressed (Fig.
The increase of delta waves in the EEGs recorded from MC and HPC in 5xFAD mice seems to be typical for transgenic murine AD models, as slower EEG activity has been shown in 5xFAD, TgCRND8, and APP single mutant mice
The EEG alterations in transgenic mice are thought to be linked to the Aβ accumulation and plaque formation
However, EEG modifications associated with the theta-gamma coupling, in particular, have been shown in transgenic mice to precede the excessive Aβ production and other AD features
In adult 5xFAD mice, which have been shown to be characterized by typical AD indices (see, e.g.,
These effects seem to be associated with a significant suppression of DAT (Fig.
The low level of DA receptor activation has been shown to be accompanied by EEG sleep features in the cortex
Indeed, in 5xFAD mice, we observe a significant amplification of both delta and alpha oscillations in MC (Fig.
Transformation of theta and beta oscillations, which dominated in nTg mice, into a delta and alpha activities in 5xFAD mice suggesting the oscillatory circuits affected by excessive Aβ in transgenic mice have a potential for adaptive remodelling in response to the neurotoxicity of soluble Aβ
Thus, further discovery of the mechanisms underlying reorganizing of disrupted neuronal circuits, involved, in particular, in sleep initiation might be useful for the development of a new therapeutic approach.
In EEG from VTA and SN in 5xFAD mice, averaged amplitudes of delta-theta waves were significantly decreased whereas those of beta rhythms were increased (Fig.
These frequency ranges coincide with those that characterise tonic (delta-theta) and so-called "bursting" (beta) neuronal activities in the DA-producing areas
Given these and an involvement of transmembrane currents in the origin of the EEG
This is in line with an about four-fold higher rate of bursting patterns revealed in rats after long-term 6-hydroxydopamine lesions of DA neurons in SN
The bias in profiles of VTA and SN neuronal activities is supposedly linked with DA cell loss in 5xFAD mice (Fig.
Evident correlation between the extent of DA cell loss in VTA (63%) and SN (48%), and beta activity increase in EEG from these areas (37% and 20%, respectively) in 5xFAD mice is in line with this suggestion (Fig.
Partial DA cell loss is expected to invoke compensatory feed-back and feed-forward mechanisms
Indeed, MC activation has been shown to initiate bursts in VTA neurons
This seems to be a vivid manifestation of a compensatory function of the MC-VTA networks in 5xFAD mice, which are characterized by depleted DAT in MC (Fig.
In our study, the functioning of networks formed by different brain areas was evaluated through the relations between their EEG frequency spectra (Fig.
In mice from both groups, the relative spectral profiles of EEG from HPC and MC were flat (Fig.
Thus, the slowing of EEGs from these areas in Tg mice (Fig.
Indeed, DA infusion into MC has been shown to produce a significant enhancement of EEG synchronization and/or coherence in MC and HPC
Together, these suggest that DA transmission in the MC-HPC neuronal circuits in 5xFAD mice is unchanged.
In control mice, VTA recordings were characterized by increased higher delta-lower theta and decreased lower alpha-beta ranges (Fig.
This specificity of DA-containing areas, revealed in their EEG spectral profiles, was lost in 5xFAD mice (Fig.
Thus, the SN-VTA networks
This is supposedly associated with the mechanisms, which are involved in the compensatory processes initiated by neuronal deficit in SN and VTA
In 5xFAD mice, a significant attenuation of the spectral differences in EEG from DA nuclei and MC was observed throughout the analyzed frequency range (Fig.
Thus, the functional disturbances in 5xFAD mice seem to be predominantly associated with the attenuation of the oscillatory activity in their DA nuclei-forebrain networks.

Apomorphine effects
In control mice, APO produced a "desynchronising" effect in EEG from MC and HPC, with both attenuated delta and enhanced beta activities (Fig.
At the lower dose of 0.01 mg/kg, APO has been shown to evoke EEG slowing biased to the delta range
At high doses, APO activates postsynaptic DA receptors in terminal areas as DA release in the forebrain is completely blocked by APO at the level of the DA-producing nuclei through the activated autoreceptors
Hence, a significant elevation of both suppression in delta band and activation in beta band in cortical and hippocampal EEG observed in 5xFAD mice (Fig.
Indeed, the neuronal population shrinkage in VTA and SN in 5xFAD mice (Fig.
Similar APO effects in delta range of EEG from VTA and SN in mice from both groups (Fig.
On the other hand, significant differences revealed in beta ("bursting") range in VTA and SN between 5xFAD and nTg mice (Fig.
APO effects on the EEG spectra in mice from different groups are expressed in both frequency and brain area specific manner (Fig.
Indeed, delta activity, slightly suppressed by APO in MC of mice from both groups (Fig.
In contrast, APO enhancing of cortical beta activity, comparable in mice from both groups (Fig.
Given the deficit of DA-producing neurones in 5xFAD mice (Fig.
Furthermore, the significant amplification of APO-induced delta activity in EEG from VTA in 5xFAD mice (c.f.
Fig.
Fig.
The differences revealed in APO effects on EEG from VTA in 5xFAD and nTg mice and similarities of those in MC (Fig.
Characteristic DAT levels in MC and DG, different in nTg mice and similar in Tg mice (Fig.
DAT activity deficit is expected could be accompanied by an increase of DA level in the synaptic clefts that in turn might initiate a compensatory desensitization of both pre-and post-synaptic DA receptors
Thus, the deficit of both DA-producing neurones and DAT in 5xFAD mice might be suggested to affect the DA receptors sensitivity resulting in compensatory reorganization of the neuronal networks in/within various brain areas.
This is expected could lead to modifications of the APO effects on the EEG oscillations generated by the affected networks.
In conclusion, the links between EEG spectra modifications and various intracerebral network transformations in the transgenic model of familial AD, 5xFAD mice, are analyzed in this work.
We have shown that EEGs from dopamine-containing areas in the midbrain and in their terminal forebrain structures are altered in these animals.
Associations of these alterations with shrinkage of DA-producing cell population, lowered dopamine transporter level, and modified sensitivity of dopamine receptors, which were revealed in this study, are discussed.
We suggest that this EEG approach might be a useful tool for further studies of the adaptive/compensatory neuronal network remodelling associated with disturbances in the dopaminergic system.
Regardless of the sources of these disturbances, in particular, associated with α-synuclein involvement



Figures legendsFigure 1 .
Figures legendsFigure1.
Typical patterns in 12-s fragments of baseline EEG in wakeful and behaviourally active non-transgenic (nTg) and 5xFAD (Tg) mice (A and B, respectively) and their frequency spectra (C -F) in the secondary motor cortex (MC), hippocampus (HPC), and the nuclei containing DAsynthesizing neurons: substantia nigra (SN) and ventral tegmental area (VTA).On A and B, time calibration is 1 sec, amplitude calibration is 100 V.
On C -F, abscissa is a frequency subband marked with its mean value, in hertz; ordinate is summed amplitudes of EEG in each of 20 subbands, normalized to a sum of all amplitude values, in arbitrary units.
Alternating white and grey bars indicate "classical" EEG frequency bands (from left to right): delta, theta, alpha, and beta.



Figure 2 .
Figure 2. Averaged amplitude-frequency spectra of 12-s baseline EEG fragments recorded from MC (A), HPC (B), VTA (C), and SN (D) for 60 min in non-transgenic (nTg, n = 9) and 5xFAD (Tg, n = 6) mice (dashed and solid lines, respectively) and spectral ratios (narrow grey bars) between the groups (Tg/nTg).Abscissa is a frequency subband marked with its mean value, in hertz; the left ordinate is summed absolute values of EEG amplitudes in each of 20 subbands, normalized to sum of all amplitude values, in arbitrary units; the right ordinate is a ratio of the EEG amplitudes, calculated as (Tg -nTg) / nTg, in %.
Vertical lines are ±1SEM; diamond denotes a significant difference between the groups (p<0.05,
Wilcoxon test).
Alternating white and grey bars indicate "classical" EEG frequency bands (from left to right): delta, theta, alpha, and beta.



Figure 3 .
Figure 3.Relations between averaged amplitude-frequency spectra of 12-s baseline EEG fragments recorded from the secondary motor cortex (MC), superficial layers of the hippocampal CA1 area (HPC), substantia nigra (SN), and ventral tegmental area (VTA) for 60 min in non-transgenic (nTg, n = 9) and 5xFAD (Tg, n = 6) mice (dashed and solid lines, respectively).
Abscissa is a frequency subband marked with its mean value in hertz; ordinate is a ratio of summed absolute values of baseline EEG amplitudes in each of 20 subbands, normalized to sum of all amplitudes of EEG recorded from different brain areas, calculated as (Area 1 -Area 2) / Area 2, in %, characterizing genetically determined EEG relations between them.
Vertical lines are ±1SEM; diamond denotes a significant difference between the groups (p<0.05,
Wilcoxon test).
Alternating white and grey bars indicate "classical" EEG frequency bands (from left to right): delta, theta, alpha, and beta.



Figure 4 .
Figure 4. Evolution of apomorphine (APO, 1.0 mg/kg, s.c.) vs. saline effects in delta and beta frequency bands (A, C, E, G and B, D, F, H, respectively) of EEG from MC, HPC, VTA, and SN in non-transgenic (nTg, n = 9) and 5xFAD (Tg, n = 6) mice (gray and black lines, respectively).


Abscissa shows time after injection, marked in 10-min intervals.
Ordinate is a ratio of the averaged EEG amplitudes in the indicated frequency bands, obtained in experiments with saline and APO in each group, and estimated as (APO -Saline) / Saline, in %, characterizing APO effects in nTg and Tg groups.
A difference between baseline EEG ratios in Tg and nTg mice was used for normalization of APO effects in Tg group.
Diamond denotes a significant difference between the groups (p < 0.05, Wilcoxon test).
Error bars show ±1 SEM.



Figure 5 .
Figure 5. Evolution of apomorphine (APO, 1.0 mg/kg, s.c.) effects in delta and beta bands of EEG from MC and VTA in non-transgenic (nTg) and 5xFAD mice (n = 9 and 6, respectively).
Abscissa shows time after APO injection, marked in 10-min intervals.
Ordinate is EEG amplitudes (in arbitrary units) summed in the indicated frequency bands in different brain areas separately for each group and normalized to EEG baseline values in MC (horizontal dashed lines).
Diamond denotes a significant difference between the groups (p < 0.05, Wilcoxon test).
Error bars show ±1 SEM.



Figure 6 .
Figure 6.
Distribution of tyrosine hydroxylase immunopositive (TH+) cells (A, C) and dopamine transporter (DAT) (B, D) in different brain areas in non-transgenic (nTg) and transgenic (Tg, 5xFAD) mice.
On A, photomicrographs from nTg (a, b) and Tg (c, d) experimental mice display TH+ cells (black pyramids) in the ventral tegmental area (VTA) and the substantia nigra (SN), outlined by dashed ellipsis on the centered section, modified from [31].
On B, photomicrographs display DAT vesicles distributions (black spots) in the dentate gyrus (DG) from nTg (a) and Tg (b) experimental mice in the area outlined by open white rectangle.
Obvious loss of TH-positive neurons and DAT vesicles is observed in 5xFAD mice.
Horizontal white bars on A and B denote the scales of 50 µm.
On C, abscissa demonstrates the brain areas with DA-producing neurons, VTA and SN; on D, abscissa shows the brain areas containing DAT: MC, DG, and hippocampal CA1-CA2, and CA3-CA4 fields.
Ordinate on C is the number of TH-positive cells in the boundaries of VTA and SN; ordinate on D is the DAT-containing area (in mm 2 ), accounted in the frame of 0.55 mm x 0.45 mm (0.25 mm 2 ).
Stars denote significant differences between Tg and nTg groups, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001 (two-tailed U-test).


, 1.74 -1.92 (1.8), 2.21 -2.44 (2.3), 2.71 -3.0 (2.9), 3.25 -3.59 (3.4), 3.82 -4.22 (4.0), 4.44 -4.91 (4.7), 5.12 -5.66 (5.4), 5.86 -6.48 (6.2), 6.68 -7.38 (7.0), 7.59 -8.39 (8.0), 8.63 -9.54 (9.1), 9.83 -10.86 (10.3), 11.25 -12.43 (11.8), 12.98 -14.35 (13.7), 15.21 -16.82 (16.0), 18.36 -20.3 (19.3), 23.75 -26.25