Essential Oils as Treatment Strategy for Alzheimerʼs Disease: Current and Future Perspectives

Introduction
Alzheimerʼs disease (AD) is a multifarious neurodegenerative disease that causes cognitive impairment and gradual memory loss.
Senile plaques and neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs) comprised of amyloid β (Aβ) peptides and hyper-phosphorylated tau proteins, respectively, are the classic pathological hallmarks of AD
Several hypotheses have been put forward to reveal the pathobiology of the disorder including cholinergic hypothesis, inflammation hypothesis, oxidative stress, mitochondrial cascade hypothesis, and metabolic hypothesis
According to the World Health Organization, AD is the most common form of dementia and accounts for about 60-70 % of all dementia cases
There is more prevalence for people aged over 65 y
Epigenetic variations on the genetic material of neurons can result in neurodegenerative disorders and these variations in AD genes change from region to region
Familial Alzheimerʼs disease (FAD) and sporadic Alz-heimerʼs disease are the 2 specific types of AD
The combined action of environmental and genetic factors might be culpable for the SAD and FAD types
Depending on the age of onset, AD can be further grouped into early onset (EOAD) and late onset (LOAD)
Mutations in some specific genes like amyloid precursor protein (APP), presenilin I, and presenilin II are responsible for EOAD whereas apolipoprotein E is the only gene identified that causes LOAD
Approximately 5 % of the AD cases is familial early onset type and it develops before 65 y of age, and the remaining 95 % accounts for sporadic late onset type and it develops after 65 y of age
The neuropathophysiology of the neurodegeneration in AD is triggered by anomalous deposition of amyloid plaques and NFTs in varied regions of the brain involved in cognition and memory
Amyloid plaques are protein fragments composed of Aβ peptides originated from APP by the synergistic action of enzymes β-secretase and γ-secretase
Polymerization of these Aβ peptides results into insoluble filaments that build up in the walls of cerebral blood vessels and configure senile plaques.
Microglial activation, reactive astrocytosis, cytokine release, and neuro-inflammation also occur in accordance with the formation of amyloid plaques
NFTs are made up of tau protein found inside the neurons as a bunch of insoluble fibers.
Hyperphosphorylation of these tau proteins results in the formation of paired helical filaments and finally forms microscopic tangles that cause cell death
Out of all above pathogenetic pathways, the mechanisms of essential oils (EOs) are associated with cholinergic hypothesis and oxidative stress hypothesis.
As stated by cholinergic hypothesis, loss of cholinergic neurotransmission in the cerebral cortex and the destruction of cholinergic neurons in the basal forebrain disturb cognitive function
Depletion of acetylcholine (ACh) level is usually noticed in dementia patients and exploratory studies in animals and humans have also confirmed the role of ACh in learning and memory
Oxidative stress is inevitably linked with various primary AD pathogenesis such as Aβ-induced neuronal loss, mitochondria dysfunction, tau protein pathology, and disturbance in metal homeostasis
Senile plaques mediated oxidative imbalance can elevate the levels of lipid peroxidation byproducts, DNA/RNA oxidation, and protein oxidation in several regions of the brain.
In addition, oxidative stress causes depletion of brain antioxidants level like uric acid, vitamin C and E and antioxidant enzymes such as catalase, glutathione reductase, superoxide dismutase, etc.
At present, very few drugs are available for the medical care of AD and are directed toward symptomatic relief.
The currently available U. S. Food and Drug Administration approved drugs in the market for AD include cholinesterase inhibitors (rivastigmine, galantamine, and donepezil) and N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor antagonist (memantine)
Tacrine has been the first approved drug (1993) as a reversible inhibitor of AChE later on abandoned in 2013 due to its hepatotoxicity, short half-life, and cholinergic side effects
Huperzin A obtained from Huperzia serrata (Thunb.)
Trevis (Lycopodiaceae) is a naturally derived AChE inhibitor used in the treatment of memory ailments in China
EOs constitute a blend of enormously complex, volatile, naturally derived compounds that are obtained as secondary metabolites from plants.
They are found to be copious in leaves, seeds, flowers, barks, and rhizomes and are commonly obtained through cold pressing, hydro-distillation methods
Its major constituents include monoterpenes hydrocarbon, sesquiterpenes hydrocarbon, oxygenated sesquiterpenes, oxygenated monoterepenes, and esters
A review on therapeutic and pharmaceutical use of EOs related to cardiovascular disease, cancer, antidiabetic, penetration enhancer, antimicrobial, massage therapy, neuroprotective, aromatherapy, and anti-aging effects revealed the immense medicinal benefits of EOs
Dobetsberger and Buchbauer
Recently, the anti-aging and neuroprotective effects of numerous EOs and their involvement in various brain disorders have been outlined
Studies revealed that EOs are classic naturally derived antioxidants and most of them exhibits cholinesterase inhibitory potential and are relevant in AD pathogenesis
▶ Table

Methods and Results
Scientific databases such as PubMed, ScienceDirect, Scopus, and Google Scholar from April 1998 to June 2018 were explored to collect data.
The keywords searched were Alzheimerʼs disease, EOs, amyloid hypothesis, NTFs, antioxidants, acetylcholinesterase, and dementia.
We have conducted wide search on various EOs used in different models of AD.
A total of 540 papers were obtained by scientific search, and 89 papers found to be relevant to the review.
Studies of about 55 EOs were identified for Alz-heimerʼs intervention.
Twenty-eight EOs were finally included based on the quality of the study of which short descriptions of in vivo studies of 13 EOs together with clinical trial data of Salvia officinalis L., S. officinalis L. ssp.
lavandulifolia (vahl) Gams, Melissa officinalis L., Lavandula angustifolia Mill., and Rosmarinus officinalis L. were highlighted.
Chemical constituents and medicinal benefits of the EOs, animal models, doses and time of administration, study duration, behavioral parameters, and biochemical and histological assessments were also summarized.
In vitro studies of 15 EOs that possess antioxidant and anticholinesterase potential are also mentioned.
S. aromaticum ICV colchicine-induced AD in rats Reversed memory impairment, restored the levels of ACh and antioxidants, reduced neuroinflammation and mitochondrial dysfunction in colchicine treated rats.

Coriandrum sativum
[33]
Z. multifora ICV Aβ(25-35)-induced AD in rats Reversed Aβ-induced learning deficits, exhibited antioxidant, anti-inflammatory and anti-cholinesterase activities.
[35]
SuHeXiang Wan Drosophila model of AD Neuroprotective effects
[40]
A. nemorosa Scopolamine-induced spatial memory impairment in rats Prevented cognitive defects.
[42]

S. officinalis
Single blind trial in healthy volunteers Enhanced mood and cognitive performance

lavandulifolia (vahl) Gams
Single blind trial in healthy volunteers No significant effects.
Enhanced mood and cognition
Improved agitation and quality of life indices
[65]

L. angustifolia
Scopolamine-induced amnesia model in rats Hindered depression, anxiety, and memory deficits.
Improved memory performances
Male SD rats were subjected to intraperitoneal injection of minocycline (25 and 50 mg/kg), clove oil (0.05 mL/kg and 0.1 mL/kg), and their combinations for 21 d.
ICV colchicinetreated rats showed significant cognitive impairment in Morris water maze (MWM) test and showed an increase in AChE activity, oxidative stress, neuro-inflammation, and mitochondrial dysfunction as compared to control group.
Treatment with clove oil was found to reverse the memory impairment, restored the levels of ACh and antioxidants, and reduced neuroinflammation and mitochondrial dysfunction in colchicine-treated rats.
Authors highlighted that the favorable potential of clove oil in reversing memory impairment and cognitive dysfunction is due to its antioxidative, mitochondrial-restoring, and microglial inhibitory mechanisms.

Zataria multiflora

Anthriscus nemorosa
Anthriscus nemorosa (M.
Beib.)
Spreng.
(chervil) is a common plant genus belonging to the family Apiaceae.
Its EO contains caryophyllene (23.6 %), germacrene D (5.6 %), α-terpineol (2.7 %), β-elemene (4.2 %), and trans-pinocarveol (9.8 %) as major constituents.
The antimicrobial property of its EO has been reported
The EO obtained from the aerial parts of A. nemorosa has been studied by Bagci et al.
The rats were exposed to inhalation of A. nemorosa EO for 21 d and behavioral parameters were analyzed by Y-maze and radial armmaze tasks.
Scopolamine (0.7 mg/kg i. p.) was administrated 30 min prior the behavior testing.
Also, anxiety-and depressionlike behaviors were tested in elevated plus-maze and forced swimming tests, respectively.
Positive results were obtained for EOtreated groups in all behavioral tests, suggesting the benefits of A. nemorosa EO against cognitive defects, anxiety, and depression.
Even though there was some behavioral evidence for memory improvement, more findings are required to elaborate the benefits of A. nemorosa in cognitive dysfunction.

Salvia species
The Salvia genus include around 900 species, of which Salvia officinalis L. (common sage/sage) and Salvia officinalis L. ssp.
lavandulifolia (vahl) Gams (Spanish sage) of Lamiaceae family have prominent medicinal benefits
In a single-blind randomized controlled trial led by Moss et al.
S. officinalis EO-treated group showed better positive performance compared to control group.
Results confirmed an enhancement in mood and cognitive performance deliberated through Bond-Lader mood scales and cognitive drug research system, respectively.
EO of S. lavandulifolia does not exhibit any significant effects.
EO of S. lavandulifolia and its constituents reported antioxidant
In a clinical trial conducted in healthy volunteers, EO treatment reported successive results on mood and cognition
Oral administration of S. lavandulifolia EO in patients with mild/ moderate AD reported significant improvement in memory and cognition in a pilot open-label study
Even though S. lavandulifolia EO possesses antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, anti-AChE, and memory enhancement potential, it fails in a clinical study
The concentration of bioactive components varies in plants based on its region, climate, etc., and this variation remains a major drawback concerning the properties of EO and is likely to remain so.

Melissa officinalis
Melissa officinalis L. (lemon balm) of Labiatae has been used traditionally in nervous system diseases, cognitive dysfunction, and sedation
Geranial (65.4 %), geranyl acetate (7.4), neral (24.7 %), (Z)-carveol (0.1 %), linalool (0.8 %), myrtenol (0.1 %), farnesene (0.1 %), 2,3-dehydro-1,8-cineole (0.1 %), and caryophyllene (0.8 %) are the active components that have been isolated from the leaves of M. officinalis EO
Agitation is one of the main symptoms of AD.
Aromatherapy of M. officinalis EO or placebo (sunflower oil) in a double-blind placebo-controlled trial in 72 Alz-heimerʼs patients (agitation with severe dementia) has been reported by Ballard et al.
Treatment analysis like Cohen-Mansfield Agitation Inventory score and quality of life indices were assessed and the results reflected 35 % and 11 % improvement in agitation in EO and placebo-treated groups, respectively.
Later in 2011, a clinical trial report revealed that massaging EO in hands and upper arms of dementia patients with agitation does not produce any significant results compared to standard drug donepezil or placebo oil
However, positive results of M. officinalis oil for its anti-agitation potential have also been reported
While all these trials comprised comparatively short duration and small sample sizes, the significant improvement in agitation with M. officinalis oil appear to explain the importance for further long-term clinical studies, assessment of adverse effects, appropriate doses, and efficacy compared to standard drugs for AD.

Juniperus communis

Pimpinella peregrina
Pimpinella peregrina L. is an aromatic herb belonging to Apiaceae family.
The major constituents of its EO are trans-pinocarveol (35.1 %), α-cubebene (12.4 %), pregeijerene (15.1 %), (+)-epi-bicyclosesquiphellandrene (7.5 %), and α-terpineol (6.7 %)
EO is widely used in flavored drinks like raki, ouzo, pastis, arak etc. Adyn et al.
Rats were exposed to inhalation of EO (1 % and 3 %) continuously for 21 d.
Scopolamine was injected (i.
p.) 30 min before the behavioral tests.
Memory impairments were observed through radial arm-maze and Y-maze tests.
Also, elevated plus-maze and forced swimming tests were used for checking anxiety and depressive behavior, respectively.
Successive results were obtained in EO-treated groups as compared to respective scopolamine-treated groups, suggesting the neuroprotective effects of P. peregrine EO in the treatment of anxiety, depression, and memory deficits.
In conclusion, more biochemical and histological findings are needed to prove the effect of P. peregrina EO on AD.

Lavandula angustifolia
Lavandula angustifolia Mill.
(lavender) belongs to the family Lamiaceae.
The dominant components of its EO are caryophyllene (24.12 %), terpinen-4-ol (9.57
%), β-phellandrene (16 %), and euca-lyptol (15.69 %)
It has been used in the treatment of anxiety, migraines, stress, irritability, exhaustion, depression, headaches, digestion, colds, flatulence, insomnia, loss of appetite, stomach upset, liver diseases, nervousness, and aromatherapy
Hritcu et al.
angustifolia on neurological capability in scopolamine (0.7 mg/kg)-induced amnesia model in rats.
Lavender EO inhalation for 7 consecutive days notably hindered depression, anxiety and memory impairment in scopolamine treated rats as observed through various behavioural tests.
A human study led by Moss et al.
Aromatherapy of 4 different EOs from R. officinalis, Citrus limon (L.), Citrus sinensis (L.) Osbeck, and L. angustifolia reported significant improvement in cognitive function in a clinical trial led in 28 elderly people

R. officinalis
Rosmarinis officinalis L. (rosemary) belongs to the family Lamiaceae.
The EO of R. officinalis consist of α-pinene (21.3 %), 1,8 cineole (28.5 %), camphor (27.7 %), camphene (8.7 %), β-pinene (4.7 %), and borneol (2.5 %) as major constituents.
Satiou et al.
The results showed that inhalation of R. officinalis EO (4 µL/ L or 8 µL/L air) have shown a positive result in spontaneous alternation behavior in Y-maze test, and 1,8 cineole, α-pinene, and βpinene were found in dominant concentration in the mice brain.
Asadi et al.
The test group were administered EO (200,400,600 and 800 mg/ kg i. p.) daily for 7 d and improvement in memory performances were found in all test groups.
Filiptsora et al.
The result showed positive results as evidenced by increased image and number memory compared to control groups.
The positive correlation of 1,8 cineole on mood and cognitive performances following inhalation of rosemary oil has been described in a clinical study conducted in healthy volunteers
As mentioned above, R. officinalis EO reported memory enhancement potential in many clinical studies
Further studies are essential for this oil to verify possibility for drug interactions and adverse effects in long duration trials and to determine appropriate dose that can mediate relevant neuroprotective effects.

In vitro studies
Ayaz et al.
In AChE inhibition assay, EO of leaf exhibited IC 50 of 120 µg/mL and flower of 220 µg/mL, whereas flower and leaf EOs reported IC 50 of 225 and 130 µg/mL, respectively, in butyrylcholinesterase (BChE) inhibitory assay.
In 1,1-diphenyl 2-picrylhydrazyl (DPPH) antiradicals assay, these EOs showed remarkable radical scavenging potentials.
Also, IC 50 of 50 and 45 µg/mL for flower oil and 60 and 180 µg/mL for leaf oil was obtained in hydrogen peroxide and 2,2-azinobis3-ethylbenzthiazoline-6-sulfonic acid (ABTS) scavenging assays, respectively.
Ahmed et al.
It exhibited significant BChE and AChE inhibitory activities with IC 50 of 97.38 and 32.54 µg/mL, respectively.
Also, IC 50 values of 6.29 and 3.71 µg/mL were obtained for ABTS and DPPH assays, respectively.
Salvia chionantha Boiss EO was analyzed for its antioxidant activity and reported 77.4 ± 0.5 % inhibition in ABTS assay.
The anti-AChE and BChE activities were found to be 56.7 ± 1.9 % and 41.7 ± 2.9 %, respectively
In vitro anti-AChE activity of EO from Acorus calamus L. rhizomes has been studied and exhibited significant AChE inhibitory potential (IC 50 = 10.61 µg/mL)
Ertas et al.
Orientalis (L.) Nordh.
and Tragopogon latifolius Boiss.
Both of them betrayed moderate AChE and BChE inhibitory activities.
EO isolated from leaf and stem of Gynura bicolor (Roxb.ex
Willd.)
DC. has been screened for anti-AChE activity.
These oils have been evaluated and compared with standard AChE inhibitor pulegone.
The leaf and stem oil inhibited AChE (53 %) at a concentration of 0.50 µg/mL with ID 50 values of 85 and 92 µg/mL, respectively.
Both oils showed better results than pulegone
EO obtained from fresh Chaerophyllum aromaticum L. root and aerial parts exhibited significant anticholinesterase and antioxidant activities
Bonesi et al.
P. heldreichii was more active with IC 50 of 80. Eminent results of all this data suggest the anticholinesterase and antioxidant potential of EOs for the development of therapeutic remedies targeting AD pathogenesis.
▶ Table

Discussion
This literature review displayed promising evidence that supports the use of EOs for reversing cognitive and memory impairment of AD.
EOs obtained from numerous medicinal plants are reported to possess anti-AD potential.
EOs of S. officinalis, S. officinalis ssp.
lavandulifolia (vahl), M. officinalis, L. angustifolia, and R. officinalis have proven their putative effects in clinical studies.
EOs are rich in various bioactive markers in different concentrations and it changes from place to place.
Linalool, thymol, β-caryophyllene, carvacrol, α-pinene, α-terpineol, α-terpinene, and eugenol are some of the components that are common in above-mentioned oils.
▶ Fig.
Some are present in higher amount like linalool (60-70 %) in C. sativum, caryophyllene (23.6 %) in A. nemorosa, and 1,8 cineole (46.0 %) in R. officinalis while others are in minor amounts.
Monoterpenes like pinene, limonene, sabinene, etc., are found to be responsible for the antioxidant and anticholinesterase properties
Therefore, it seems to be important to screen the main constituents of EOs based upon the strength of the biologic potential and more findings are needed to establish the required dose and proportions that are necessary to protect the brain from degenerative diseases.
Majority of the clinical as well as animal studies prefer inhalation as the route of administration of EO for AD therapy.
Aromatherapy for AD are used since long back and found to be very effective.
The aroma of EO acquired through inhaling or massaging directly affects mood and cognition.
These oils are supposed to enter the blood stream through lung mucosa, nasal, or even diffuse directly into the olfactory nerve and reach limbic system in the brain
The EOs mentioned in this review is mostly nontoxic at the recommended doses.
Most of the EOs possess anticholinesterase property.
In vitro studies of 15 EOs that displayed both AChE and BChE inhibitory potentials are mentioned.
ACh is the brain neurotransmitter involved in regulating memory and cognition and cholinesterase inhibitors prevent degradation of ACh and maintain its synaptic concentration.
Hence, assessment of the potential shown by EOs on cholinesterase adds up a useful approach for developing new drugs for AChE/BChE inhibitor with fewer cholinergic side effects.
Oxidative stress plays a major role in the pathophysiology of AD.
Imbalance in oxidants/antioxidants defense generates free radical that causes cell/neuron damage.
Antioxidant-rich EOs can hence counteract the free radical mediated oxidative stress and thereby protects brain form neuronal damage.
The ability of EOs to cross blood brain barrier remains as a main reason for activity in brain regions However, it is important to initiate further studies on pharmacokinetics and toxicities of EOs and their bioactive markers responsible for anti-Alzheimerʼs action.
More cell culture and in vivo studies are essential.
All these findings result in the establishment of good interventions and subsequent development of safer and more effective anti-Alzheimerʼs drug.
There are numerous natural resources with reputed ethnobotanical uses shown to ameliorate memory impairment in different Alzheimerʼs studies.
However, comparatively only few are explored to determine any therapeutic support for their putative effects.
Our literary survey revealed encouraging results regarding various EOs being studied in preclinical and clinical studies of AD with significant effects in modulating the pathology through antiamyloid, antioxidants, anti-AChE, and memory enhancement activity.
The literature studies disclosed many drugs that showed positive results in animal studies but failed in clinical trial.
This demands more studies focused on human physiology, pharmacokinetics, dose, and route of administration.
Thus, the establishment of potential targets and optimization of safety and efficacy of EOs in AD remain as a promising area for future research.


signaling mechanism was examined by measuring the phosphorylation status of the stress stimulated JNK, protein kinases, and p38 in the mice brain.
SHXW treatment significantly reversed the Aβ(1-42)-mediated memory deficit by suppressing Aβ(1-42)-mediated JNK, tau phosphorylation, and p38 in the mice hippocampus.
In addition, an in vitro investigation was also performed to examine the inhibitory potential of SHXW EO in Aβ(1-42)-incited neurotoxicity in SH-SY5Y cells.
Not reported were any toxic effects on cell viability assays.
EO suppressed Aβ-induced apoptosis and exhibited antioxidant effect through an upregulation of Nrf2 and HO-1 expression in SH-SY5Y cells


6 and 51.1 µg/mL toward BChE and AChE inhibitory assays, respectively.
EOs from Cistus libanotis L., Cistus salvifolius L., Cistus creticus L., Cistus villosus L., and Cistus monspeliensis L. were evaluated for antiradicals and anti-AChE activities.
In ferric reducing antioxidant assay, C. libanotis exhibited most potent value of 19.2 l MFe (II)/g.
In AChE inhibitory assay C. salvifolius revealed IC 50 of 58.1 µg/mL.
Meanwhile, C. creticus, C. libanotis, and C. salvifolius exhibited significant anti-BChE effects with IC 50 values of 29.1, 23.7, and 34.2 µg/mL, respectively.
In b-carotene bleaching test, C. monspeliensis EO exhibited better results with IC 50 of 54.7 µg/mL [87].


O 2 : hydrogen peroxide, ABTS: 2,2-azinobis3-ethylbenzthiazoline-6-sulfonic acid, DPPH: 1,1-diphenyl 2-picrylhydrazyl, FRAP: ferric-reducing antioxidant power, ↓: decreasing/inhibiting.
▶ Fig. 1 Some of the main bioactive constituents of EOs.


List of EOs with respect to their anti-Alzheimerʼs intervention.


[63]per oil treated groups showed significantly less memory impairment in both behavioral tests as compared to Aβ(1-42) alone treated group.Later Cioanco et al.[60]demonstrated that antioxidant and anti-AChE potential of juniper volatile oil ameliorates cognitive dysfunction in Aβ(1-42)-induced rat model of AD.Hu Yang et al.[62]conducted a prospective study in Alzheimerʼs patients in which the test group was provided with coconut oil (40 mL/day) for 3 wk.The memory test such as lobo cognitive test and mini test scores pre-and postinvolvement were performed in test and control groups.A statistically appreciable elevation in test score was noticed in patients taking the oil and therefore a positive improvement in memory status was noted.An in vitro study conducted by Nafer et al.[63]highlighted the neuron protecting effects of coconut oil in Aβ-in-



Table 2
List of in vitro studies of essential oils that possess antioxidant and anti-cholinesterase activities.
AChE, BChE inhibition DPPH, ABTS, H 2 O 2 assay ↓AChE, BChE, DPPH, ABTS, H 2 O 2 activity [79] R. hastatus AChE, BChE inhibition DPPH, ABTS, H 2 O 2 assays ↓AChE, BChE, DPPH, ABTS activity [80]