Oxidative stress in alzheimer’s disease: A review on emergent natural polyphenolic therapeutics
Objectives: The aim of this research was to review the literature on Alzheimer's disease (AD) with a focus on polyphenolics as antioxidant therapeutics.

Introduction 1.1 Naturally derived drugs and therapeutics
The use of medicinal plant material for the management of a myriad of disorders by indigenous populations has existed for several hundred years and has started to be re-explored in the last century with advances in technology and expansion of drug discovery.
ver 25% of new molecular entities approved by the Food and Drug Administration are derived from natural plant products.
Today, the sale of drugs extracted from plants exceeds USD $65 billion per annum, with approximately 80% of antimicrobial, cardiovascular, immunosuppressive, and anticancer agents being plant derivatives.
wever, despite an estimated global total of 450,000 plant species, only approximately 6% have been investigated pharmacologically and around 15% phytochemically.
For instance, the use of plant extracts in Alzheimer's disease (AD) prevention and treatment could be the key to alleviating the symptoms of this devastating and currently untreatable neurodegenerative disorder.
Medicinal plant extracts not only have the potential for multi-targeted effects, which are advantageous for complex disease, but can also complement existing drug treatments for greater synergistic outcomes.
] 1.2 Impact and Prevalence of Alzheimer's disease AD is a progressive neurodegenerative disorder that is clinically characterised by cognitive dysfunction and disturbances in behaviour and personality.
With its late-onset and age dependency, AD affects over 10% of people over the age of 65 years,
With no cure or adequate treatments yet available, and the ever-increasing longevity of the Western world's population, AD is reaching epidemic proportions.
A 2010 study performed by Prince et al. estimated that a total of 47 million individuals worldwide suffered from dementia, with that statistic expected to rise to over 110 million people by 2050.
AD is a complex multifactorial disorder resulting from genetic, epigenetic and environmental risk factors.
The molecular mechanism of AD pathophysiology emanates from the deposition of amyloid β (Aβ) plaques and the formation of hyperphosphorylated tau proteins (p-tau) causing neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs).

Polyphenolics as antioxidants
Polyphenolic compounds are structurally characterised by the presence of several hydroxyl groups attached to aromatic rings.
Polyphenols can be classified into several classes, including phenolic acids, stilbenes, lignans, and flavonoids, with a number of subclasses present that contribute to their structural and functional diversity.
These compounds are predominantly secondary metabolites found across the plant kingdom, where they play a role in defence against pathogens and protection from ultraviolet radiation.
This defensive role stems from an underlying antioxidant potential, which many natural polyphenolic compounds possess.
.
Moreover, phenolic compounds can exhibit antimutagenic and antimicrobial properties, as well as finding use as metal chelators and clarifying agents.
As antioxidants, polyphenolic compounds are able to protect tissue by quenching endogenous oxidants or inhibiting the production of highly reactive oxygen species.
For this reason, the present review focusses specifically on polyphenol compounds in relation to oxidative stress in AD.

Methodology
The literature within the PubMed and Medline databases was searched using the following terms: Alzheimer's Disease, Aβ peptide, tau, oxidative stress, redox, oxidation, therapeutic, antioxidant, natural therapy, polyphenol.
Any review articles, case studies, research reports, and articles in English that were published up to September 2019 were identified and subsequently interrogated.
In addition, we examined citations from within relevant articles and included these where appropriate.

Review

The role of Aβ in AD
The imbalance of Aβ to Aβ42 protein in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) is one of the main criteria to clinically confirm AD pathology.
Aβ is a product of the sequential cleavage of amyloid β precursor protein (APP) by the β-secretase, 'β-site amyloid precursor protein cleaving enzyme 1' (BACE 1), and the γ-secretase protein in the amyloidogenic pathway (Figure
APP is a transmembrane protein that plays a significant role in neuronal development and growth and anterograde axoplasmic transport trafficking.
BACE 1 initiates the amyloidogenic pathway by cleaving APP at two β-secretase locations, producing carboxyterminal fragment (CTF)-99 or CTF-89 and a long form of APP that is secreted from the plasma membrane called sAPPβ.
e sAPPβ peptide functions as a ligand to death receptor 6 (DR6) which subsequently causes activation of caspase 6, initiating axonal pruning and neuronal cell death.
Finally, the γsecretase complex cleaves the CTFs at several sites producing the amino-terminal APP intracellular domain 50 (AICD50) and full-length Aβ38, Aβ40 and Aβ42 for cleavage of CTF-99 or truncated variants of these for cleavage of CTF-89.
AICD50 is a peptide that undergoes nuclear translocation in order to bind to adaptor proteins such as Fe65 to upregulate gene transcription.
he Aβ peptides released by cleavage at the γ site are then free to undergo oligomerization and subsequent fibrillization to form the characteristic β amyloid plaques visible in the atrophied brain tissue of deceased AD patients.
Aβ42 appears more neurotoxic than Aβ40 or Aβ38 as Aβ42 is more prone to oligomerization, potentiating its ability to exert cytotoxic effects.
onversely, Panza and colleagues propose that elevated Aβ may be associated with the brain's response to injury and its attempt to mitigate or repair the insult, emphasising that AD-related neuronal death causes increased Aβ and not vice-versa.
the other hand, the non-amyloidogenic pathway is initiated by α-secretases which act on APP by cleaving the extracellular α-site, just a few amino acid residues from the two β-sites.
The activity of α-secretase is attributed to the ADAM (a disintegrin and metalloproteinases) family of proteins.
Proteolytic processing of APP by α-secretase results in sAPPα, a soluble form of APP which, in contrast to sAPPβ, has been demonstrated to provide neuroprotective effects in the form of increased neuronal plasticity and survival, protection against excitotoxicity, initiation of neural stem cell proliferation and enhanced long-term potentiation.
he other product derived from the cleavage of α-secretase is CTF-83, which is subsequently processed into AICD50 and P3 by cleavage of the γ-secretase complex.
the physiological system, both of these pathways are active, but the non-amyloidogenic pathway is favoured, demonstrating that the activity of α-secretase is crucial to normal brain function.
In the normal physiological state, α -secretase cleaves 90% or more of APP, with the remaining APP being cleaved by β-secretase and y-secretase to form Aβ40 and Aβ42 peptides.
Aggregation and / or clearance of Aβ is also dependant on the allele present in APOE gene coding for apolipoprotein E, which primarily has a role in lipid transport.
Four alleles of the APOE gene have been identified, with the APOEε4 allele is reportedly present in 14.5% of the general population and in 40% of people with late-onset AD, while rare Apoε2 allele (6.4% of population) may have a protective role for AD.
urrently, the precise mechanism of APOE in AD is not well understood and requires more extensive mechanistic and biochemical research.

The role of tau in AD
Tau proteins are crucial to the physiological functioning of neurons, as they are responsible for microtubule polymerisation, microtubule stabilisation, facilitation of the transportation of organelles and enzymes along the cellular cytoskeleton, and promotion of neuronal growth.
u may undergo numerous post-translational modifications, including phosphorylation by kinases such as JKN, AMPK and GSK-3β, as tau proteins possess over 30 potential phosphorylation sites due to a high number of serine and threonine phosphate accepting residues.
erphosphorylation of tau proteins results in large amounts of aggregation forming tau oligomers and eventually paired helical filaments or straight filaments which constitute NFTs (Figure
NFT formation contributes to neuronal toxicity by decreasing tau affinity for microtubules.
It is unknown whether phosphorylation of tau at specific amino acid sites induces toxicity or whether a certain quantity of tau must be phosphorylated before pathological effects are observed.
The mechanism of tau-mediated neurotoxicity occurs via two major mechanisms: toxic loss of function, in which physiological tau protein loses function causing microtubule destabilisation,
Furthermore, in vitro studies have identified that soluble and prefibrillar tau oligomers possess far greater toxic characteristics rather than higher order tau aggregations.
he tau pathology is currently classified into six distinguishing Braak stages according to the propagation of p-tau aggregation in the brain, reflecting AD symptoms and progression.

The role of oxidative stress in AD pathogenesis and progression
Oxidative stress has been demonstrated to be a major contributor to the progression of Alzheimer's disease.
For over twenty years, oxidative stress has been recognised and discussed as a major factor in AD pathogenesis, with a number of review articles highlighting the critical role that ROS play in AD pathology.  In the
trophied brains of patients with AD, there is often significant oxidative damage to neuronal tissue.

Macromolecule oxidation
Lipid peroxidation, interruption of DNA protein cross-links and oxidative cellular damage have been demonstrated to accelerate the process of ageing and numerous chronic diseases including diabetes, some cancers, arthritis, cardiac problems (such as heart disease and atherosclerosis), and degenerative diseases including Parkinson's disease, muscular dystrophy and AD.
oxidation of the double bonds in polyunsaturated neuronal lipid products results in the generation of biochemically active lipid by-products including 4-hydroxy-2, 3-nonenal (HNE), malondialdehyde and F2-isoprostanes.
hese molecules are extremely reactive and are able to stimulate phosphorylation and dysfunction of tau, disruption of intracellular Ca 2+ signalling pathway and induction of an apoptotic cascade.
cleotides present in nuclear and mitochondrial DNA show great vulnerability to oxidative damage by ROS via hydroxylation, carbonylation and nitration.
hese epigenetic regulations lead to the alternation of transcription factor binding, interruption of crosslinking between DNA and protein, and the induction of mutagenic properties.
xidation of nucleotides produces biomarkers which can be used to determine the extent of oxidative damage, such as 8-hydroxydeoxyguanine (8-OHdG) which were found to colocalise with Aβ and p-tau formations in the temporal, parietal and frontal lobes.
ally, ROS has been demonstrated to accelerate the oxidation of glycated proteins, which are formed by the reaction of saccharides with proteins.
These advanced glycation end products (AGEs) are potent neurotoxins and proinflammatory species, as they are able to bind to the receptor for advanced glycation end products (RAGE) to induce the release of inflammatory mediators such as nitrous oxide, interleukin-1 and tumour necrosis factor-α, further facilitating neuronal tissue damage.
urthermore, physiological tau proteins are capable of being glycated and transformed into AGEs, inhibiting the ability to bind to microtubules and contributing to the formation of higher order fibril generation.
imilarly, glycation and AGE formation from Aβ monomers have been demonstrated to enhance the formation of oligomerization and higher order plaque formation by improving Aβ cross-linking.

Metal ion redox potential
Metal ions such as copper, zinc and iron are involved in biological functions of metalloproteins and in neuronal processes.
Metal ion homeostasis is disrupted in neurodegenerative diseases, such as AD, with ion concentrations and distribution deviating from physiological levels.
In AD brains, neuronal Cu 2+ and Zn 2+ levels can increase up to three times the physiological value of healthy control brain.
Cations Zn 2+ and Cu 2+ are able to bind to the hydrophilic N-terminal ends of Aβ peptides, where they are able to undergo continuous redox reactions, generating substantial amounts of ROS, creating a positive feedback loop of increased oxidation and increased ROS production.
xidised Aβ protein can accumulate in the synaptic cleft, where it reacts with the high concentration of Zn 2+ ions to form a precipitate of toxic Aβ peptides unable to exit the synapse.
The binding of metal ions to Aβ monomers allows for easier aggregation into neurotoxic oligomers and eventually into plaques.
a similar fashion, metal ions are able to interact with tau proteins.
It has been demonstrated that Zn 2+ is able to bind tau, promoting its phosphorylation.
Likewise, Mo et al. found that even micromolar concentrations of Zn 2+ ions induce and accelerate tau fibrillization and paired helical filament formation through the upregulation of kinases that phosphorylate tau, such as GSK-3β, and inhibiting kinases responsible for the dephosphorylation of tau proteins, such as protein phosphatase 2A.
urthermore, Fe 3+ can bind to p-tau monomers, inducing aggregation and oligomer formation.
Accumulation of Fe 3+ ions in NFTs allows them to undergo continuous Fenton redox reactions, generating significant amounts of ROS and causing further intracellular oxidative stress.

Mitochondrial dysfunction
Under physiological conditions, ROS can be derived from complexes 1 and 3 in the mitochondrial electron transport chain, where electrons can be directly donated to molecular oxygen to form a superoxide anion.
To counter this, mitochondria possess a diverse antioxidant defence mechanism for catalysing ROS, including such enzymes as cytochrome c oxidase.
A study performed by Mutisya et al. reported a severe decrease in cytochrome c oxidase in the hippocampi of AD patients.
Moreover, impaired insulin production and signalling have been reported to increase oxidative stress within neuronal mitochondria.
In addition, Aβ oligomers that accumulate in the inner mitochondrial membrane continue to disrupt key electron transport chain complexes and subsequently increase the formation of ROS beyond the capacity of mitochondrial defence mechanisms.
β is able to enter the mitochondria via two potential mechanisms, which include increased expression of proteins associated with the mitochondrial-associated endoplasmic reticulum membrane (MAM), and translocation via the translocase of the outer membrane (TOM) complex.
The result of Aβ induced mitochondrial dysfunction is the generation of substantial amounts of ROS in the intracellular compartment, causing a vicious cycle that further facilitates AD pathology.
ochondrial axonal transport is impaired in AD brains due to hyperphosphorylated tau dissociating from microtubules.
Physiologically, anterograde and retrograde mitochondrial trafficking occurs in neurons to transport functional and dysfunctional mitochondria via kinesin and dynein motor proteins.
However, accumulation of excess p-tau acts as obstacles, affecting anterograde and retrograde transport of mitochondria, resulting in oxidative stress inside neurons.

Aβ and p-tau upregulation and toxicity
Oxidative stress has been shown to upregulate both tau phosphorylation and Aβ production.
CE1 proteolytic activity and mRNA expression are increased and correlate with elevated oxidative biomarkers, such as HNE during hypoxia and in the presence of oxidizing agents.
e upregulation of BACE1 arises from AGEs binding to RAGE, and activation of the NF-κB signalling pathway, which induces BACE1 transcription, BACE1 synthesis and Aβ production.
ncreased Aβ processing and peptide aggregation may perturb the lipid microenvironment surrounding nicotinic acetylcholine receptors resulting in modification of their function.
imilarly, binding of AGEs to RAGE induces tau phosphorylation by the activation of GSK-3β by decreasing lithium chloride concentrations, an inhibitor of GSK-3β.
Increased GSK-3β and p-tau levels have been detected in rat cortical neuron cultures and PC12 cell cultures following hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) treatment.
inally, both JNK1 and p38 MAP kinases were reported to be activated by HNE, leading to the increase of tau phosphorylation during high levels of oxidative stress.
result of increased Aβ and p-tau generation and aggregation into oligomers due to ROS production and oxidative stress is the toxic gain of function by the migration of species to dendritic spines, disrupting functional receptors on the postsynaptic membrane and the eventual activation of proteins causing the dendritic spine collapse and loss of synapse.
Aβ oligomers are able to act on extrasynaptic N-methyl-D-aspartate receptors (NMDAR), causing Ca 2+ influx into the neuron resulting in enhanced activation of tau protein kinases such as AMPK and GSK-3β.
Increased tau phosphorylation also causes p-tau to bind to Fyn kinase, causing migration of p-tau to the dendritic neuronal spines.
Furthermore, Aβ and Fynbound p-tau have synergistic effects, resulting in decreased surface NMDARs and eventual death of the dendritic spine and synaptic loss, resulting in inhibition of hippocampal long-term potentiation, thus affecting memory consolidation.
Finally, Aβ activates the protein striatalenriched protein tyrosine phosphatase (STEP), which inactivates Fyn, causing a series of downstream reactions leading to dendritic spine collapse (Figure
idative stress produces a positive feedback loop that increases ROS production, Aβ generation and tau phosphorylation leading to further oxidative stress.
Ultimately, this pathophysiological cascade of neurodegeneration results in substantial neuronal damage.
erefore, it is evident that the interplay between oxidative stress, p-tau and Aβ is crucial to the clinical effects displayed by AD patients.

Current AD treatment strategies and future prospects
The current treatment options for AD are limited in efficacy and scope, with these therapies mainly focussing on the treatment of mild to moderate AD symptoms.
For instance, Tacrine, approved for AD treatment in 1993, provided very mild improvements in cognitive function, but included adverse side effects.
imilarly, Physostigmine, the first cholinesterase inhibitor (ChEI) for AD treatment, was abandoned due to its adverse effects.
As a result, more drugs, such as donepezil, rivastigmine, galantamine, and memantine, bapineuzumab, and solanezumab, were designed and approved for use after 1995.
nepezil (5-10 mg / day), rivastigmine (1.5-6 mg / day) and galantamine are selective acetylcholinesterase (AChE) inhibitors, aiming to delay the progression of AD symptoms by restoring cholinergic pathways in the forebrain and cortical areas.
emantine (5-20 mg / day) is an NMDA receptor antagonist that prevents excess levels of glutamate from binding, inhibiting excitotoxicity.
Bapineuzumab, and solanezumab are anti-Aβ monoclonal antibodies.
wever, these medications do not have the ability to fully alleviate AD pathology, acting only to slow symptom progression and possessing adverse side effects (e.g.
nausea, hepatotoxicity, bradycardia, and diarrhoea
Although these compounds may have potential in combination therapies, current regimes possessing a single one of these drugs do not provide sufficient efficacy for the management of AD.
Due to the extensive damage resulting from oxidative stress and ROS production on the brains of patients suffering from AD, the suggestion that antioxidant administration may have potent neuroprotective effects against neurodegenerative disorders is topical.
e have been numerous studies examining the efficacy of several antioxidant substances in various in vivo AD models, with some displaying encouraging results.
The researchers assessed daily living activities at 6-month intervals, and found that the rate of cognitive decline was halved in the treatment group, compared to the control group.
Similarly, Clausen et al. found that the administration of EUK-207, a synthetic superoxide dismutase mimetic with potent antioxidant properties, to a 3xTg-AD transgenic mouse model of AD resulted in a decrease in oxidative stress biomarkers, disease phenotypes and AD biomarker accumulation in the amygdala and hippocampus of mice with late-stage AD.
Treatment with methylene blue, a phenothiazine that has electron donating and redox cycling properties, showed reduced HNE production and oxidative stress, promotion of mitochondrial biogenesis and decreased tau hyperphosphorylation in a P301S transgenic mouse model.
Finally, Elipenahli et al.   demonstrated that the administration of coenzyme Q10, a vital component of the electron transport chain with potent antioxidant characteristics, to a P301S tau mutated transgenic mouse model reduced oxidative stress, upregulated key complexes in the electron transport chain, and increased neuronal survival rates and cognitive behaviour.
These synthetic antioxidant compounds display promising outcomes as potential treatment for AD pathology.
However, there has been an increased interest in the use of naturally derived substances in the management of AD due to the pleiotropic effects, superior tolerability and wider availability of natural products; and in response to the lack of efficacy and serious side effects of current synthetic agents.
The beneficial effects displayed by extracts are derived from phytochemicals, which are substances produced by metabolic pathways in plants.
f the medically significant phytochemicals, polyphenolic compounds have been demonstrated to be the most efficient due to their ability to scavenge and inhibit ROS, donate hydrogen atoms or electrons, chelate metal cations and scavenge electrophiles.
Accordingly, plant phenolics exhibit a wide range of physiological properties, including anti-inflammatory, antimicrobial, anti-thrombotic, anti-allergenic, anti-atherogenic, vasodilatory and cardioprotective effects.
Therefore, extracts of plants containing high concentrations of phenolic compounds may have potential neuroprotective effects against cognitive decline in AD.
There have been numerous studies conducted using naturally derived polyphenols that have shown diverse neuroprotective effects.
The structures of a few such bioactive compounds are shown in Figure
Using a diet supplemented in antioxidant-rich α-tocopherol, a type of vitamin E, two studies in a Tg2576 transgenic mouse model and one study in a T44 human tau isoform transgenic mouse model demonstrated improved cognitive function, a decrease in mortality and amelioration of higher order tau and Aβ aggregates in both animal models.
The mechanism of α-tocopherol mediated neuroprotection is due to the prevention of Aβ-induced ROS production, reducing p-tau and Aβ aggregation and activation of the PP2A tau kinase.
eatment of a human neuroblastoma cell line with α-tocopherol revealed the upregulation and downregulation of genes involved in the non-amyloidogenic and amyloidogenic pathways, respectively.
In a large double-blinded, placebo-controlled, randomized clinical trial of 613 patients with mild to moderate AD, α-tocopherol displayed positive results by slowing functional decline compared to placebo.
Using the Alzheimer's Disease Cooperative Study/Activities of Daily Living Inventory Score (ADCS-ADL), the researchers found that the administration of a treatment regime of 2000 IU / d of α-tocopherol slowed cognitive decline by an average of 3.15 units less than those receiving a placebo.
Furthermore, a 20 mg / d memantine only treatment regime showed a decrease of only 1.98 units compared to placebo.
These results indicate that among patients with mild to moderate AD, 2000 IU / d of αtocopherol decreased functional decline at a rate that was superior to placebo and current AD treatment.
e principal compound present in the rhizomes of turmeric (Curcuma longa), curcumin (a hydrophobic polyphenol), has been investigated in vitro and in vivo.
he antioxidant properties of curcumin derive from its β-diketone structure and phenolic groups, which curcumin uses to scavenge free radicals.
Park et al. demonstrated protective effects of curcumin in a PC12 cell line against Aβ induced toxicity through the inhibition of oxidative damage and tau hyperphosphorylation,
reover, curcumin administration to several Drosophila AD genotypes displayed a reduction in Aβ oligomer-induced neurotoxicity.
More recently, curcumin intervention in vitro alleviated oxidative stress on macrophages and improved Aβ phagocytosis dependent on the presence of an ApoE polymorphism.
These studies show promising results for the use of Curcuma longa extracts as a treatment for AD in vitro and in vivo.
A 2012 randomised, doubleblind, placebo-controlled study investigating the administration of a placebo and 2 g or 4 g of oral Curcumin C3 Complex for 24 weeks with the aim of examining the incidence of adverse events, changes in clinical laboratory tests and variances in the Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale -Cognitive Subscale (ADAS-Cog).
Although the drug was generally well-tolerated, no statistically significant differences were reported between the curcumin treatment group and placebo group.
However, it was acknowledged that the plasma curcumin concentrations were very low (7.32 ng / ml), suggesting limited bioavailability and that a greater oral dose may be required.
Augmented delivery could also be a possibility, such as a curcumin-cyclodextrin hybrid that has been reported to increase solubility / bioavailability of curcumin by ten thousand times,
Despite the results of the aforementioned clinical trial, the in vitro and in vivo research has shown compelling evidence, and there are currently four more clinical trials being conducted to examine the efficacy of curcumin extracts in human patients.
dditionally, in vivo and in vitro studies have shown that EGb 761, a drug extract containing bilobalide, the main terpenoid from the Ginkgo biloba tree, possesses potent antioxidant characteristics, reversing Aβ induced toxicity and ROS production, Aβ aggregation and oxidative-induced neuronal cell death.
In PC12 nerve cells, treatment with EGb 761 resulted in increased glucose uptake, reduced Aβ-induced ROS production and prevented apoptosis in a dose-dependent manner.
Furthermore, HE 208, the polyphenol-free extract of EGb 761, failed to rescue PC12 cells from oxidative stress, Aβ toxicity and induction of apoptosis, indicating that the beneficial effects of EGb 761 are due to its antioxidant capacity.
Similarly, Tchantchou et al. showed that bilobalide extracts stimulate neurogenesis and synaptogenesis in hippocampal neurons cultured from C57B6/BL AD rat foetuses.
It was found that bilobalide is able to stimulate dendritic processes and enhance cell proliferation in a dose-dependent manner by targeting specific proteins in hippocampal neurons.
A randomized double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical trial of EGb 761 administration to 309 mild to severely demented patients demonstrated improved cognitive performance and social functioning scores according to the ADAS-Cog and the Geriatric Evaluation by Relative's Rating Instrument (GERRI).
The patients receiving EGb 761 scored an average of 1.4 points better on the ADAD-Cog and a received a GERRI score 0.14 points higher than patients receiving placebo.
These promising outcomes show that there is potential use for this drug as an AD stabiliser.
her compounds that are still being investigated and have shown promising outcomes in AD treatment include flavonoids, rosmarinic acid, and melatonin.
Flavonoids are polyphenolic compounds that naturally occur in plants.
Flavonoids may exhibit ROS scavenging and redox metal-chelating properties, and interact with signal transduction in neuron and glial cells (via PI3K/Akt, MAPK, PKC, tyrosine kinase pathways).
he potential use of flavonoids in AD treatment may be limited to the early stages, however hybrid containing flavonoids may improve cognitive function in the later stages.
esveratrol, a stilbene compound extracted from plant sources, such as pine trees and cocoa bushes, has potent ROS scavenging capacity.
In a study of its neuroprotective effects, oral administration of resveratrol (10 and 20 mg/kg over 25 days) to a colchicine-induced AD rat model reduced lipid peroxidation and improved cognitive function.
Myricetin, morin, rutin, apigenin, and quercetin (0.1-1 µM) all exhibit antiamyloidogenic and Aβ fibril-destabilisation properties.
has been suggested that the higher the number of hydroxyl groups on these flavonoids, the higher their potential for anti-AD activity, at least in vitro.
Quercetin, present in apples, onions and berries, displays anti-amyloidogenic effects via ROS scavenging, inhibition of Aβ oligomer formation, and decreased Aβ-stimulated apoptosis in primary rat neuronal cultures subjected to a single treatment of quercetin across a serial dosage range of 40 µM to 5 µM.
smarinic acid is a polyphenol carboxylic acid present in herbs, such as rosemary and oregano, and possesses ROS scavenging capacity.
In an Aβ-stimulated mouse model, administration of rosmarinic acid (0.25, 1, 2, and 4 mg/kg day, i.p.) prevented Aβ-25-35 induced memory impairment.
The action of rosmarinic acid is thought to directly mitigate oxidative damaged induced by Aβ, through quenching peroxynitrites and reducing ROS formation, caspase-3 activation, and tau hyperphosphorylation.
supplementation reportedly relieves sleep disorders and behavioural disturbances in AD patients.
4.0 Concluding remarks Scientific advances in molecular, cellular and neurobiology have uncovered a myriad of crucial information pertaining to the aetiology and pathophysiology of AD.
Along with Aβ and p-tau toxicity, it is evident that oxidative stress is a major contributor to the progression of AD symptoms and ultimately death in patients afflicted with this abhorrent neurodegenerative disorder.
The current Food and Drug Administration approved therapies lack efficacy and possess serious side effects, necessitating novel approaches to combat AD pathophysiology.
Due to the tremendous complexity of AD pathology, a multi-targeted treatment approach is crucial.
Recent studies into the use of antioxidant drugs have shown extremely positive outcomes, suggesting that antioxidant adjuvant therapy could be a promising treatment strategy in the future.
Furthermore, naturally derived antioxidants such as polyphenolic compounds from natural products present an attractive alternative to synthetic compounds due to their innocuous nature, their ability to readily cross the blood-brain barrier and improve cognitive decline in in vivo studies.
Importantly, naturally derived polyphenolic compounds have demonstrable antioxidant capacity that could address the oxidative stress present in the AD brain.
Whether treatment with such polyphenolic compounds alone will be able to mitigate or slow disease progression is not yet clear.
The complex underlying biology of AD is still a topic of debate and ongoing research, with oxidative stress both symptom and cause.
Polyphenolic therapeutics could assist with ROS imbalances, but may not be able to ameliorate or prevent AD where complex biological issues are present.
To date, the research into natural polyphenols as antioxidant therapeutics presents many options, but there is no one best compound.
Flavonoids, such as rosmarinic acid, quercetin and epicatechin, may be more attractive as a class of molecules due to the potential for neural regeneration, protective capacity against early amyloidosis and general high reducing power.
However, further studies are required to determine the molecular biology and biochemistry of the mechanism of action for polyphenols.
This should include singular compounds and hybrids, in combination with other agents or drugs to take full advantage of multiple therapeutic effects, with additional in vitro and in vivo work to be performed to bolster our current understanding of these potential future treatments.
Such in vivo work would be required to establish dosage and effective formulations or delivery, so as preserve bioavailability, and determine the most effective stage to administer the drug.
Likewise, translation of this knowledge into human clinical trials is required to prove the efficacy of this class of compounds for AD patients.
Nonetheless, polyphenolic phytochemicals possess the potential to be an inexpensive, safe and widely available prophylactic treatment for individuals afflicted with AD to live a normal life again.



Figure 1 :
Figure 1: The molecular mechanisms of Alzheimer's Disease (AD) pathophysiology.
(A) The catalytic processing of APP into various products, including Aβ.
The non-amyloidogenic pathway is initiated by cleavage with α-secretase, resulting in sAPPα, which possesses neuroprotective properties, and CTF-83, which is cleaved by γ-secretase to produce P3 and AICD.
The amyloidogenic pathway is initiated by β-secreatase cleaving two sites on APP, producing sAPPβ, which has toxic effects, and either CTF-99 or CTF-89 depending on the cleavage site.
Subsequently, γ-secretase cleaves the CTFs producing AICD and various forms of amyloidogenic Aβ protein, which is then subject to oligomerization and plaque formation.
(B) The mechanism of tau-induced neurotoxicity.
Physiologically, tau proteins stabilise microtubules in neurons, and their activity is modulated by the phosphorylation of tau kinases.
Hyperphosphorylation of tau results in decreased microtubule affinity, destabilisation of microtubules, and the oligomerization of hyperphosphorylated tau monomers.
Tau oligomers exert toxic effects in neurons, and are able to aggregate into neurofibrillary tangles.
APPamyloid β precursor protein, CTF -carboxyterminal fragment, Aβ -Amyloid beta, sAPPβsecreted amyloid precursor protein β, sAPPα -secreted amyloid precursor protein α, AICDamino-terminal APP intracellular domain 50, DR6 -death receptor 6, LTP -long-term potentiation.



Figure 2 :
Figure 2: The interplay between oxidative stress and Alzheimer's Disease (AD).
Oxidative stress contributes to AD pathophysiology by causing dysfunction of neuronal mitochondria, the oxidation of macromolecules, the generation of ROS by the binding of metal ions to Aβ plaques and the upregulation of p-tau and Aβ synthesis.
The result of this is activation of Fyn kinase causing activation of a pathway leading to the death of dendritic spines, loss of synapses, and inhibition of LTP, causing cognitive dysfunction.
ROS -reactive oxygen species, p-tauhyperphosphorylated tau protein, Aβ -amyloid beta, AGE -advanced glycated end products, RAGE -receptor for advanced glycated end products, NMDAR -N-methyl-D-aspartate receptors, LTP -long-term potentiation



Figure 3 :
Figure 3: Five phenolic compounds with potential as antioxidant therapeutics forAlzheimer's Disease.
These compounds include: alpha-tocopherol, curcumin, resveratrol, quercetin, and rosmarinic acid.



Figure 3
Figure 3