A genome-wide association study with 1,126,563 individuals identifies new risk loci for Alzheimer’s disease
Late-onset Alzheimer's disease is a prevalent age-related polygenic disease that accounts for 50-70% of dementia cases.
Currently, only a fraction of the genetic variants underlying Alzheimer's disease have been identified.
Here we show that increased sample sizes allowed identification of seven previously unidentified genetic loci contributing to Alzheimer's disease.
This study highlights microglia, immune cells and protein catabolism as relevant to late-onset Alzheimer's disease, while identifying and prioritizing previously unidentified genes of potential interest.
We anticipate that these results can be included in larger meta-analyses of Alzheimer's disease to identify further genetic variants that contribute to Alzheimer's pathology.

D
ementia has an age-and sex-standardized prevalence of ~7.1% in Europeans 1 , with Alzheimer's disease (AD) being the most common form of dementia (50-70% of cases)
AD is pathologically characterized by the presence of amyloid-beta plaques and tau neurofibrillary tangles in the brain
Most patients are diagnosed with AD after the age of 65, termed late-onset AD (LOAD), while only 1% of AD cases have an early onset (before the age of 65)
On the basis of twin studies, the heritability of LOAD is estimated to be ~60-80% (refs.
), suggesting that a large proportion of individual differences in LOAD risk is driven by genetics.
The heritability of LOAD is spread across many genetic variants; however, Zhang et al.
Zhang et al.
Increasing the sample size of genome-wide association studies (GWAS) will improve the statistical power to identify the missing causal variants and may highlight additional disease mechanisms.
In combination with increasing the number of samples, it is beneficial to use different approaches to identify rare and private variation to help identify additional causal variants and increase understanding of disease mechanisms; however, we deem this to be out of the scope of the current analysis.
The largest previous GWAS of LOAD, identified 29 risk loci from 71,880 (46,613 proxy) cases and 383,378 (318,246 proxy) controls
Our current study expands this to include 90,338 (46,613 proxy)  cases and 1,036,225 (318,246 proxy) controls.
The recruitment of LOAD cases can be difficult due to the late age of onset, so proxy cases can allow for the inclusion of younger individuals by estimating their risk of LOAD using parental status.
Proxy cases and controls were defined on the basis of known parental LOAD status weighted by parental age (Supplementary Information).
In the current study, we identified 38 loci, including seven loci that have not been reported previously.
Functional follow-up analyses implicated

Articles
NATure GeNeTiCs tissues, cell types and genes of interest through tissue and cell type enrichment, colocalization and statistical fine-mapping.
This study highlights microglia, immune cells and protein catabolism as relevant to LOAD, while identifying previously unidentified genes of potential interest.

Results
Genome-wide inferences.
We performed meta-analysis on data from 13 cohorts, totaling 1,126,563 individuals (Supplementary Table
The inflation factors and linkage disequilibrium score (LDSC) regression
The liability scale SNP heritability was estimated by LDSC regression 9 to be 0.031 (s.e.
= 0.0062) given a population prevalence of 0.05 (UK Biobank (UKB) data excluded).
This estimate is low but similar to the estimates obtained in previous GWAS meta-analyses (Jansen et al.
= 0.0099; Lambert et al.
= 0.013).
The LDSC intercept was 1.022 (s.e.
= 0.013), the inflation factor (λ) for the meta-analysis was 1.11 and the sample size-adjusted inflation factor (λ 1,000 )
The genetic correlation
= 0.21, P = 6.61 × 10 -5 ).
Separate Manhattan plots for the LOAD proxy data and the case-control LOAD data are available in Supplementary Figs.
Across 855 external phenotypes in LD Hub
The meta-analysis identified 3,915 significant (P < 5 × 10 -8 ) variants across 38 independent loci (Table
Of those 38 loci, seven have not shown associations with LOAD in previous GWAS, and five of those loci have not been associated with any form of dementia (AGRN, TNIP1, HAVCR2, NTN5, LILRB2).
The lead variant effect estimates and significance values per dataset for each locus are reported in Supplementary Table
We largely replicated the loci identified in Jansen et al.
However, we successfully replicated all the significant loci in Kunkle et al.
Tissue type, cell type and gene-set enrichment.
MAGMA tissue specificity analysis
However, this tissue was slightly above the significance threshold (P Bonferroni = 0.054) when the larger APOE region (GRCh37: 19:40,000,000-50,000,000) was excluded (Supplementary Table
Spleen was also significant in the previous MAGMA tissue specificity analysis performed in Jansen et al.
To investigate enrichment at the cell type level, FUMA cell type analysis
Six single-cell RNA-sequencing (scRNA-seq) datasets were significantly associated, after multiple testing correction, with the expression of LOAD-associated genes (Supplementary Fig.
Microglia were the only significant cell type in all six independent scRNA-seq datasets.
We confirm previously observed enrichment for nonhuman microglial cells
Four of these enrichments remained significant after exclusion of the larger APOE region, suggesting that genomic regions outside of the APOE region play a substantial role in the microglia finding.
A combination of the cell type and tissue specificity results identifies microglia and immune tissues as potential experimental models for identifying the contribution of LOAD-associated genes towards LOAD pathogenesis.
MAGMA gene-set analysis
Subsequent conditional gene-set analyses confirmed independent association of four of these 25 gene sets, reflecting the role of LOAD-associated genes in amyloid and tau plaque formation, protein catabolism of plaques, immune cell recruitment and glial cells (Supplementary Table
The exclusion of the larger APOE region resulted in the loss of five significant gene sets related to amyloid-beta clearance, phospholipid efflux, cholesterol transport, protein lipid interactions and tau binding, and the gain of two significant gene sets related to tau degradation and astrocyte activation (Supplementary Table
Conditional gene-set analysis, with the larger APOE region excluded, identified four independent gene sets related to astrocyte activation, immune cell recruitment, amyloid catabolism and neurofibrillary tangles.
The gene-set related to glial cells was still significant after removal of the APOE region, but was not identified as an independent gene set, which suggests that this association can be explained by the APOE region in addition to another significant independent gene set.
Largely, the themes highlighted in the gene-set analysis are robust to the exclusion of the APOE region.
Our gene-set analysis identified the same themes as Jansen et al.

Gene prioritization.
As expected, the genomic risk loci identified in this study were enriched for active chromatin and variant annotations relating to gene function (Supplementary Information).
We performed functional follow-up (colocalization and fine-mapping) to further dissect the genomic risk loci to identify potential disease drivers.
Functional mapping of variants to genes on the basis of position and expression quantitative trait loci (eQTL) information from brain and immune tissues/cells identified 989 genes that mapped to one of the 38 genomic risk loci (Supplementary Table
These mapped genes were annotated with the drugs that target them on the basis of information from DrugBank
Due to linkage disequilibrium (LD) and the inability to distinguish true causal variants from variants in LD, many of the mapped genes may be functionally irrelevant to LOAD.
To highlight potentially relevant genes, eQTL data from immune tissues, brain and microglia were colocalized with the genomic risk loci using Coloc
We used the 19 successful colocalizations (Supplementary Table
ACE, NTN5, CD33 and CASS4) to prioritize genes in those loci.
Statistical fine-mapping with susieR was additionally performed to narrow down the associated region (Supplementary Table
The statistical fine-mapping required an external reference panel, which limits the interpretation of the findings, so only high confidence variants (posterior inclusion probability (PIP) in a credible set >0.95) were considered in gene prioritization.
Gene prioritization of the previously unidentified loci, and a description of colocalization and fine-mapping evidence for previously identified loci, is available in the Supplementary Information.
Some of the most interesting findings for the previously unidentified loci are highlighted below.
The lead variant of locus 7 (rs871269; P = 1.37 × 10 -9 ; minor allele frequency (MAF) = 0.34) is located in an intron of TNIP1 (Supplementary Fig.
The lead variant is supported by a few variants with suggestive signal (rs34294852; P = 1.05 × 10 -6 ) but none of these variants are in LD (R 2 > 0.1) in the 1000 Genomes (1KG) European (EUR) population.
However, these variants are in moderate/low LD with the lead variant (R 2 = 0.2-0.6) in the 1KG East Asian (EAS) and American populations.
This suggests that the 1KG EUR reference panel does not accurately represent the LD

Articles
NATure GeNeTiCs structure of our data at this locus.
The fine-mapping results from susieR identified the lead variant as the only variant with high PIP (>0.99).
However, the association signal in this locus colocalized with a nearby suggestive variant (rs34294852; R 2 = 0.29 in 1KG EAS); this variant is an eQTL for TNIP1 in blood tissue (TwinsUK).
Support from previous literature is sparse; however, TNIP1 has the most support of the three genes.
TNIP1 contributes to hyperinflammation and has been previously identified in an autoimmune GWAS
TNIP1 was included in a transcription module regulated by Bcl3 in mouse microglia
The gene encoding Bcl3 (BCL3) was found to be significantly associated with cerebrospinal fluid amyloid-beta1-42 peptide after conditioning for APOE
Further investigation into this locus in nonEuropean populations may yield more support for the lead variant and improve the fine-mapping analysis.
The lead variant of locus 8 (rs6891966; P = 7.91 × 10 -10 ) is located in an intron of HAVCR2 (Supplementary Fig.
HAVCR1 and TIMD4 also map to this region on the basis of brain eQTLs (PsychENCODE).
HAVCR2 was significantly differentially expressed in bulk brain tissue of patients with LOAD compared to the P values were identified through a meta-analysis (two-sided test) of summary statistics generated by linear/logistic regressions (two-sided test) and were not adjusted for multiple testing.
the previously unidentified loci are highlighted in bold.
the genes were assigned on the basis of colocalization results, fine-mapping results and previous literature.
A1, tested allele; N, sample size.
controls
HAVCR2 is preferentially expressed in aged microglia
The protein encoded by HAVCR2 (Havcr2) has been suggested to bind to phosphatidylserine on cell surfaces to mediate apoptosis
TIMD4 is another gene in this region that encodes a protein (TIM-4) with a similar function to Havcr2; it binds to phosphatidylserine on cell surfaces to mediate apoptosis, and microglia without TIM-4 receptors have reduced apoptotic clearance
Follow-up experimental work would be useful to determine the role that these genes play within LOAD.
Locus 12 and locus 28 have been previously associated with dementia
The lead variant in locus 12 (rs5011436; P = 2.7 × 10 -9 ) is an intron variant in TMEM106B (Supplementary Fig.
A nearby exonic variant (rs3173615; R 2 = 0.976 in 1KG EUR; P = 6.61 × 10 -9 ) with a CADD score of 21.2 has been discussed as the association signal-driving variant in frontotemporal dementia (FTD) by causing decreased transmembrane protein 106B (the protein encoded by TMEM106B) abundance through increased protein degradation
TMEM106B was also found to be significantly differentially expressed in bulk brain tissue of patients with LOAD compared to controls
The lead variant in locus 28 (rs708382; P = 1.98 × 10 -9 ) is an upstream variant of FAM171A2 (Supplementary Fig.
Interestingly, the protein (integrin alpha-IIb) encoded by a nearby gene (ITGA2B) is a target for abciximab, an antibody that inhibits platelet aggregation and is used to estimate concentrations of coated platelets
In patients with mild cognitive impairments, elevated coated-platelet levels are linked to increased risk of LOAD progression.
However, the association signal in this locus colocalized with an eQTL for GRN in brain tissue (ROSMAP and BrainSeq) with the lead variant identified as the colocalized variant.
GRN is also a known FTD gene
The association signals in locus 12 and locus 28 do not appear to be primarily driven by the UKB data (Supplementary Information), which suggests that the associations of the known FTD genes are not driven by the proxy phenotype.
These results suggest that TMEM106B and GRN are not solely contributing to FTD, but also contributing to LOAD, suggesting that their biological implications might be related to protein clearance mechanisms rather than involvement in specific disease-related protein aggregates.
Only variants with P < 0.0005 are displayed.
the APOE region cannot be fully observed because the y axis is limited to the top variant in the second most significant locus, -log 10 (1 × 10 -60 ), to display the less significant variants.
the red line represents genome-wide significance (5 × 10 -8 ). the P values were identified through a meta-analysis (two-sided test) of summary statistics generated by linear/logistic regressions (two-sided test) and were not adjusted for multiple testing.
the previously unidentified loci are highlighted in green and indicated by the assigned gene name.
the TNIP1/HAVCR2 regions and the NTN5/LILRB2 regions are close enough together that they cannot be visually distinguished at this scale, but are different genomic risk loci.
The lead variant of locus 36 (rs1761461, P = 1.56 × 10 -9 ) is an intergenic variant upstream of LILRA5 (Supplementary Fig.
The lead variant is an eQTL for LILRA5, LILRP2, LILRB1 and LILRA4 in GTEx whole blood.
These genes encode a family of transmembrane glycoproteins that mediate immune activation
LILRB5, LILRA5 and LILRB2 were significantly differentially expressed in bulk brain tissue of patients with LOAD compared to controls
Interestingly, LILRB2 is a nearby gene in the same family and encodes a protein (leukocyte immunoglobulin-like receptor B2) that is known to inhibit axonal regeneration and to contribute to LOAD through amyloid binding
The role of LILRB2 in LOAD has been investigated in mouse models and results suggest that drug-targeting this gene could be a beneficial treatment approach
While prioritizing this region to a single gene is difficult, the LILR family appears to be the most likely candidate for explaining the association signal.

Discussion
We performed a large GWAS for LOAD, including 1,126,563 individuals, and identified 38 LOAD-associated loci, including seven previously unidentified loci.
The data included both clinical cases and proxy cases, defined on the basis of parental LOAD status, a strategy that was validated previously by ourselves 8 and others
Through gene-set analysis, tissue and single-cell specificity analysis, colocalization and fine-mapping, this study highlighted additional biological routes that connect genetic variants to LOAD pathology.
These functional analyses all implicated immune cells and microglia as cells of interest, which provided genetic support to the current understanding of LOAD pathology
The seven previously unidentified loci were functionally annotated and fine-mapped to help narrow down candidate causal genes.
Two of the previously unidentified loci have been previously associated with FTD
This signal is not driven by the nonmedically verified LOAD cases in the UKB proxy LOAD data (Supplementary Information), which suggests that this region is pleiotropic for FTD or contains separate causal variants within the same LD blocks.
A recent study 7 produced a power curve for LOAD using a model that accounts for large and small effect variants.
This model was based on summary statistics from a previous GWAS of LOAD
A sample size of 2.2 million is predicted to identify 80% of genetic variance on chromosome 19, and a sample size of 7.8 million is predicted to identify 80% genetic variance outside chromosome 19.
The effective sample size
We demonstrated that an increased sample size in a GWAS meta-analysis approach allowed for identification of previously unidentified loci; however, Holland et al.
These large effect variants (and small effect rare variants) are unlikely to be identified through traditional GWAS approaches focusing on common variants.
Larger sample size GWAS approaches should be complemented with rare variant, copy number variant and private variant discovery to identify the remaining causal variants.
Future work focusing on fine-mapping, generating larger QTL databases in more specific cells types and incorporating other ancestries will improve the interpretability of associated loci.
Our colocalization analysis identified a candidate causal gene in nine of the 38 loci and we expect that larger and more specific QTL datasets will improve the number of successful colocalizations.
Yao et al.
The identification of human microglia, but not bulk brain tissue, as a cell/tissue type of interest in this study supported a finding in a recent single-cell epigenomic study
One important goal for LOAD GWAS is the identification of medically actionable information that can help in diagnosis or treatment in all populations.
This study was limited in the ability to identify causal genes and in the applicability to nonEuropean populations.
Further study in nonEuropean populations will improve the equity of genetic information and also help with fine-mapping of associated regions.
Larger sample sizes of GWAS, epigenomic studies and eQTL studies in all populations will improve identification and explanation of additional LOAD loci while increasing the applicability of these findings to a larger group of individuals.
This could be accomplished by a push for facilitating data sharing and global collaboration within the field of Alzheimer's disease genetics.
The current work provided genetic support for the role of immune cells and microglia in LOAD, identified previously unidentified LOAD-associated regions, prioritized causal genes of interest and highlighted the importance of collaboration to discern the biological process that mediates LOAD pathology.



Fig. 1 |
Fig.1| A Manhattan plot of the meta-analysis results highlighting 38 loci, including seven previously unidentified regions.
Only variants with P < 0.0005 are displayed.
the APOE region cannot be fully observed because the y axis is limited to the top variant in the second most significant locus, -log 10 (1 × 10 -60 ), to display the less significant variants.
the red line represents genome-wide significance (5 × 10 -8 ). the P values were identified through a meta-analysis (two-sided test) of summary statistics generated by linear/logistic regressions (two-sided test) and were not adjusted for multiple testing.
the previously unidentified loci are highlighted in green and indicated by the assigned gene name.
the TNIP1/HAVCR2 regions and the NTN5/LILRB2 regions are close enough together that they cannot be visually distinguished at this scale, but are different genomic risk loci.



Table 1 | The 38 genomic risk loci identified from 90,338 (46,613 proxy) cases and 1,036,225 (318,246 proxy) controls