Potential Therapeutic Role of Phytochemicals to Mitigate Mitochondrial Dysfunctions in Alzheimer’s Disease
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a progressive neurodegenerative disorder characterized by a decline in cognitive function and neuronal damage.
Although the precise pathobiology of AD remains elusive, accumulating evidence suggests that mitochondrial dysfunction is one of the underlying causes of AD.
Mutations in mitochondrial or nuclear DNA that encode mitochondrial components may cause mitochondrial dysfunction.
In particular, the dysfunction of electron transport chain complexes, along with the interactions of mitochondrial pathological proteins are associated with mitochondrial dysfunction in AD.
Mitochondrial dysfunction causes an imbalance in the production of reactive oxygen species, leading to oxidative stress (OS) and vice versa.
Neuroinflammation is another potential contributory factor that induces mitochondrial dysfunction.
Phytochemicals or other natural compounds have the potential to scavenge oxygen free radicals and enhance cellular antioxidant defense systems, thereby protecting against OS-mediated cellular damage.
Phytochemicals can also modulate other cellular processes, including autophagy and mitochondrial biogenesis.
Therefore, pharmacological intervention via neuroprotective phytochemicals can be a potential strategy to combat mitochondrial dysfunction as well as AD.
This review focuses on the role of phytochemicals in mitigating mitochondrial dysfunction in the pathogenesis of AD.

Introduction
Several studies have demonstrated that mitochondrial dysfunction leads to several neurodegenerative diseases, including Alzheimer's disease (AD)
AD shows common symptoms such as insanity and leads to a morbid state and death in the aged population
In both familial and sporadic patterns, AD is characterized by dual unique medical hallmarks: senile plaques formed via the extracellular accumulation of amyloid-β (Aβ) peptide and intracellular deposition of neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs) formed via hyperphosphorylation of tau proteins
These phenomena are accompanied by both pre-and postsynaptic and neuronal casualty
In addition, multiple reports demonstrate that the alterations in axonal transport (AT) are the precise culprit for the development of neurodevelopmental diseases such as AD
AD in mammals involves the atypical decomposition of several abnormal organelles like mitochondria, resulting in the degeneration of senile plaques along with abnormal neuronal expansion leading to a decline in neurites
Phytochemicals or plant-derived chemical compounds are currently under research with unestablished health benefits
Phytochemicals show multiple beneficial effects on mitochondrial dysfunction
A wide range of studies have demonstrated that numerous bioactive phytochemicals and other organic compounds may improve the treatment of AD
Phytochemicals, including polyphenolic compounds that are present in numerous plants exhibit several essential properties such as anti-inflammatory potential, DNA repair, autophagy, and antioxidant activities
In the brains of AD patients as well as transgenic AD mouse models, APP and Aβ are present in mitochondrial membranes, interrupting the mitochondrial electron transport system
Potential therapeutic effects of these phytochemicals include antioxidant and anti-inflammatory activities via modulation of Aβ toxicity.
Mitochondrial dysfunction discharges excessive quantities of H 2 O 2 , which ultimately leads to irreversible cellular dysfunction and damage in the brain
Aggregated Aβ peptides, H 2 O 2 -induced hydroxyl radical, and mitochondrial dysfunction caused by APP in AD may restrain in addition to pharmacological approaches using phytochemicals that preserve mitochondrial dynamics
Owing to their therapeutic capabilities, phytobioactive compounds have been deliberated as favorable beneficial agents for AD and age-related diseases
Therefore, the current review describes the underlying mechanisms of mitochondrial dysfunction in the pathogenesis of AD and discuss how phytochemicals may mitigate mitochondrial dysfunction.

Mitochondrial Dysfunction in AD via ROS Production
Oxidative stress (OS) occurs owing to the imbalance between the generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and cellular antioxidant potential.
OS stands for excess quantities of ROS production that incur damage to nucleic acids and small molecules such as proteins or lipids.
OS can lead to neuronal, specifically causing neurodegenerative diseases and cellular aging processes
Restrained ROS production has physiological roles, particularly in controlling cellular redox equilibrium and regulating intracellular signal transduction
ROS (collectively, H 2 O 2 , OH, and O 2 ) •-) may be the causative factor leading to defects in mitochondrial respiration and the development processes of the human brain that are accompanied by augmented ROS generation.
They also contribute to dynamic changes in the brain during AD and aging progression (Figure
The primary origins of ROS production in the brain under functional circumstances as well as in pathological processes (e.g., neurological diseases) are complex I and complex III of the respiratory chain.
Complex I discharge superoxide (O 2
•-) into the intermembrane space such as the matrix, and complex III liberates O 2
•-to both sides of the electron transport chain (ETC) or inner mitochondrial membrane.
Hydrogen peroxide (H 2 O 2 ) can be generated from O 2
•-by an enzyme called superoxide dismutase.
Both molecules can cross the inner membranes and can produce extremely reactive hydroxyl radical ( • OH).
Under physiological conditions, the proton movements and the respiratory state of mitochondria produce H 2 O 2 and O 2
•-from the electron transport chain (ETC)
Complex IV also enhances the generation of ROS, whereas complexes III and V generate a minimal amount of ROS
Apart from these, defective production and detoxification of ROS are critically involved in mitochondrial dysfunction
During the aging process, a high amount of ROS is generated due to defective mitochondria.
Likewise, a decline in antioxidant enzyme activities ensues, leading to increased ROS production
Excess ROS production adversely affects the ETC; complexes I, III, and IV appear to be the most affected, while complex II remains undisturbed
transport chain (ETC) or inner mitochondrial membrane.
Hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) can be generated from O2 .-by
an enzyme called superoxide dismutase.
Both molecules can cross the inner membranes and can produce extremely reactive hydroxyl radical ( .
OH).
Under physiological conditions, the proton movements and the respiratory state of mitochondria produce H2O2 and O2 -from the electron transport chain (ETC)
Complex IV also enhances the generation of ROS, whereas complexes III and V generate a minimal amount of ROS
Apart from these, defective production and detoxification of ROS are critically involved in mitochondrial dysfunction
During the aging process, a high amount of ROS is generated due to defective mitochondria.
Likewise, a decline in antioxidant enzyme activities ensues, leading to increased ROS production
Excess ROS production adversely affects the ETC; complexes I, III, and IV appear to be the most affected, while complex II remains undisturbed

Mitochondrial Deformity as an Outcome of AD Progression
Accumulating evidence has demonstrated that metabolic alterations play a pivotal role in AD progression mediated by several pathogenic factors such as ROS, mitochondrial deformity, and Aβ load
Extensive research has shown that ROS formation mediated by Aβ and calcium imbalance leads to mitochondrial injuries (Figure
Hippocampal expression of mutant APP and Aβ in mouse HT22 cell lines led to impaired mitochondrial dynamics, alterations of mitochondrial structure, and action in neurons
Amyloid precursor proteins (APP) can lead to the overexpression of mitochondrial protein import channels in AD sensitive brain regions, leading to mitochondrial malfunction
Alternatively, several studies have shown that Aβ precisely disorganizes mitochondrial dynamics and hinders critical enzymatic functions.
Lustbader et al. reported that Aβ-binding alcohol dehydrogenase (ABAD) directly interacts with Aβ and leads to Aβ-linked apoptosis, mitochondrial toxicity, and free-radical formation in neuronal cells
Furthermore, voltage-dependent anionselective channel 1 protein (VDAC1) is excessively expressed in AD-vulnerable brains, which combines with phosphorylated tau and Aβ to block mitochondrial intramembranous pores, accelerating mitochondrial impairment
A distinct number of in vitro analysis proposed a connection among augmented Aβ levels, mitochondrial abnormal function, and oxidative burden, collectively leading to AD progression.
Nevertheless, the origin of the impairment of mitochondrial dynamics in AD pathogenesis remains elusive.
Anthocyanins control mitochondrial fission/fusion pathways, prevent complex I APP Swedish K670N/M671L double mutation (APPswe), and promote normal mitochondrial dynamics
Numerous phenolic compounds exert neuroprotective effects in AD and other neurodegenerative diseases and.
Sulfuretin, a well-known flavonoid glycoside derived from Albizia julibrissin, protects primary hippocampal neuronal cells and SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma cells from Aβ-mediated neurotoxicity
Dietary (poly)phenols

Phytochemicals Prevent Mitochondrial Dysfunction and Improve Biogenesis
Several phytochemicals function to neutralize ROS and activate cellular antioxidant mechanisms.
Phytochemicals also enhance mitochondrial biogenesis and protect neurons from toxic damage
Additionally, phytochemicals can stimulate cell survival pathways by triggering many growths signaling pathways.
In this section, we discuss recently explored phytochemicals that have been shown to protect neurons from mitochondrial dysfunction in AD by stimulating numerous signaling pathways.
Molecular targets, experimental model, research outcomes, and molecular signaling systems of these phytochemicals are summarized in Table
Additionally, epidemiological as well as clinical interventions have been displayed that dietary phytochemicals, for example Mediterranean diet, exhibit beneficial properties in dementia patients, AD, PD, depressive disorders, and mild cognitive impairment
Secondary metabolites of phytochemicals from Mediterranean diet contain ω-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids which has been described to maintain cognitive function in human studies
Anthocyanins control mitochondrial fission/fusion pathways, prevent complex I APP Swedish K670N/M671L double mutation (APPswe), and promote normal mitochondrial dynamics
Numerous phenolic compounds exert neuroprotective effects in AD and other neurodegenerative diseases and.
Sulfuretin, a well-known flavonoid glycoside derived from Albizia julibrissin, protects primary hippocampal neuronal cells and SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma cells from Aβ-mediated neurotoxicity
Dietary (poly)phenols have been found to cross blood-brain barrier (BBB) in endothelial cells and shown neuroprotective potential
Polyphenol resveratrol, derived from grapes and black barriers, protects HT22 and PC12 cells against Aβ toxicity by activating the PI3K/Akt/Nrf2 pathway
In addition, resveratrol prevents cell death and represses ROS production induced by Aβ toxicity by enhancing PI3K/Akt phosphorylation, the protein levels of SOD, HO-1, and GSH, and Nrf2 nuclear translocation
Resveratrol also found to cross BBB
Quercetin, a hydroxytyrosol derived from olives, prompts mitochondrial biogenesis and enhances muscle mtDNA in adult men
Tea polyphenols (TPs) mitigate OS in H 2 O 2induced human neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y cells via Keap1-Nrf2 signaling initiation and decrease in H 2 O 2 -mediated cell death, as well as ROS and H 2 O 2 levels to protect against mitochondrial dysfunction
Liquiritigenin prompts mitochondrial fusion and prevents mitochondrial cytotoxicity, in addition to the fragmentation induced by Aβ in SK-N-MC cells
In addition, EGCG and resveratrol increase the levels of Sirt-1 and AMPK along with mitochondrial biogenesis via PGC-1α, thereby protecting the neuronal cells
Conversely, kaempferol, resveratrol luteolin, wogonin, quercetin, theaflavins, EGCG, curcumin, and baicalein open the mPTP, which activates the apoptosis pathway in cancer cells via Bcl-2 and Bcl-xL inhibition along with oligomerization of Bax, in addition to the downregulation of NF-κB signaling pathway
Additionally, curcumin has been found to cross BBB to enter brain tissue and considerable exhibited neuro-protective as well as anti-cancer properties
A previous study showed that curcumin protected against mitochondrial degeneration by mitigating the autophagic pathway via modulation of the PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway in the ischemia/reperfusion-induced rat model
Kaempferol passed to penetrate BBB and attenuates neuroinflammation as well as BBB dysfunction in cerebral ischemia/reperfusion rats in addition to improve neurological deficits
A ginseng-derived exogenous lysophosphatidic acid receptor ligand, gintonin, improves blood-brain barrier permeability in primary human brain microvascular endothelial cells (HBMECs)

Phytochemical Intervention of Molecular Signaling Pathways Related to Mitochondrial Dysfunctions in AD
Accumulating evidence has indicated that a large number of phytochemicals are capable of showing numerous benefits against mitochondrial dysfunction in AD pathogenesis by modulating molecular signaling pathways.
Several polyphenols promote mitochondrial functions and biogenesis, particularly by regulating ETC activity, redox state modulation, and apoptosis inhibition.
Phenolic acids can scavenge peroxynitrite, superoxide, and hydroxyl radicals, terminate radical chain reactions, and upregulate several protective genes that encode extracellular signal-related kinase 1/2 (ERK1/2), heat shock protein 70, and heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1)
Several in vivo and in vitro studies have revealed that curcumin can prevent mitochondrial dysfunction in AD by scavenging hydroxyl radicals, hydrogen peroxide, and peroxynitrite and attenuating lipid peroxidation
Flavonoids exhibit antioxidant activity and protect neurons via modulation of cellular signaling pathways, in addition to the induction of expression of several genes
Flavonoids can also increase the expression of ROS-eliminating enzymes such as catalase, SOD, and glutathione reductase via the activation of the Keap1/Nrf2/ARE-mediated signaling pathway
Polyphenols such as catechin, apigenin, luteolin, kaempferol, curcumin, and quercetin can inhibit ROS-generating xanthine oxidase (XO), NADPH oxidase (NOX), and MAO
Flavonoids exert neuronal effects via several lipid kinase and protein kinase signaling pathways, such as the protein kinase C, MAPK tyrosine kinase, PI3K/Akt signaling pathways, and NF-κB pathway
The stimulatory or inhibitory properties of these pathways can significantly modulate gene expression by altering the phosphorylation state as well as affecting the neuronal properties and function of target molecules.
As a result, this might lead to synaptic protein synthesis, morphological variations, and plasticity involved in neurodegenerative processes in AD.
Serine/threonine kinases, known as MAPK and mitogen-activated kinases, regulate numerous cellular functions via extracellular signal transduction pathways, generating intracellular downstream signals
Flavonoids have selectively interacted with MAPK kinases, including ERK, MEK1, and MEK2 signaling, resulting in the activation of downstream cAMP response element-binding protein (CREB)
These results might lead to alterations in memory function and synaptic plasticity via the upregulation of neuroprotective pathways in AD.
Blueberry supplementation rich in anthocyanins and flavonols increased memory performance in rats via CREB activation and promoting pro-BDNF and mature BDNF levels in the hippocampus
In another study, 12 weeks of blueberry supplementation activated Akt phosphorylation, mTOR downstream activation, and enhanced activityregulated cytoskeletal-associated protein (Arc/Arg3.1)
expression in the hippocampus of aged animals
This might promote morphology and spine density in neuronal cells, thereby enhancing learning and memory function.
In addition, treatment with green tea catechins ameliorated memory impairments and promoted spatial learning function by diminishing the oligomers of Aβ (1-42) in senescence-accelerated mice by augmenting the expression of the PKA/CREB pathway in the hippocampus
Furthermore, EGCG promoted ERK and PI3K-mediated phosphorylation of CREB as well as stimulated GluR2 levels and modulated synaptogenesis, neurotransmission activity, and plasticity in cortical neurons
In addition, flavonoids modulate the activity of PI3K via direct interactions with its ATP binding site
Hesperetin is an activator of the Akt/PKB pathway in cortical neurons.
In contrast, quercetin inhibits the prosurvival Akt/PKB pathways by preventing the activity of PI3K
Flavonoids prevent certain activities of CDK5/p25 and GSK-3β, which contribute to the hyperphosphorylation of Tau and accumulation of neurofibrillary tangles in AD pathogenesis
Indirubins prevent CDK5/p25 and GSK-3β and inhibit abnormal phosphorylation of tau in AD pathogenesis
Likewise, GSK-3β activity is inhibited by flavonoid morin
Morin can prevent GSK-3β-mediated phosphorylation of tau in vitro, decrease Aβ-induced tau phosphorylation, and protect against Aβ cytotoxicity in human SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma cells
Furthermore, morin reduces the hyperphosphorylation of tau in the hippocampal neurons of 3xTg-AD mice
Luteolin reduces soluble Aβ, interrupted the PS1-APP association, and diminished GSK-3 activity in an AD mouse model of Tg2576, and rescued cognitive impairments

Phytochemicals Inhibit AD Specific Protein Aggregation
Neuropathological characteristics of AD involve the accumulation of amyloid-β plaques, neurofibrillary tangles, and neuronal loss in the limbic neocortical brain regions
Pathobiology of AD encompasses oxidative stress, mitochondrial dysfunction, neuroinflammation, apoptosis, reduced neurotrophic factors and neurogenesis, loss of the cholinergic system, autophagy dysfunction, and glutamatergic excitotoxicity
Various phytochemicals, anti-inflammatory medications, and antioxidants prevent amyloidogenic monomer synthesis, fibrillar aggregates, and oligomeric formation
Phytochemicals also stimulate nontoxic aggregate formation and proteolytic system activation to ameliorate neuronal mitochondrial dysfunction triggered by Aβ
It is well known that amyloidogenic Aβ 40-42 is produced via consecutive APP cleavage mediated by β-secretase (BACE1) and γ-secretase enzymes
Tannic acid, genistein, ferulic acid, nobiletin, galangin, sinensetin, and tangeretin inhibit β-secretase activity, in addition to behavioral enhancement in AD animal models
In addition, resveratrol, EGCG, icariin, quercetin, luteolin, 7,8-dihydroxyflavine, rutin, and curcumin decrease β-secretase expression and protect neurons
Furthermore, curcumin, oleuropein, genistein, and EGCG promote APP cleavage via α-secretase, producing nontoxic N-terminal soluble APPα product and C-terminal α fragment
Phytochemicals promote α-secretase or prevent β-secretase activity and inhibit fibril and toxic oligomer production
Curcumin as well as other polyphenolic compounds have been changed to mature Aβ aggregates, which make nontoxic molecules as well.
Many phytochemicals inhibit mTOR signaling, thereby inducing the autophagy pathway
Polyphenols inhibit oligomer synthesis and formation, in addition to preventing tau hyperphosphorylation and aggregation reduction under in vitro and in vivo conditions
Soluble Aβ oligomers along with profibrillar species are produced via the action of rosmarinic acid, myricetin, and curcumin, which reduce the number of toxic oligomers and fibrils
Aβ aggregation is inhibited by honokiol, myricetin, and luteolin upon binding to the hydrophobic site of the amyloid pentamer and employed the most prominent Aβ1-42 aggregate inhibition in PC12 cells to protect anti-aggregative properties as well as neuronal toxicity
Numerous phytochemicals involved in the pathogenesis of AD are indicated in Figure
Tau oligomers are toxic and cause synaptic dysfunction in AD.
Several findings have revealed that hyperphosphorylation of tau can be inhibited by treatment with caffeic acid, altenusin, EGCG, curcumin, and resveratrol
Moreover, EGCG inhibits the conversion of tau aggregates into toxic oligomers
In addition, emodin and daunorubicin repress tau aggregation and dissolve paired helical filaments under in vitro conditions
In another study, epicatechin-5-gallate and myrecetin were shown to hinder heparin-mediated tau formation, and EGCG administration in an AD transgenic mouse model controlled the phosphorylation of sarkosyl-soluble tau isoform

Therapeutic Applications of Phytochemicals in Mitochondrial Dysfunction in AD
Many studies have reported the effective therapeutic potential of antioxidants and mitochondria-targeting agents such as vitamin C, vitamin E, carnitine, and alpha-lipoic acid in AD
The coenzyme Q10, piracetam, simvastatin, curcumin, ginkgo biloba, piracetam, and omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids also show effective therapeutic potential
An effective therapeutic strategy can be developed against AD by targeting mitochondrial proteins.
Using these strategies, various types of mitochondria-targeted antioxidants have been manufactured.
The alteration of mitochondrial movement has a neg-

Therapeutic Applications of Phytochemicals in Mitochondrial Dysfunction in AD
Many studies have reported the effective therapeutic potential of antioxidants and mitochondria-targeting agents such as vitamin C, vitamin E, carnitine, and alpha-lipoic acid in AD
The coenzyme Q10, piracetam, simvastatin, curcumin, ginkgo biloba, piracetam, and omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids also show effective therapeutic potential
An effective therapeutic strategy can be developed against AD by targeting mitochondrial proteins.
Using these strategies, various types of mitochondria-targeted antioxidants have been manufactured.
The alteration of mitochondrial movement has a negative impact on mitochondrial function, thereby contributing critically to the pathogenesis of AD
Consequently, approaches to modify defective mitochondrial movement and transportation may constitute an effective therapeutic strategy for the treatment of AD.
Therapeutics that decrease the activation of the mitochondrial fission proteins such as Drp1, pTau, and Aβ can rescue the neurons from the toxic effects of those agents and their interconnection.
A diversity of phytochemicals available in numerous plant sources demonstrate various pharmacological properties, including neuroprotection
Because of these capabilities, phytochemicals are progressively considered as favorable therapeutic candidates for AD therapy
The therapeutic possibilities of curcumin were considered in various aging-related pathological disorders, including type 2 diabetes, ocular diseases, cancer, atherosclerosis, osteoporosis, rheumatoid arthritis, chronic kidney disorders, hypertension, cardiovascular diseases, and neurodegenerative disorders
The neuroprotective action of curcumin in AD is well known.
Curcumin protects against Aβ-mediated mitochondrial dysfunction and synaptic toxicity in SH-SY5Y human neuroblastoma cells [109].
However, the effects of curcumin in placebo-controlled, double-blinded clinical trials with AD pa- The therapeutic possibilities of curcumin were considered in various aging-related pathological disorders, including type 2 diabetes, ocular diseases, cancer, atherosclerosis, osteoporosis, rheumatoid arthritis, chronic kidney disorders, hypertension, cardiovascular diseases, and neurodegenerative disorders
The neuroprotective action of curcumin in AD is well known.
Curcumin protects against Aβ-mediated mitochondrial dysfunction and synaptic toxicity in SH-SY5Y human neuroblastoma cells
However, the effects of curcumin in placebo-controlled, double-blinded clinical trials with AD patients were moderately inadequate
Low solubility might be a potential cause.
Recently, several preclinical investigations have claimed the anti-AD potential of quercetin
Treatment with quercetin improved mitochondrial dysfunction by restoring mitochondrial membrane potential, which led to reduced ROS production, in addition to restoring ATP synthesis
Furthermore, this treatment significantly enhanced AMPK expression, decreased scattered senile plaque formation, and inhibited the impairment of learning and memory
More recently, in triple transgenic AD mice, the long-term oral administration of quercetin led to reduced tauopathy, astrogliosis, microgliosis, and β-amyloidosis in the amygdala and hippocampus, which improved cognitive function and performance of learning and spatial memory function
Different phytochemicals and other chemicals used in mitochondrial-targeted AD treatments in preclinical and clinical studies are listed in Table
However, in human, flavonoids and polyphenols from Mediterranean diets have been shown antioxidant as well as anti-inflammatory activities in cardiovascular disease, type-2 diabetes mellitus, cancer prevention, and stroke
Fruits and vegetables which contains polyphenols have been modulated hyperphosphorylation of tau and Aβ aggregation in animal models of AD
Genistein, a soy isoflavonoid, has therapeutic implications in many aging-related mitochondrial dysfunctions in pathological conditions, including neuroinflammation, oxidative stress, and aggregation of Aβ in AD.
This therapeutic effect of genistein was attributed to its ability to improve function impairments induced by Aβ aggregates in mitochondrial dysfunctions
However, genistein pretreatment in a primary astrocyte culture prevented Aβ-mediated production of pro-inflammatory mediators
Recently, in a streptozotocin-induced rat model, a higher dose of genistein (150 mg/kg/day) was found to activate autophagy in the sporadic form of AD
Additionally, genistein treatment resulted in the complete degradation of tau hyperphosphorylation and Aβ proteins in the brain of mitochondrial dysfunction.
Currently, it has been innovated the designs in nanocomposites with genistein-loaded which has confirmed to develop the oral delivery system in addition to overcome the toxic effects isoflavonoid [117].
Plant polyphenols stimulate mitochondrial biogenesis and diminish mitochondrial dysfunction in AD
Resveratrol represses the activity of cAMP phosphodiesterases and augments cAMP via the cAMP/CaMK/AMPA activation pathway
Additionally, mitochondrial dynamics, biogenesis, and function have been activated by resveratrol via the activation of AMPK, protein kinase C epsilon (PKCε), along with the improvement in NAD + levels
In contrast, EGCG promoted the biogenesis of mitochondrial function in the AD model with Down's syndrome through the Sirt1/PGC-1α signaling pathway via the upregulation of TFAM and Nrf1, in addition to mtDNA content
Several flavones such as wogonin, quercetin, and baicalein improved the biogenesis of mitochondrial activities by enhancing the expression of Sirt1/AMPA/PGC-1α under in vitro and in vivo conditions
Extra virgin olive oil contains oleuropein, augments mtDNA along with the expression of PGC-1α, complex II and IV, controlled mitogenesis and mitochondrial biogenesis in AD, and diminishes oxidative stress
Therefore, pharmacological intervention via polyphenols has been anticipated as a promising therapeutic approach for mitochondrial dysfunction-associated neurodegenerative disorders.

Concluding Remarks and Future Directions
Although the prevalence of AD is increasing tremendously, there is still no specific therapeutic strategy for curing, slowing the progression, or prevention of AD
Mitochondrial dysfunction plays a crucial role in the pathogenesis of AD.
However, the elusive mechanisms of AD pathobiology further complicate treatment strategies.
From this perspective, ongoing research is dedicated to underscoring the precise pathomechanism of AD as well as exploring the possibility of alternative treatment strategies.
In light of the current discussion, pharmacological intervention via natural products, particularly phytochemicals, is a promising strategy to combat AD-associated pathological factors, including mitochondrial dysfunction.
Phytochemicals and other natural compounds can prevent mitochondrial dysfunction by regulating several signaling pathways, including those associated with cellular antioxidant defense, anti-inflammation, autophagy and other quality control systems, mitochondrial biogenesis, and cell survival.
Although several phytochemicals have shown promise against AD, their clinical application remains elusive.
Since the therapeutic applications of many phytochemicals are limited owing to their poor pharmacokinetic properties, strategies such as nanoparticle synthesis may potentially improve their drug-likeness.
Moreover, not enough clinical evidence is available compared to the preclinical data.
Therefore, further human trials are necessary to translate the existing findings into clinical use.
Understanding the advanced pathobiology of AD and the pharmacological mechanism of phytochemical-based therapy may offer an emerging novel neuroprotective approach for AD in the future.



Figure 1 .
Figure 1.
Mitochondrial dysfunction and oxidative stress in neurons lead to the development of AD.
Typically, ROS are produced via numerous mechanisms such as ER stress, mitochondrial dysfunction, neuroinflammation, and excitotoxicity.
Excessive ROS generation leads to oxi-dative stress (OS), which is responsible for mitochondrial dysfunction.
OS prevents the deg-radation of protein molecules and impairs the clearance of misfolded proteins, which subse-quently leads to protein aggregation causing neuronal death and AD.


Antioxidants 2021, 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW 5 of 20



Figure 2 .
Figure 2. Mitochondrial dysfunction in AD pathogenesis.
Aβ and Tau initiate mitochondrial dysfunctions that can result in the modulation of several factors.
ROS is generated, which causes lipid peroxidation and DNA damage to initiate apoptosis.
Damaged mitochondria demonstrate a decrease in mitochondrial membrane potential (ΔΨm) as a result of the activation of mitochondrial permeability transition pores (mPTPs), which release cytochrome c and apoptosis-inducing factor (AIF), and consequently, initiate apoptosis pathway.
Aβ and pTau improve mitochondrial fission and mitophagy.



Figure 2 .
Figure 2. Mitochondrial dysfunction in AD pathogenesis.
Aβ and Tau initiate mitochondrial dysfunctions that can result in the modulation of several factors.
ROS is generated, which causes lipid peroxidation and DNA damage to initiate apoptosis.
Damaged mitochondria demonstrate a decrease in mitochondrial membrane potential (∆Ψm) as a result of the activation of mitochondrial permeability transition pores (mPTPs), which release cytochrome c and apoptosis-inducing factor (AIF), and consequently, initiate apoptosis pathway.
Aβ and pTau improve mitochondrial fission and mitophagy.



Antioxidants 2021 , 20 Figure 3 .
Figure 3. Phytochemicals modulate AD pathogenesis.
Phytochemicals stimulate α-secretase activity or may hinder βsecretase activity that inhibits toxic oligomer production.
Polyphenols and other compounds modify Aβ aggregates and convert them into nontoxic oligomers.
Some phytochemicals inactivate mTOR and initiate the autophagy pathway.
Polyphenols and other compounds prevent tau hyperphosphorylation and convert tau aggregates into nontoxic aggregates.



Figure 3 .
Figure 3. Phytochemicals modulate AD pathogenesis.
Phytochemicals stimulate α-secretase activity or may hinder βsecretase activity that inhibits toxic oligomer production.
Polyphenols and other compounds modify Aβ aggregates and convert them into nontoxic oligomers.
Some phytochemicals inactivate mTOR and initiate the autophagy pathway.
Polyphenols and other compounds prevent tau hyperphosphorylation and convert tau aggregates into nontoxic aggregates.


Antioxidants 2021, 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW 11 of 20



Figure 4 .
Figure 4. Emerging potential therapeutic targets of phytochemicals in mitochondrial dysfunction and AD pathogenesis.
Abnormal APP is proteolyticlly cleaved by β-as well as γ-secretase leading to the accumulation of extracellular amyloidβ (Aβ).
Deficient clearance of Aβ or Aβ production increases aggregation, leading to the accumulation of a diversity of Aβ assemblies.
Accumulation of Aβ directly interrelates with mitochondria as well as ROS generation with different intracellular pathways.
These oxidative stress reactions lead to the impairment of neuronal synapses and dendrite function with multifactorial mechanisms, in addition to neurological degeneration and dysregulation of synaptic function in the regions of the brain implicated in learning and memory impairment in AD.
Additionally, Aβ aggregates are degraded by autophagy via the stimulatory action of phytochemicals.



Figure 4 .
Figure 4. Emerging potential therapeutic targets of phytochemicals in mitochondrial dysfunction and AD pathogenesis.
Abnormal APP is proteolyticlly cleaved by βas well as γ-secretase leading to the accumulation of extracellular amyloid-β (Aβ).
Deficient clearance of Aβ or Aβ production increases aggregation, leading to the accumulation of a diversity of Aβ assemblies.
Accumulation of Aβ directly interrelates with mitochondria as well as ROS generation with different intracellular pathways.
These oxidative stress reactions lead to the impairment of neuronal synapses and dendrite function with multifactorial mechanisms, in addition to neurological degeneration and dysregulation of synaptic function in the regions of the brain implicated in learning and memory impairment in AD.
Additionally, Aβ aggregates are degraded by autophagy via the stimulatory action of phytochemicals.



Table 1 .
Different phytochemicals mitigating mitochondrial dysfunctions in AD pathology.



Table 2 .
Phytochemicals and other chemicals used for mitochondrial-targeted therapies in AD models in preclinical and clinical studies.



Table 2 .
Cont.