Heatwaves, hospitalizations for Alzheimer's disease, and postdischarge deaths: A population-based cohort study
Background: Available data on the effects of heatwaves on hospitalizations and postdischarge status of Alzheimer's disease patients are very scarce.
We used data from a retrospective cohort study which included Alzheimer's disease patients who were hospitalized from 1 st January 2005 to 31 st December 2013 in Brisbane, Australia, and died within two months after they were discharged.
A time-stratified casecrossover design using conditional logistic regression was employed to quantify the effects of heatwaves on hospitalizations and postdischarge deaths due to Alzheimer's disease.
A case-only design was used to assess the modification effects of age, sex, and community-level vegetation and Socio-Economic Indexes for Areas (SEIFA) on heatwave effects.
Results: There were 907 hospitalizations in the study period, and 307 patients died within two months after discharge.
Hospitalizations and postdischarge deaths due to Alzheimer's disease increased by 51% (95% confidence interval (CI): 2%, 126%) and 269% (95% CI: 76%, 665%), respectively, during middle-intensity heatwaves (i.e., 95 th percentile & ≥2 days).
The magnitude of heatwave effect on postdischarge deaths increased dramatically when heatwave intensity increased from 95 th percentile to 97 th percentile.
People who lived in communities with low-level vegetation were more vulnerable to heatwave effect on hospitalizations for Alzheimer's disease than those who lived in communities with high-level vegetation (relative risk: 3.05, 95% CI: 1.16, 7.98).
Heatwaves increased the risk of hospitalizations for those living with Alzheimer's disease, and increased the risk of postdischarge deaths of Alzheimer's disease patients.
Increasing urban greenness may ease heat-related Alzheimer's disease burden.

Introduction
Neurological disorders were the leading cause group of disability-adjusted life years (DALYs) in 2015 globally, and Alzheimer's disease and other dementias were one of the most prevalent neurological disorders
Australia bore a considerable burden of neurological disorders, and its all-age DALYs due to neurological disorders increased by 27.6% from 1990 to 2015
With the fast pace of population ageing in developed countries, Alzheimer's disease becomes a great public health concern, posing a massive burden to patients as well as their care-givers.
The etiology of Alzheimer's disease remains largely unclear, and there is no cure for this disease to date, although some medications ease the symptoms.
Understanding the genetic and environmental risk factors of Alzheimer's disease
Zanobetti and colleagues observed that, in 135 US cities, people with preexisting Alzheimer's disease were more likely to die during extremely hot days compared with those who did not have Alzheimer's disease
These prior studies motivated us to examine the effects of heatwaves on hospital admissions for Alzheimer's disease and the postdischarge deaths.
The hypotheses of the present study are that (1) heatwaves may exacerbate the symptoms of Alzheimer's disease
A population's vulnerability to heatwaves is largely determined by three aspects: their exposure level, their sensitivity, and their adaptive capacity.
For example, elderly people have been widely reported to be most sensitive to heatwave impact compared with younger groups
There is also mounting evidence documenting that urban vegetation may protect people from the adverse impact of high temperature
Understanding whether increased urban vegetation can help residents better adapt to heatwave impact is crucial for developing public health strategies for dealing with heatwaves, especially in light of the fact that climate change will increase the frequency, intensity, and duration of heatwaves in the future
The effects of heatwaves on hospitalizations and deaths have been assessed in prior studies using various analytical approaches
In this study, we used a case-crossover design with conditional logistic regression to analyze data from a population-based retrospective cohort study and quantify the effects of heatwaves on hospitalizations and postdischarge deaths due to Alzheimer's disease in Brisbane, Australia.
Further, we assessed whether individual-level (age and sex) and communitylevel characteristics (community vegetation and socioeconomic status) modified the effects of heatwaves on hospitalizations and postdischarge deaths due to Alzheimer's disease.

Methods

Data collection
This retrospective cohort included people who were hospitalized for Alzheimer's disease in public or private hospitals in Brisbane, Australia, from 1 st January 2005 to 31 st December 2013 and died within two months after they were discharged from hospitals.
We chose two months as the cut-off date for death to make sure that the cause-of-death was exactly the same as the cause of their final hospitalization (i.e.
Alzheimer's disease).
Firstly, individuals who were hospitalized for Alzheimer's disease were identified from the database of Queensland Hospital Admitted Patient Data Collection (QHAPDC) (
Information on the individual reference number, along with the admission date, the discharge date, age, sex and postcode of residential suburb of each patient was extracted.
The reference number of each patient was then used to identify individuals who died within two months after they were discharged from hospitals with Alzheimer's disease as the fundamental death cause from the Registrar General Death Database (RGDD).
Data on the community-level characteristics including Socioeconomic Indexes for Areas (SEIFA) (indicator of socioeconomic level) and normalized difference vegetation index (NDVI) (indicator of community vegetation) were obtained from Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS, 2012) and Australian Bureau of Meteorology, respectively.
SEIFA consists of four domains, including Index of Advantage/Disadvantage, Index of Disadvantage, Index of Economic Resources, and Index of Education and Occupation.
A higher score of each domain indicates a better socioeconomic status (i.e., more advantaged, less disadvantaged, better income, or better education and occupation).
NDVI data were derived from satellite data, and the data were originated from the Advanced Very High Resolution Radiometer (AVHRR) instruments on board the US National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) series of satellites.
The data were initially processed onto a 0.01*0.01
degree grid and then averaged to a 0.05*0.05
degree grid.
The data included NDVI values for four seasons, and we used the NDVI value for summer as heatwaves occurred in summer.
As the death data in this study ended in February 2014, we obtained daily data on meteorological variables, including maximum and minimum temperatures, and relative humidity from 1 st January 2005 to 28 th February 2014 from Australian Bureau of Meteorology.
The meteorological data were originally collected from two monitoring stations (i.e., Brisbane station, and Brisbane Aero station), and we averaged the values of the two stations to get the value for Brisbane.
Mean temperature was calculated by averaging the values of maximum temperature and minimum temperature as our prior study found that this calculation approach is suitable for Brisbane
Daily data on air pollutants for the same time period, including particulate matter ≤10 µm (PM 10 ) (µg/m 3 ) and nitrogen dioxide (NO 2 ) were provided by Queensland Department of Environment and Heritage Protection.
The detailed description on data collection for air pollutants (e.g., monitoring stations) can be found in our previous paper
The ethics approval was granted by the Queensland University of Technology Human Research Ethics Committee before the data collection was conducted.

Heatwave definition
We incorporated intensity and duration to define heatwaves in this study.
Our recent study has found that heatwaves lasting for two consecutive days were long enough to trigger an increase in hospitalizations, and heatwaves of different intensities corresponded to different health impacts
Hence, we used 90 th , 95 th and 97 th percentiles of daily mean temperature from 1 st January 2005 to 28 th February 2014 to define heatwaves.
Three heatwave definitions were adopted in this study: 2 days & 90 th percentile, 2 days & 95 th percentile, and 2 days & 97 th percentile.

Data analysis
To quantify the effects of heatwaves on hospitalizations and postdischarge deaths due to Alzheimer's disease, we used case-crossover design with conditional logistic regression.
To examine whether individual-and community-level characteristics modified the effects of heatwaves on hospitalizations and postdischarge deaths due to Alzheimer's disease, we used case-only design.
Case-crossover design has been widely used to quantify the health effects of environmental hazards (e.g., air pollution)
In a case-crossover study, cases serve as their own controls to avoid confounding by individual characteristics (e.g., age and sex).
In the present study, conditional logistic regression was used in the case-crossover design to examine the effect of heatwaves in the same Alzheimer's disease patient/death during the highrisk period and a specific period before it.
Only those strata that contain both heatwave and nonheatwave days can directly inform the heatwave effect parameter, and thus by construction all of the strata that contribute to inference of the main exposure were from the hottest months of the year.
Air pollutants (PM 10 and NO 2 ) and relative humidity were controlled for in the model.
We defined the referent days as the same day of week in the same month as the case
As the health effects of heatwaves normally occur not just on the day of exposure but also on the next few days
We used a separate model for each lag and also used a distributed lag model for all lags.
Case-only design was originally used in genetic epidemiology, and then it was used to assess the modification effects of individual characteristics on health effects of weather
The underlying idea behind this in a heatwave study is that if a characteristic (e.g., male sex) makes people more vulnerable to heatwaves, a greater proportion of people who were hospitalized or died during heatwave days would have this characteristic, compared with nonheatwave days
Our prior study has used this approach to assess the modification effects of age, sex and SEIFA on the effect of heatwaves on infants' hospitalizations
Logistic regression with the individual-and community-level characteristics as the outcome variables was used in the case-only study.
The age variable was converted into a binary variable (<65 years and ≥ 65 years).
The 1 st and 3 rd quartiles of four SEIFA domains and summer NDVI values were identified and used to covert these variables into three-category variables.
Relative humidity was controlled for in the case-only analysis, and seasonality was also controlled for in the case-only analysis using an annual sine-cosine pair
The analysis of the case-crossover study was conducted in R (version 3.4.4),
and the analysis of the case-only study was conducted in SPSS (SPSS 23, IBM Corp., Armonk, NY, USA).

Results
There were 907 hospitalizations for Alzheimer's disease in Brisbane during the study period, and 307 patients died within two months after being discharged.
Table
Most of them were ≥ 65 years (93.3% in hospitalized patients and 98.4% in those who died), and all patients who died were ≥ 55 years.
The proportion of females (51.9%) was slightly greater than males (48.1%) in hospitalized patients, but in those who died, the proportion of females was much greater than males (58.0%
vs 42.0%).
Approximately 13% of the hospitalized patients and those who died lived in suburbs with high NDVI.
Roughly 50% of the hospitalized patients and those who died lived in suburbs with mid-level SEIFA, with high or low SEIFA level accounting for approximately 25%.
Table
Mean temperature ranged from 9.0 °C to 31.5 °C, and relative humidity ranged from 14.8% to 96.4%.
PM 10 ranged from 2.5 μg/m 3 to 960.0 μg/m 3 , and NO 2 ranged from 0.1 μg/m 3 to 29.7 μg/m 3 .
Figure
Figure
Additionally, the magnitude of the effect which occurred on the first three days increased dramatically when heatwave intensity increased from 95 th percentile to 97 th percentile.
Table

Discussion
This study suggested that intense heatwaves increased the risk of hospitalizations for Alzheimer's disease and may have accelerated the postdischarge deaths of Alzheimer's disease patients.
Under the heatwave definition of 95 th percentile for more than two days, we observed that people living in communities with low-level NDVI might be more vulnerable to the effect of heatwaves on hospitalizations for Alzheimer's disease compared with those living in communities with high-level NDVI.
Among those who died from Alzheimer's disease, the proportion of females was greater than the proportion of males, but no modification effect of age, sex or SEIFA on heatwave effects on hospitalizations and deaths due to Alzheimer's disease was observed.
The nature of Alzheimer's disease can be a risk factor for heatwave-related morbidity and mortality
This leads to a vicious circle for Alzheimer's disease patients during heatwave days.
Three biologically plausible mechanisms regarding the effect of heatwaves on Alzheimer's disease have been proposed in the existing literature.
Firstly, the medications that Alzheimer's patients used (e.g., neuroleptic use) change their thermoregulation capacity through pharmacologic effect on parasympathetic pathway
Secondly, hyperthermia during heatwave days may lead to a dopamine deficit in the brain of Alzheimer's disease patients
Thirdly, Alzheimer's disease patients may have less cognitive awareness of hostile environments and thus they have less capacity to respond to ambient high temperature due to their language impairment
Elderly people are the predominant group affected by Alzheimer's disease, and the effects of heatwaves on hospitalizations and postdischarge deaths due to Alzheimer's disease that we observed in this study imply that heatwaves may pose extra burden to caregivers of Alzheimer's disease patients.
In this study, we found that when heatwave intensity increased from 90 th percentile (mean temperature of 26.2 °C) to 95 th percentile (mean temperature of 27.1 °C), its effect on Alzheimer's hospitalizations and postdischarge deaths became significant.
During the days with mean temperature being 27.1 °C in our study period, the average value of maximum temperature was 31.2 °C.
A study in Madrid, Spain, found that maximum temperature of 34 °C was responsible for triggering emergency admissions of neurodegenerative diseases, which was higher than the threshold temperature in Brisbane
Surprisingly, in this study, we found that, when heatwave intensity increased from 95 th percentile to 97 th percentile, its effect on hospitalizations from Alzheimer's disease became insignificant, but its effect on postdischarge deaths kept increasing substantially.
We postulated that, during highly intense heatwave days (e.g., 97 th percentile), Alzheimer's patients might be better protected (e.g., stay in air conditioned rooms), but for severe Alzheimer's patients who were discharged from hospitals, heat adaptive actions appeared to be less effective.
The significant effects of heatwaves on hospitalizations and postdischarge deaths due to Alzheimer's disease that we observed in this study may remind local authorities that elderly people with pre-existing neurological disorders (e.g.
Alzheimer's disease) need consideration in the development of future heat adaptation plans.
No modification effect of age or sex on the effect of heatwaves on Alzheimer's disease was observed in this study, but we found that the proportion of females in the decedents was greater than the proportion of males.
It has been reported that females have a higher risk of developing Alzheimer's disease pathology compared with males, although the reasons for this sex difference remain unclear
The simultaneous trends of urbanization, climate change, and population ageing will very likely increase heat-related disease burden in elderly people of urban cities.
Urban greenness has been increasingly reported as an important built environment factor in built environments to decrease morbidity and mortality
This may be through improving air quality, reducing noise, and increasing community heat adaptive capacity
In this study, under the heatwave definition of 95 th percentile for more than two days, we found that people living in communities with lowest level of NDVI might be more vulnerable to heatwaves compared with those living in communities with highest level of NDVI, implying that increasing urban vegetation in Brisbane may ease heat-related health burden.
Chen et al. have modelled the health benefit of increasing urban vegetation coverage and reported that 5% to 28% of heat-related mortality could be reduced by doubling the vegetation coverage of Melbourne, Australia
Similar findings have also been observed in Soul, Korea
As heat adaptation resources are limited and its allocation needs to be done with wisdom, future studies should assess the cost-effectiveness of programs on increasing urban vegetation and developing optimal urban vegetation plans to improve public health
Our results are in contrast to a prior study in Brisbane which assessed the community-level predictors of heat-related morbidity and found that low income was associated with higher heatrelated morbidity
We did not observe a significant modification effect of SEIFA on the health effects of heatwaves in this study.
This difference might be partially due to different community-level indicators being used.
We also did not observe the modification effects of community-level occupation and education on health effects of heatwaves.
Previous studies have found mixed results when examining education effects on heat vulnerability at the community level
Educational attainment is not usually recorded in the hospital admission database in Australia, restricting our ability to explore whether individual-level educational attainment modified the health effects of heatwaves.
This study, to our knowledge, is the first attempt to examine the effects of heatwaves on hospitalizations and postdischarge deaths due to Alzheimer's disease using retrospective cohort data.
Several limitations should be acknowledged.
Firstly, the absence of individual-level income, occupation and educational attainment data prevented us from assessing the possible modification effects of these factors on the health effects of heatwaves.
Secondly, O 3 and PM 2.5 may be associated with the hospitalizations for Alzheimer's diseases
Thirdly, the spatial resolution of the NDVI data may not have been fine enough (ideally 1km*1km), although this was the best-resolution data that we could access.
Fourthly, this is a one-city study, and generalizing the findings to other cities needs to be done with caution.
Fifthly, those deaths which occurred during hospitalizations were not included in this study due to lack of power.
Finally, this study used a few heatwave definitions, and generalizing the findings of this study to very extreme heatwaves (e.g., 99.5 th percentile) needs to be done with caution.

Conclusion
Our study suggests that heatwaves increased the risk of hospitalizations for those living with Alzheimer's disease, and increased the risk of postdischarge deaths of Alzheimer's disease patients.
In the face of more intense, more frequent, and longer-lasting heatwaves in the future as the climate warms, public health officials and caregivers of Alzheimer's disease patients need to be better prepared.
Increasing urban vegetation appeared to be an effective means for easing heat-related health burden and it can be taken into account in shaping optimal public health strategies for heat-adaptation.



Table 1 .
Individual-and community-level characteristics of patients with Alzheimer's disease



Table 2 .
Summary statistics for climatic factors and air pollutants in Brisbane, from 1 st January 2005 to 28 th February 2014



Table 3 .
Modification by individual-and community-level characteristics of heatwave impacts on hospitalizations and deaths due to Alzheimer's disease