Multivariate MR biomarkers better predict cognitive dysfunction in mouse models of Alzheimer's disease
To understand multifactorial conditions such as Alzheimer's disease (AD) we need brain signatures that predict the impact of multiple pathologies and their interactions.
To help uncover the relationships between pathology affected brain circuits and cognitive markers we have used mouse models that represent, at least in part, the complex interactions altered in AD, while being raised in uniform environments and with known genotype alterations.
In particular, we aimed to understand the relationship between vulnerable brain circuits and memory deficits measured in the Morris water maze, and we tested several predictive modeling approaches.
We used in vivo manganese enhanced MRI traditional voxel based analyses to reveal regional differences in volume (morphometry), signal intensity (activity), and magnetic susceptibility (iron deposition, demyelination).
These regions included hippocampus, olfactory areas, entorhinal cortex and cerebellum, as well as the frontal association area.
The properties of these regions, extracted from each of the imaging markers, were used to predict spatial memory.
We next used eigenanatomy, which reduces dimensionality to produce sets of regions that explain the variance in the data.
For each imaging marker, eigenanatomy revealed networks underpinning a range of cognitive

Introduction
A key question in Alzheimer's disease (AD) research is how pathology differentially and sequentially affects vulnerable brain circuits, thereby giving rise to behavioral changes.
Although critically important, detailed descriptions of interactions between genes and structural and functional phenotypes are poorly described.
However, these interactions dictate the vulnerability for cognitive dysfunction in the context of aging and AD related pathologies.
Investigating the circuits and mechanisms underlying cognitive dysfunction is important for understanding what triggers the switch from normal aging to AD, what predicts rates of disease progression, and how patient-specific therapeutic strategies may be developed
Therapies for neurodegeneration have been directed to individual targets, such as altered synaptic transmission, amyloid deposition, or abnormal tau phosphorylationall well-demonstrated pathologies in AD
Additional factors, such as cardio vascular status
Importantly, neuro-immunological mechanisms, interacting with systemic inflammatory mediators and obesity, are thought to also modulate AD pathology
Since attacking AD pathologies separately has not yet provided effective strategies for prevention or reduction of cognitive damage, we need models that provide an integrated view of how multiple variables and risk factors contribute to system wide dysfunction.
We currently lack the quantitative integrative models required to understand multifactorial conditions.
To help understand the causative links between the biological and cognitive substrates typical of AD, it is helpful to conceptualize the brain as a set of interacting regions forming a spatially distributed network
Structural networks integrate effects from changes occurring at different scales (synapse, cells, circuits), which in turn modulate the properties of functional networks.
Several large-scale networks have been mapped in the brain and characterized by distinct functional profiles, such as sensory perception, movement, attention and cognition
However, it is not well understood how brain sub-networks map to the cognitive domain.
Understanding these relationships in the normal brain, and their alterations in disease may inform on the mechanisms underlying mild cognitive impairment (MCI) or dementias such as AD
One strategy to help understand how circuits influence behavior is to link imaging to the clinical AD cognitive phenotypes.
The progressive loss of cognitive memory is commonly diagnosed using tests such as the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE)
Clinical populations of individuals diagnosed with AD have shown overlaps in the patterns of gray matter atrophy
Such differences may relate to population heterogeneity in terms of genetics, disease stage, or comorbidities.
An alternative hypothesis to explore AD etiology is based on selective vulnerability of cells and axonal pathways favoring disease propagation.
Imaging can provide in vivo biomarkers
To successfully link imaging to clinical phenotypes, we need to develop integrative models that explain the initiation, potentiation, and propagation of selective vulnerability in cells and networks that underlie AD processes, in relation to risk factors.
Neuroimaging approaches to map brain levels of behavioral descriptors have traditionally used voxel based statistical analyses (VBA) of deformation fields, structural and functional connectivity maps, vascular perfusion, or amyloid deposition and tau maps.
But statistical approaches that pursue a dichotomous strategy, and aim to separate data according to image features do not necessarily explain the behavioral changes, nor do they disclose the biological processes underlying them.
More recently predictive modeling approaches have been proposed to provide statistically relevant imaging correlates of memory changes spanning a continuum range, as observed in AD
In this study, we have used a mouse model of AD to develop such predictive approaches.
Mice provide tools for dissecting the contributions of genes on circuits and behavior.
In particular, they provide homogenous populations, and can be tightly controlled for genetic and environmental factors, thus simplifying the problem of mapping brain circuits responsible for behavior.
To establish and test a novel integrative predictive modeling approach one could choose among multiple mouse models.
Most traditional models replicate one of the AD hallmarks (amyloid plaques, or tau tangles), but do not fully reflect the complex biology of AD.
These transgenic mice express mutated APP
However, humans do not overexpress APP or PSEN1 to the same levels as in mice, and the role of beta amyloid deposition has not been fully clarified.
More recently, models which also express hyperphosphorylated tau have been generated
Still, most transgenic models fail to replicate other phenotypes seen in human AD, including neurodegeneration
Models of late onset, or sporadic AD are based on the genetic risk conferred by the presence of APOE4 alleles
These models, while very promising in their ability to help us understand the etiology and progression of AD, require long times to express phenotypes, including behavioral deficits.
None of these models addresses the differences between the mouse and the human innate immune systems, and the potentially important role of microglia in the development of AD
For example the nitric oxide levels produced by immune activation of the NOS2 gene mouse are much higher than in humans
In the APPSwDI +/+ /mNos2 -/-(CVN-AD) strain
In conjunction with the Swedish, Dutch and Iowa mutations, this promotes an AD-like background required for studying the underlying mechanisms of pathological regional vulnerability.
CVN-AD mice replicate multiple AD pathologies, including amyloid and tau deposition, neuronal loss, altered microglial activity with typical AD-like inflammatory patterns and deficits in memory and learning
The appearance of cognitive deficits with aging in this strain mimics processes in humans with AD and can be assessed using the Morris water maze test.
This behavioral test is commonly used to quantify the loss of spatial learning and memory in animal models of aging and AD
To map behavioral changes to specific brain regions and networks we have used in vivo manganese enhanced MRI (MEMRI).
Manganese ions (Mn 2+ ) are paramagnetic and induce T1 shortening
Mn 2+ has also been used to characterize trans-synaptic connectivity and axonal transport properties in rodents
Importantly, Mn 2+ enters neural cells via voltage gated calcium channels and vesicular reuptake, presenting an alternative for task based fMRI in rodents
These strategies to characterize brain structure and function in CVN-AD mice in relation to age matched controls can identify vulnerable brain circuits responsible for behaviors typical of AD.
To identify vulnerable regions and networks that predict deficits in memory and learning, we used an integrative approach that was not linked to a single identified neuropathological mechanism, but was reflective of multiple concomitant factors.
We evaluated how traditional mass-univariate analyses can predict behavior dysfunction, and followed with a multivariate approach involving dimensionality reduction.
Eigenanatomy, a sparse dimensionality reduction method, was incorporated to extract brain regions responsible for changes in morphometry, signal intensity due to Mn 2+ uptake (reflective of brain activity), and magnetic susceptibility (reflective of altered iron homeostasis and conducive to oxidative stress and inflammation)
However, these methods analyzed individual biomarkers separately.
We have employed both a data-driven as well as a hypothesis-driven approach to associate imaging phenotypes with behavioral markers for cognitive status and to identify circuits vulnerable to AD like pathology.
Eigenanatomy produced candidate regions and circuits, and we selected regions that appeared important based on one or more biomarkers, and confirmed by previous studies as relevant to AD.
To predict cognitive dysfunction based on in vivo multivariate imaging markers we used sparse canonical correlation analysis (SCCA)
SCCA selects regions so to maximize correlation among imaging and cognitive measures, in a supervised approach.
The result is a network of regions that underlie changes in cognition, incorporated in a multivariate analysis.
Our results provide insight into the relationships between structural networks and cognitive function in animal models of AD, supporting the value of multivariate approaches for humans with AD.

Materials and Methods
To test the hypothesis that we can identify vulnerable brain circuits involved in behaviors where aged mouse models for Alzheimer's disease (AD) differ relative to their age matched controls, we used in vivo multivariate magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and the Morris water maze test for spatial memory.
Our strategy examined each biomarker at a time, as well as an integrative predictive modeling framework.

Animals
The study was conducted under protocols approved by the Duke IACUC.
CVN-AD (APPSwDI/mNos2 -/-) (11 mice) and mNos2 -/-controls (13 mice), aged 75. 9 ± 4.4 weeks were handled and acclimated to water for 5 days.
To contrast AD like phenotypes in CVN-AD mice we compared them to mNos2 -/-mice, which we found to perform similarly to WT mice
Mice were then implanted with Alzet 1007D minipumps (Durect Corp, Cupertino, CA), containing 100 μl of 64 μm/μl MnCl 2 *4(H 2 O) (Sigma Aldrich, St Louis, MO), in 100 mmol bicine (Sigma-Aldrich, St Louis, MO).
Animals were acclimated for 3 days following pump implantation, before behavioral testing.
A summary of the experimental design is shown in Fig.

Behavioral Testing
To test spatial memory which declines in AD, we used the hidden platform Morris water maze.
For 5 days, mice received 4 trials a day (of maximum 60 s each), in trial pairs (60 s between trials) separated by 60 min intervals.
Probe trials were run 60 minutes after the last trial on days 3 and 5. Swim time and distance were measured using Ethovision (Noldus Information Technology, Blacksburg, VA).
Statistical analysis used SPSS (IBM, Armonk, NY), and included a repeated measure ANOVA, followed by Bonferroni corrected posthoc tests.
A p-value < 0.05 was considered significant.

Imaging
In vivo imaging was done using a 7 T, 20-cm bore Bruker BioSpec 70/20 USR magnet (Bruker Biospin, Billerica, MA), interfaced to an Avance III console.
The scanner has actively shielded gradients with integrated shims.
The 198/114 mm outer/inner diameter insert gradient coil can supply 440 mT/m, at a slew rate of 3440 T/m/s, and rise time of 110 μs.
We used a quadrature radio frequency transmit-receive cryogenic coil.
Two protocols were used to image the mouse brain at 100 μm resolution.
To quantify morphometric changes and manganese uptake we used a T1-weighted (T1w) Rapid Imaging with Refocused Echoes (RARE) sequence with field of view (FOV) 2×2×1 cm, matrix 200×200×100, number of excitations (NEX) =2, BW =100 kHz, min echo time (TE) =10.3 ms, effective echo time TEeff=20.6
ms, repetition time TR =150 ms, echo spacing 10.3 ms, RARE partitions 4, acquired in 23 min.
To estimate quantitative susceptibility maps we used a multi echo gradient recalled echo (mGRE) with field of view (FOV) 1.92×1.92×0.9;
matrix 192×192×90, 8 echoes with spacing of 5.5 ms, number of excitation (NEX) =1, 1 st echo time (TE1) =3.9 ms; repetition time (TR) =100 ms, flip =30°, bandwidth (BW)=62.5 kHz, respiratory gated, acquired in ~30-40 mins.
To ensure reproducible positioning, mice were restrained in a cradle equipped with ear bars, and a nose cone for isoflurane delivery (1.5±1%).
Animals were monitored throughout the experiment, temperature and respiratory rate being maintained at physiological levels (37°C, 70-110/min) by circulating warm water under the cradle, and adjusting the anesthesia level.

Image Preprocessing
Images were bias field corrected
All brain images were rigidly aligned into the Waxholm space
The template was labeled with a set of 332 regions, symmetric for the left and right hemispheres
To estimate morphometric differences, we used the log-transformed Jacobian determinants of the deformation fields (logJAC), mapping individual brains to the average.
This enables comparisons with a symmetric distribution, with the same prior probability for shrinkage or expansion
We used the T1-weighted images, where the voxel intensity reflects Mn 2+ uptake, which happens at least partly through calcium channels, to provide estimates of neuronal activity independently of hemodynamic activity
Average T1-weighted manganese enhanced MRI (T1wMEMRI) voxel values for each mouse brain were normalized to a reference brain value.
We calculated quantitative susceptibility maps (QSM) sensitive to iron, amyloid accumulation, and myelin using STI Suite
Susceptibility values were directly used for comparison without referencing to any selected region of interest, which essentially sets the susceptibility reference to the mean susceptibility of the whole structure within the FOV.
STI Suite uses a Laplacian-based method to unwrap the phase, after which the background is eliminated using vSHARP
The corrected phase images were combined, weighting the two channels.
We used a twostep streaking artifact reduction regularized reconstruction (STAR-QSM)

Voxel Based Analysis
All three contrast images (log Jacobian, normalized T1-weighted RARE, and QSM) were mapped into the space of the minimum deformation template, and smoothed with a 200 μm kernel.
This kernel was selected to highlight the scale of features at which we expect to detect pathology-related differences across these MRI-based measurements.
The Statistical Parametric Mapping SPM toolbox, version 12

Eigenanatomy
We hypothesized that eigenanatomy
The method approximates an eigen decomposition of an image set with spatial basis functions (eigenanatomy vectors) that are unsigned, sparse, and anatomically clustered.
We employed the eigenanatomy vectors as anatomical and functional imaging predictors.
We leveraged the technique in two stages: first, to reduce the dimensionality in an unsupervised setting; second, to perform a supervised regression within the setting of cross-validation.
The goal of eigenanatomy is to identify sparse functions which approximate the eigenvectors (ν p = X T ν n and ν n = Xν p ) of the n × p image matrix X, where each row n represents the data for one subject, and has p entries (voxel values).
The method approximates X with i sparse singular vectors v i sp , treating the positive (v i sp +
) and negative components (v i sp -) separately, and imposes positivity constraints on both:
where γ is the sparseness parameter.
The weight on the L1 penalty is set to reach the desired sparseness and guarantees that only a subset of voxels is considered
The minimization uses a nonlinear conjugate gradient, with sparseness imposed through soft thresholding S(v, γ), which rejects clusters below a threshold.
The resulting pseudoeigenvectors are sparse, unsigned, and represent the input data (X) through weighted averages.
To estimate the generalization performance for our models we divided the data in training and testing groups (75%, and 25%), and we used a 4-fold cross-validation, as described in
We assigned data to training (n=18), and validation (n=6) partitions in a balanced way using caret (caret.r-forge.r-project.org/),
then evaluated the average root mean square error (RMSE) over the test partitions.
Dimensionality reduction was performed using the function sparseDecom in ANTsR (
for each of the imaging contrasts (logJac, T1wMEMRI, QSM), producing areas that have maximum covariance between subjects.
For each imaging contrast we used 2 eigenvectors, a sparsity threshold of 5%, and a min cluster size of 250 voxels, or 6 eigenvectors for all three imaging contrasts used in the multivariate approach.
These parameters were chosen to balance interpretability and anatomical specificity.
The choice of two vectors/contrast enable analogous comparisons between the VBA analyses (pos+neg clusters) and our sparse decomposition based approaches.
Clustered signal smaller than 250 voxels (roughly 0.25 mm 3 ) are difficult to interpret.
Furthermore, extended components (> 5% of the brain) are less specific and tend to converge towards the mean signal over the whole brain.
These eigenregions were projected against the training set to generate statistical models that predict swim distance at day 4.
The summary of the statistical models performance applied to the testing sets included the RMSE, Pearson correlation, adjusted R 2 and p value (considered significant at p<0.05).

Prior-Based Prediction Using Sparse Canonical Correlation (SCCAN)
We used an anatomically informed, prior-based approach to constrain the solution space, to test whether specific brain regions were associated with cognitive performance.
These regions were determined based on: 1) eigenanatomy results, producing a supervised decomposition, and 2) anatomical priors on regions known for their involvement in AD, and which are recognizable in mouse models.
These regions included the hippocampus, parasubiculum, and fornix
Each of these regions is likely to incur changes during training in the water maze.
These regions were used to initialize SCCAN
We hypothesized that we could identify brain networks associated with behaviors based on canonical correlation (CCA)
To find the linear projections of two random vectors, CCA maximizes the correlation between the two linear combinations of the variables in each data set.
Our datasets consist of imaging (X) and behavioral parameters (Y) for n subjects.
The imaging parameter is a large n × p multidimensional matrix, and the behavioral parameter is n × q; where p is the number of voxels in X for each subject, and q is the number of behavioral parameters in Y for each subject.
Due to the greater size of the imaging matrix compared to behavior, CCA becomes ineffective.
Instead sparse CCA has been used as a dimensionality reduction method to produce the solution vectors, x (p × 1) and y (q × 1), which act as weights on columns of X and Y
x*, y* = argmax
x, y
The x* solution vector is subjected to the "L 1 " norm, ||.|| 1 , producing non-zero entries below the chosen sparsity threshold
The gradient of the objective function in (Eq.2) is calculated with respect to x and y.
A nonlinear gradient descent optimizer is used to provide the solution vectors.
Additionally, a cluster threshold and a smoothness constraint are enforced to retain anatomically meaningful brain regions.
As a result, sparse CCA produces solution vectors x* and y*, dimensioned as subsets of variables that maximize the correlation between imaging and behavior.
Here we focused on a single vector to represent behavioral performance, i.e. swim distance at day 4 (SD4).
We used sparse canonical correlation (SCCAN) to perform a sparse regression between imaging and behavior.
where s is the desired sparseness, λ 1 a ridge penalty which alleviates the problem of multicollinearity amongst regression predictor variables, and λ 2 a smoothness penalty, and ∇ denotes the gradient operator.
This is solved through a projected gradient descent
We note that in recent approaches the L0 penalty, which guarantees that only a subset of voxels is considered for the model, has been replaced with the convex approximation given by an L1 penalty, which yields virtually identical results, in a robust approach to regression
The soft thresholding operator was used to update the sparse projection of the solution vectors at each step of the optimization.
We used SCCAN for a positively constrained optimization that finds projection vectors in the minimum deformation template space, which maximizes the relationship between image markers (for each of the three separate contrasts, and in combination) and swim distance at day 4.
The inputs for SCCAN included the training set for both imaging and swim distance (SD4) through the function sparseDecom2
Both the imaging and behavioral data were split into training and testing sets in a ratio of 75:25, which allowed for 18 variables/subjects for training and 6 for testing.
We chose the SD4 as the behavior to be predicted based on its robust ability to separate the groups.
The sparse canonical correlation was initialized from each of the a priori selected image regions (1 eigenvector), using a medium prior (0.5).
We used sparseDecom2 with 5% sparseness, 250 voxels cluster threshold, 15 iterations.
No sparsity constraints were enforced on behavior.
The projection vectors obtained from the training set model the relationship with behavior.
These models were then used to predict swim distance for the testing set.
To assess the quality of the predictive modelling approach we determined the relationship between the predicted and measured SD4.
We examined how the solution vectors from sparse CCA of different imaging contrasts performed as predictors on unseen behavioral data.
We aimed to identify brain regions with a reliable association between each imaging marker and behavior using sparseDecom2, with a sparseness value that selects a small, informative subset of voxels (250 voxels, and 5% sparsity).
Finally, the resulting eigenregions were used to fit a linear model to SD4.
Our modeling approach is summarized in Fig
The combined biomarkers modeling uses image concatenation in an easy extension of this approach.
We tested several models to predict behavior based on imaging biomarkers using a 4-fold cross validation scheme.
First, we examined how the clusters surviving false discovery correction (FDR) in the VBA in the three different imaging contrasts performed as predictors for behavioral data.
We compared the performance of these models with those generated from the sparse decomposition (SD) for each of the imaging contrasts.
Finally, we fused the information from all imaging contrasts in a behavior supervised sparse decomposition (SSD) that maximized the canonical correlation between imaging and swim distance.
This approach was used in a hypothesis generating mode throughout the whole brain to identify brain circuits responsible for AD like cognitive decline, as well as to test our hypotheses for regions expected to be involved in memory or motor function.
All prediction methods were executed using R (www.r-project.org) and the ANTsR package (
The compute times required for each fold in our optimization experiments ranged from 2 minutes (for 2 vectors, 5% sparsity) up to 2 hours and 22 minutes (for 50 eigenvectors, 5% sparsity), using a MacPro equipped with 12 cores, 2.7 GHz Xeon E3 processors, running 10.13.6 Mac OS Sierra.
FSLEyes (
We used a sodium borohydride method to stain for iron deposits.
We used a modified Gallyas silver staining method for white matter
We used the Abeta 700254 antibody from Invitrogen, the NeuN MAB377 antibody from Chemicon for neurons, GFAP 13-0300 antibody from Zymed for reactive astrocytes, and the CD11c MCA1369 antibody from AbDSerotec for activated microglia.

Results
To help uncover the relationship between cognition and the biological substrates underlying AD, experiments were carried out using a well-characterized mouse model of AD, to reduce genetic and environmental diversity.
Behavior and imaging data were subjected to univariate and multivariate analyses.
Spatial memory was examined through acquisition and probe trial performance in the Morris water maze (Fig.
Swim distance and swim time to the hidden platform declined across testing for both genotypes (Fig.
Significant genotype effects emerged on block trials 3-5, where swim distances decreased in the mNos2 -/-control mice relative to the CVN-AD strain (p≤0.050) (Fig.
Within genotype, swim distances decreased from trial 1 to trials 3-5 in mNos2 -/-control mice (p≤0.002),
whereas in CVN-AD animals this parameter only declined from trial 1 to 5 (p=0.005).
A similar relationship was observed for swim time (Fig.
Here, swim times were reduced significantly on trials 3 and 4 for the mNos2 -/- compared to CVN-AD animals (p≤0.025).
Within genotype, swim times in mNos2 -/- animals declined from trial 1 to trials 3-5 (p<0.001).
By comparison, in CVN-AD mice swim time was decreased only from trial 1 to 5 (p=0.001).
Analysis of learning performance on the probe trials for swim distance and swim time further demonstrated that the CVN-AD mice were deficient in this task (Fig.
On day 3 mNos2 -/-control mice swam over longer distances in the target northeast (NE) quadrant, whereas CVNAD mice had not made this distinction (Fig.
Thus, on day 3 CVN-AD animals swam over shorter distances in the NE target (p=0.026)
and longer in the northwest (NW) and southwest quadrants than mNos2 -/-controls (p≤0.018) (Fig.
On probe day 5, mNos2 -/-animals maintained increased swim distances in the target quadrant, whereas in CVN-AD mice swim distances were longer in the NE and northwest than the other quadrants (Fig.
On this probe trial, the only genotype difference was in the northwest quadrant where CVN-AD mice swam over a longer distance than mNos2 -/- controls (p=0.003).
Similar relationships were observed with swim time (Fig.
With the probe trial on day 3, mNos2 -/-mice swam for longer times in the NE target quadrant (p=0.002) and shorter times in the northwest (p=0.004) with a trend for the southwest (p=0.064)
quadrant compared to the CVN-AD animals (Fig.
By day 5 probe trial, swim time remained augmented in the northwest quadrant for the CVN-AD mice (p=0.045) (Fig.
These results indicate that the CVN-AD mice had learned that the north quadrants contained the target, but they were unable to discriminate the NE from the NW quadrant.
Collectively, these results demonstrate that acquisition duration in the Morris water maze is prolonged in CVN-AD mice, which fail to identify the NE quadrant as the target zone in the probe trials.
We have also examined the three-way interaction between genotype, probe day and zone, and compared the zone activity within genotype and for each of the two probe days (Fig.
Bonferroni corrected a posteriori tests showed that mNOS2 -/-mice traveled more in the target NE quadrant compared to the SE (p<0.002)
quadrant, and showed a trend relative to the NW (p=0.069) and SW (p=0.077)
quadrant.
This difference was also observed in the controls on day 5, with a significant difference between the NE and NW quadrant (p<0.039) and marginal differences between the NE and the SE (p=0.079), but non-significant relative to the SW (p=0.262)
quadrant.
Hence, the distance moved in the four quadrants and marked preference for the NE quadrant was stable on day 5 compared to day 3 in the mNOS2 -/- mice.
By comparison, the CVN-AD animals failed to show significant preferences for the NE target quadrant on the day 3 probe test compared to the other quadrants and did travel more in the NW or SW quadrants, although these differences were not statistically significant.
On day 5 probe testing the CVN-AD mice increased the distance in the NE quadrant compared to that measured on day 3 (p<0.058),
however, this still did not produce a significant difference between the NE and the remaining quadrants.
Hence, compared to the mNOS2 -/-mice, the CVN-AD animals showed reduced preference for the NE quadrant on day 3 (p<0.026),
and increased preferences for the NW (p<0.003) and SW (p<0.018)
quadrants compared to the mNOS2 -/-animals.
By probe day 5, the increase observed in the NE quadrant by the CVN-AD mice made that activity equivalent to that observed in the mNOS2 -/-animals for that quadrant on the same day.
Although the CVN-AD mice continued to travel more in the adjacent NW quadrant (p<0.003)
compared to the mNOS2 -/- mice on day 5, no differences were detected between these two groups for the SE and SW quadrants.
For the probe swim time, Bonferroni corrected post-hoc tests found significant overall genotype differences within the NE target quadrant (p<0.008), and the adjacent NW quadrant (p<0.002);
however, no differences were found between the two southern quadrants.
Overall, while the mNOS2 -/-mice spent more time swimming in the NE zone compared to the NW (p<0.001),
SE (p<0.001) and SW (p<0.004)
quadrants, the CNV-AD mice failed to exhibit significant differences between the NE and remaining zones.
Although the within subjects contrast three-way interaction approached significance, it's important to note that the Bonferroni post-hoc comparisons did show that the genotypes had significant differences on the first probe test within the NE quadrant (p<0,002) with the CVN-AD mice spending less time in the target zone.
However, by the final probe test, no differences in the swim time existed between the two genotypes (p=0.305).
These results show that on test day 3 the CVN-AD mice are delayed in discriminating the target NE quadrant in the water maze, but by day 5, there is a marginal preference for the target quadrant, although this is not absolute as found in the mNOS2 -/-animals.
Since in the acquisition test genotype differences were most robust on trial 4 for swim distance, and provided a clear separation of the two genotypes, these data were used as the dependent variables for predictive modeling.
We have implemented two manganese enhanced MRI (MEMRI) protocols to characterize anatomy and memory function based on: 1) the log-jacobian of the deformation fields; 2) the T1-weighted signal intensity (normalized to the average value determined for a reference brain); and 3) quantitative susceptibility maps (QSM).
Representative images for one animal are shown in Fig.
We constructed minimum deformation templates (MDT) as study specific population atlases for each of these contrasts (Fig.
We sought brain networks for which changes in imaging markers explain changes in behavior.
Using regional and voxel based analyses (VBA) we identified significant changes in volume (Jacobian of deformation fields), manganese accumulation (normalized T1weighted signal intensity), and quantitative susceptibility maps (QSM).
All image contrasts identified differences in the olfactory areas, hippocampus, entorhinal cortex, and cerebellum, and the volume and T1wMEMRI analyses revealed a role for the retrosplenial cortex (Fig.
The reductions in volume in olfactory areas, thalamus, and hippocampus were accompanied by increased magnetic susceptibility, and lower manganese uptake (Fig.
Areas of the entorhinal cortex, hippocampus and subiculum showed decreased susceptibility.
Increases in susceptibility were noted in the caudate putamen and red nucleus.
T1wMEMRI signal intensity was overall lower on CVN-AD mice, and local differences between genotypes were significant at FDR 0.2 in the olfactory areas, motor cortex, primary somatosensory (S1) cortex, hypothalamus, and hippocampus, in particular the dentate gyrus and subiculum, and cerebellum.
A more extensive presentation of the regional results can be found in the Supplementary Tables.
Separate analyses for volume, T1wMEMRI signal and QSM were conducted using the clusters with significant VBA differences between the two groups to model the relationship with behavior (Fig.
Among the individual contrasts volume was ranked as the best predictor, followed by T1wMEMRI signal, then QSM.
The root mean square error (RMSE) ranged from 259±57 cm for clusters with significant atrophy, to 274±54 cm for clusters with decreased T1w signal, while the largest RMSE was obtained for the combined QSM clusters (290 ±51cm).
Table
We then used eigenanatomy to identify areas of the brain with maximum covariance between subjects, producing a sparse decomposition (SD) for each of the imaging contrasts.
The eigen regions based on volume revealed a network comprised of the frontal pole, septum, medial thalamus, retrosplenial and cingulate cortex, amygdala, the CA1 area of hippocampus, and fimbria.
In addition, we noted the involvement of sensory and motor cortices, and of the caudate putamen (Fig.
The T1wMEMRI signal intensity-based decomposition revealed a network including olfactory areas, the cingulate cortex, bed nucleus of stria terminalis, substantia innominata, amygdala and hippocampus (Fig.
The QSM based decomposition revealed involvement of the olfactory areas, septum, and cingulate cortex, the hippocampus, bed nucleus of stria terminalis, substantia innominata.
Iron rich regions were also involved such as the substantia nigra, caudate putamen and globus pallidus (Fig.
By adding elements of supervision through the sparse canonical correlation of imaging and behavior we observed additional areas relative to the networks identified before.
These included the fornix, dorsal thalamic nuclei, as well as the ventricles for the volume based decomposition (Fig.
Specific brain areas (eigen regions) found to be common in the results for all three contrasts (Fig.
included the olfactory, cingulate cortex and retrosplenial cortex, hippocampus, as well as the motor cortices, and septum.
The substantia innominata and bed nucleus of stria terminalis were common to T1wMEMRI, and QSM.
Using a supervised approach and the combined regions from volume, T1wMEMRI and QSM provided the lowest RMSE of 233.08 ±101.78 cm, a significant correlation of 0.94, explaining 88% of the variance in the swim distance.
The tightest confidence intervals and largest adjusted R2 were obtained using the multivariate supervised approach (Fig.
A nonparametric Kruskal Wallis test did not reveal a significant difference for the generalization performance estimated based on the 4 fold cross-validation (testing RMSE) for all models (p=0.09,
chi square=22.9,
df=15).
To evaluate the 16 models' performance, we compared their predictions with the measured values for the swim distances for the full data set.
The Kruskall-Wallis analyses were followed by posthoc Tukey Kramer tests to control for the family wise error rate.
Our results (Table
, chi=45.3,
df=15).
These analyses also indicated that amongst the individual imaging contrasts studied, volume was the best predictor for behavioral performance in the water maze, followed by QSM, and then T1wMEMRI.
To test whether structures about which we have previous hypotheses are predictive of behavioral performance in the Morris water maze, we selected regions that appeared significant in one or more of the single biomarker analyses.
These regions play a role in spatial memory and included the hippocampal formation, entorhinal cortex, parasubiculum, fornix, the primary and secondary motor cortex.
Fig.
The RMSE and significance of the models predicting relationships between imaging and behavior generally improved or were similar to the best predictor when the model included all three factors (Table
However, the single region analysis underperformed relative to the whole brain supervised sparse decomposition (SSD) analysis, with a maximum correlation of 0.76 for the parasubiculum in the combined analysis (explaining 56% of the variance), and 0.73 for its volume (explaining 51% of the variance).
This suggests that our animals model a complex, network-rather than a region-based disease.

Discussion
Neurodegenerative conditions such as AD arise from multifactorial pathological processes.
Integrative modeling is an important step towards better understanding this complex disease etiology, as well as predicting its trajectory.
Recent efforts to produce models for disease progression and response to treatment have shown promise in AD patients, and cognitively normal people at risk for AD
However, the genetic variability and differences in environmental conditions to which patients have been exposed make these studies difficult.
Animal models provide attractive tools for conceptually advancing our understanding of complex pathological processes, and factor to factor interactions.
Moreover, animal models are required for testing therapeutic interventions.
Hence we used a mouse model
Our results support previous findings on learning and memory deficits in mouse models of AD
Such deficits have been associated with the presence of amyloid
The impairment in the acquisition of the Morris water maze was evident for CVN-AD mice relative to mNos2 -/-controls when both swim distance and swim time were analyzed.
These deficiencies were verified in the probe trials where CVN-AD mice failed to discriminate the target quadrant from the other quadrants early in testing and from the northwest quadrant at the end of testing.
Our results thus confirmed that CVN-AD mice were impaired in spatial memory, in agreement to previous publications
Moreover, we identified swim distance during the 4 th day of trial test as a robust measure that allows clear differentiation of CVN-AD models from age matched mNos2 -/-controls.
To bridge between structural and functional imaging correlates, we used manganese, which modifies MRI signals and accumulates during behavioral training and testing.
Manganese increases image contrast due to differential uptake by various brain areas
We have used this property to more accurately estimate morphometric changes in vivo.
T1
shortening occurs as a consequence to intracellular manganese uptake, upon neuronal excitation/depolarization. Our use of MEMRI is equivalent to a spatial memory -based fMRI, with the limitation that it lacks the temporal resolution, and we showed that MEMRI can be used to map complex brain circuits involved in spatial memory.
The observed decrease in MEMRI signal after behavioral testing supports the loss of neuronal activity in memory circuits in old CVN-AD mice.
A loss of MEMRI signal has also been demonstrated in mouse models of tauopathy
In contrast, MEMRI signal was shown to increase 24 h after MnCl2 injection in young 5xFAD mice
This model of AD demonstrates abundant amyloid deposition generated from a high level of overexpression of mutated human amyloid precursor protein
In addition to the differences between mouse models, the differences between these studies results may be explained by two effects: 1) high neuronal activity was present in younger mouse models of AD, and later decreased with age, and/or 2) our study measured a functional effect related to maze training, specific to memory function and diminished in older models of AD.
The T1 weighted MEMRI (T1wMEMRI) images suggested decreased Mn movement into the cells in CVN-AD models, in particular in olfactory areas, the hippocampus, hypothalamus, motor cortex, and also the cerebellum.
The lower manganese uptake in CVN-AD mice was accompanied by atrophy in the olfactory areas, thalamus, and hippocampus, and was also associated with increased magnetic susceptibility.
However, a reduced brain activity was expected to cause susceptibility reduction.
Indeed, several areas of the hippocampus, entorhinal cortex and parasubiculum had lower susceptibility values in AD models.
A decrease in susceptibility can be attributed to reduced manganese uptake, and also to diamagnetic properties of amyloid, or myelin.
QSM increases did however overlap with areas of volume reduction, possibly associated with cellular and dendritic density reduction, leading to loss of anisotropy.
QSM increases were noted in the hippocampus, olfactory areas, and red nucleus.
VBA also identified QSM increased in iron rich areas, such as the globus pallidus and caudate putamen.
Alterations in iron metabolism or the presence of microbleeds may lead to the observed predominant susceptibility increases.
The increased susceptibility in areas such as the caudate putamen
Hippocampal QSM increase has been associated with amyloid pathology in humans, moreover it was predictive of faster cognitive deterioration
A qualitative evaluation of histopathological features from age matched CVN-AD and age matched control animals (Fig.
The histological markers included amyloid beta, iron staining (ferritin), myelin, as well as inflammatory changes.
Amyloid beta deposition would lead to decrease in QSM in the hippocampus, and was also seen in the subiculum, and entorhinal cortex.
However, our VBA results also identified QSM changes due to iron presence, in the hippocampus and in areas known to be rich in iron, such as the globus pallidus.
These resulted in increased QSM in CVN-AD models.
Reduction in myelination would lead to increased QSM, but the resolution of in vivo scan may not be sufficient to resolve such changes in small white matter tracts, however we observed such effects previously as well
QSM changes do however overlap with areas of volume reduction, possibly associated with cellular density reduction (NeuN), leading to loss of anisotropy.
Activated astrocytes and microglia may also result in microstructural changes, and possible damage to myelin.
VBA revealed that morphometric changes survived the highest stringency in thresholded statistical maps, relative to QSM and T1wMEMRI signal reflecting manganese uptake.
Significant changes in all three parameters were present in olfactory areas, septum, hippocampus in specific layers and the dentate gyrus, subiculum, and cerebellum.
Since mice perform a complex task during Morris water maze testing, which also involves swimming, it is not surprising to find that key regions realizing intentional motor control (including the cingulate cortex) are involved
Not only does this region have a role in consolidating object/place association memories
In primates, the cingulate cortex has been shown to have structural connections with limbic regions/temporal cortex, but also to supplementary motor areas, premotor as well as parts of the prefrontal cortex, and insula.
In summary, while the exact pathology underlying the observed changes remains unclear, these may be attributed to atrophy associated with neurodegeneration (or conversely, increases due to astrogliosis), to reduced manganese uptake and myelin loss; or to amyloid and abnormal iron deposition.
As shown previously for other amyloid based mouse models, we found enlarged volumes in some areas of the brain, particularly the somatosensory cortex, cerebellum, and the corpus callosum.
Such changes have been observed in multiple mouse models of AD including the TgCRND8
We used eigenanatomy
We then used regression in this reduced dimensionality space to identify associations with spatial memory.
The regularized sparse decomposition (SD) identified that the volume of the cingulate and motor cortex areas had good predictive value for spatial memory.
Additionally, the decomposition solutions based on T1wMEMRI signal revealed that lower activity in the limbic thalamus, in the motor, cingulate and entorhinal cortices, as well as in the globus pallidus, were all predictive of the behavioral performance.
Some of these areas were also present in the decomposition solutions based on susceptibility, which emphasized the role of the olfactory, motor, cingulate, and hippocampal areas.
While distinct regions were associated with behavior for different imaging parameters, a number of these regions were common between the three contrasts, and were overlapping with areas known to be involved in AD.
These involved a network including septum, hippocampus, cingulate, retrosplenial and motor cortices.
Our results also suggest a role for limbic thalamic nuclei, substantia innominata and amygdala.
While the eigenregions were more extensive than the clusters obtained from VBA, these were also likely to be involved in multiple behaviors, such in motor planning and execution of the task, besides spatial memory.
Motivated by such hypotheses we have integrated multivariate imaging biomarkers into a modeling framework to map brain circuits that predict performance in the water maze.
We selected regions identified as important in our previous analyses for one or more of the biomarkers, and with demonstrated involvement in AD.
We found that gray matter regions such as hippocampal [106], parasubiculum [107], entorhinal [108], retrosplenial [109] and motor cortices provided good predictions for spatial memory performance.
While our techniques were limited in resolution to 100 μm, we were able to identify the fornix volume, and QSM as predictors for spatial memory function.
Other white matter tracts such as the anterior commissure (connecting the temporal lobe structures), and corpus callosum (largely responsible for interhemispheric connectivity) may need to be investigated in future studies.
Such studies may help understand how disease propagation within brain networks leads to cognitive deterioration.
Finally, we assessed the value of individual and combined imaging biomarkers in predicting spatial memory for whole brain based analyses, and for selected regions which appeared as eigen solutions for one or more imaging markers and had demonstrated roles in AD.
We found that the combined supervised approach improved the prediction accuracy relative to single biomarkers, in agreement with
A limitation of our approach comes from the small sample size, a problem that is common to many preclinical studies.
This restricts us to using simpler models.
However, this is alleviated by the genetic similarity of mouse populations relative to clinical populations.
While in this study we demonstrated a promising approach for predictive modeling in mouse models of AD, future studies would benefit from larger samples.
Such studies may test other correlatives, and attempt to build genotype specific models.
Possible neurotoxic effects may limit manganese studies, in particular their applicability to longitudinal studies in animal models, and they are certainly not amenable to human studies.
To maximize contrast while reducing toxicity, we chose a small but continuous delivery method, via implanted mini-pumps, over a single injection
An additional consideration when using QSM in manganese dosed models of AD is the possibility of compound effects, e.g.
iron accumulation, which is likely to dominate in effect size, and may induce oxidative tissue damage
However, our technique produced QSM with exquisite contrast by exploiting the MR phase, in addition to providing morphometry and T1wMEMRI signal information.
This approach holds promise as a more direct measure of functional information based on imaging
Since imaging biomarkers may indicate changes before overt cognitive decline
It would be interesting to include vascular biomarkers, which may constitute early events in fronto-temporal dementia
Future studies may address predictions along a temporal scale, and give insight into the dynamics of interactions among pathological factors, in relation to disease propagation.
To the best of our knowledge this is the first application of sparse predictive modeling integrating multivariate biomarkers for structure and brain activity, to map circuits responsible for behavioral dysfunction in models of AD.
Mapping cognition to brain circuits will increasingly rely on such multivariate statistical algorithms involving clustering, module detection, or other dimensionality reduction approaches, which offer increased power to identify signatures of neurodegenerative disease.
The success of such translational approaches will allow testing mechanistic hypotheses using mouse models and help develop better models for complex diseases.
In conclusion, we show that MEMRI can both enhance contrast and thus contribute to the increased accuracy of volume measurements, as well as provide a tool for studying brain dysfunction in rodent models of neurological disorders.
Our approach synergized information from multivariate imaging and behavioral markers, allowing for observation of multifactorial biological processes and enabling future modeling of such factor-factor interactions, locally or as they spread over physical brain networks, to alter functional networks and ultimately cognition.
Our results demonstrated that integrative predictive modeling approaches may outperform any single one imaging modality, giving us the ability to map vulnerable brain circuits responsible for cognitive changes, including memory deficits.
This is in particular important for a multifactorial disease like AD, where the same regions are affected by multiple pathologies.
Moreover, such multivariate approaches hold promise to help discover mechanistic links between the structural and functional components of brain circuits that underlie cognitive dysfunction in AD.
Each animal was implanted with a MnCl 2 filled minipump on day 0 (d0), then acclimated for 3 days.
Behavior was assessed over 5 days (d3-d7) using the Morris Water Maze (MWM).
Subsequently mice were imaged using in vivo MRI.
We start with an image space representation for each of the subjects.
This is converted into a reduced dimensionality space, where we model behavior using weights for the sparse solution vectors.
Statistical t maps were thresholded using false discovery rate (q).
Regional properties identified areas of significant differences for (B) volume; (C) T1wMEMRI signal intensity normalized to total brain; (D) magnetic susceptibility (QSM).
Local atrophy was evident in the olfactory areas (Olf), septum (Spt), and dentate gyrus of the hippocampus (HcDG) in the CVN-AD model.
Manganese uptake was lower in these mice, with the exception for the septum/fornix.
Susceptibility was increased in the olfactory areas, caudate putamen (CPu), and dentate gyrus of hippocampus, but decreased in the CA1, entorhinal cortex (Ent), and subiculum (Sub).
(E) VBA identified regions were used for predicting behavior, based on regions with either positive or negative effects for volume, T1wMEMRI signal, and QSM.
For all contrasts, the 1 st row represents the networks identified by the sparse decomposition.
The 2 nd row represents the networks identified based on a behavior supervised decomposition.
The predictive modeling results for swim distance are shown together with the associated confidence intervals for each of the biomarkers, as well as for the combined approach (E).
Our results suggest the integrative approach has increased value when applied to a model of a complex, multifactorial disease such as AD.
FrA: frontal association cortex; M1/M2 primary and secondary cortices; CPu: caudate putamen; S1/S2 primary and secondary cortices; Amy: amygdala; Sub: subiculum; Ent: entorhinal cortex; V1: primary visual cortex; Olf: olfactory areas; A24 cingulate cortex, area 24; BNST: bed nucleus of stria terminalis; Hyp: hypothalamus; CeA: central amygdaloid nucleus; BLA: basolateral amygdala; Hc: hippocampus; Spt: septum; VP: ventral pallium; GP: globus pallidus; Hc:DG: hippocampal dentate gyrus; SN: susbtantia nigra.
Model performance comparison based on a whole brain unbiased analysis, showing the root mean square error (RMSE) between the predictions and the true values for the swim distance produced for the 16 models.
We note the good predictions for the parasubiculum, involved in spatial navigation.
included extracellular amyloid deposits, iron (ferritin), differential neuronal nuclei (NeuN) and myelin staining (Gallyas), as well as reactive astrocytes (GFAP) and activated microglia (CD11c).
Amyloid beta deposition would lead to decrease in QSM in the hippocampus, and was also seen in the subiculum, and entorhinal cortex.
However, our VBA results also identified QSM changes due to iron presence, in the hippocampus and in areas known to be rich in iron, such as the globus pallidus.
These resulted in increased QSM in CVN-AD models.
Reduction in myelination would lead to increased QSM, but the resolution of in vivo scan may not be sufficient to resolve such changes in small white matter tracts, however we observed such effects previously as well
QSM changes do however overlap with areas of volume reduction, possibly associated with cellular density reduction (NeuN), leading to loss of anisotropy.
The presence of reactive astrocytes and activated microglia may also result in microstructural changes, and possible damage to myelin.



Figure 1 .
Figure 1.
Experimental timeline.



Figure 2 .
Figure 2. Schematic of the modeling approach.



Figure 3 .
Figure 3. Main results for the acquisition performance and probe trial results (mean± SEM).
(A) Repeated measures ANOVA (RMANOVA) for swim distance during acquisition testing for the Morris water maze detected a significant within subjects main effect of time [F(4,88)=22.436,
p<0.001] and a significant time by genotype interaction [F(4,88)=2.451,
p=0.012]; the between subjects effect of genotype was significant also [F(1,22)=13.229,
p<0.001].
(B) RMANOVA for swim time during acquisition testing noted that the within subjects main effect of time [F(4,88)=26.706,
p<0.001], the time by genotype interaction [F(4,88)=2.667,
p=0.037], and the between subjects effect of genotype [F(1,22)=5.466,
p=0.029] were all significant.
N=13 mNos2-/mice and N=11 CVN-AD mice.
(C) For the probe trial RMANOVA differences in swim distance between groups within test day and maze zone identified a trend for the day by zone by genotype interaction [F(3,63)=2.241,
p=0.092].
The within subjects contrasts however revealed significant linear effects of zone [F(1,21)=11.924,
p<0.002) and cubic effects for zone by genotype interaction [F(1,21)=10.783,
p=0.004)].
While the test day, test day by genotype and test day by zone interactions were not significant, the three way test day by zone by genotype interaction was found to be significant by linear within subjects contracts [F(1,21)=4.292,
p<0.051].
Moreover, the between subjects effects for genotype alone were also significant [F(1,21)=17.441,
p<0.001].
(D) Similar effects were found for the probe trial with swim time where RMANOVA only found the main effect of zone [F(3,63)=11.74,
p<0.001] and the zone by genotype interaction [F(3,63)=5.79,
p=0.001] to be significant.
Within subjects contrasts for Zone [F(1,21)=16.117,
p<0.001], and zone by genotype interaction [F(1,21)=9.071,
p<0.001] were significant.
The three way test day by genotype by zone



Figure 4 .
Figure 4. T1-weighted RARE and mGRE images were acquired for 24 mice, and the mGRE was used to calculate quantitative susceptibility maps (QSM).Representative images from one mouse are shown in (A).
The control group was used to calculate minimum deformation templates (MDT) (B) for T1wMEMRI RARE and mGRE images, to produce the deformation maps (C), and MDT for QSM (D).



Figure 5 .
Figure 5. (A) Voxel-based analysis (VBA) identified genotype differences in all three biomarkers (volume, T1-weigted MEMRI signal, and susceptibility).



Figure 6 .
Figure 6.
Using volume (A), T1wMEMRI signal (B), QSM (C), or combination of the three biomarkers (D) as predictors we identified significant associations between eigen regions (red for volume, blue for T1wMEMRI and swim distance on day 4.



Figure 7 .
Figure 7.



Figure 8 :
Figure 8: Relative to single biomarkers, the combined set of three contrasts performed in general better or just as well as the best predictor, in terms of the ability to predict swim distance for regions selected because they were a priori expected to be involved in memory or motor function, and/or AD pathology.



Figure 9 :
Figure 9: Histopathological correlates of imaging biomarkers in CVN-AD mice


, PSAPP, and Arc [100], and are generally in contrast to the pathology commonly observed in AD patients.
AD is associated with cortical thinning and cortical volume loss [101].
However, heterogeneity has been demonstrated in human studies.
Increased volumes have been observed in APOE4 positive AD patients [102], particularly in early stages.
Whole brain, cortical, and hippocampal volume increases due to APP or PS1 transgenes have been also reported in humans and have been attributed to amyloid deposition [103], gliosis [104], increased extracellular space, cellular swelling in response to toxicity, or to a compensatory mechanism [105].


=9.071, p<0.001] were significant.
The three way test day by genotype by zone were found to approach significance [F(1,21)=3.093,
p<0.093).
Note that the control mice had a strong preference for the target quadrant, while this was less clear for CVNAD mice, as illustrated in text.
NE=northeast (target quadrant), NW=northwest, SE=southeast, SW=southwest.
Note, one mNos2-/-control was not tested on the probe trial day 5 due to a lesion.
N=12 mNos2-/-mice and N=11 CVN-AD mice; *p<0.05,
mNos2-/-versus CVN-



Table 1 .
Model performance comparison based on a whole brain unbiased analysis, showing the testing root mean square error of the predictions (RMSE); and the whole set based Pearson correlation (corr), associated p value, and the explained variance (adjusted R2).



Table 2 .
Model performance comparison based on a ROI prior initialized based analysis, showing the testing root mean square error of the predictions (RMSE); and the whole set based Pearson correlation (corr), associated p value, and the explained variance (adjusted R2).
Hc: hippocampus; PaS: parasubiculum; CEnt: caudal entorhinal cortex; fx: fornix; M1: primary motor cortex; M2: secondary motor cortex.