Neurodegeneration of Trigeminal Mesencephalic Neurons by the Tooth Loss Triggers the Progression of Alzheimer’s Disease in 3×Tg-AD Model Mice
Background: The mesencephalic trigeminal nucleus (Vmes) is not only anatomically adjacent to the locus coeruleus (LC) but is also tightly associated with the function of the LC.
The LC can be the first area in which Alzheimer's disease (AD) develops, although it is unclear how LC neuronal loss occurs.
Objective: We investigated whether neuronal death in the Vmes can be spread to adjacent LC in female triple transgenic (3×Tg)-AD mice, how amyloid-␤ (A␤) is involved in LC neuronal loss, and how this neurodegeneration affects cognitive function.
Methods: The molars of 3×Tg-AD mice were extracted, and the mice were reared for one week to 4 months.
Immunohistochemical analysis, and spatial learning/memory assessment using the Barnes maze were carried out.

INTRODUCTION
A great deal of research has been performed on Alzheimer's disease (AD) risk factors, and aging is commonly recognized as the strongest risk factor for AD.
AD is pathologically characterized by plaques containing aggregates of amyloid-␤ (A␤) peptides derived from amyloid-␤ protein precursor (A␤PP/APP), as well as by neurofibrillary tangles containing hyperphosphorylated tau.
Since there are currently no effective treatments for AD, many AD studies are shifting focus from the dementia stage to prevention at the mild cognitive impairment (MCI) or preclinical stage
Although many AD risk factors have been identified, it is still unclear what triggers AD progression, and causes the spread of neurodegeneration.
The locus coeruleus (LC) has been shown to be the first brain region in which AD develops
It has also been suggested that the decrease in LC volume due to aging is limited; thus, another factor is needed to reduce the volume of the LC.
Anatomically, LC is located adjacent to the mesencephalic trigeminal nucleus (Vmes) in the lateral part of the periaqueductal gray matter of the fourth ventricle, and LC and Vmes are affecting each other
Based on this notion, it is highly possible that neurodegeneration in Vmes can spread to the LC.
Previous studies have shown that the nerve endings of Vmes neurons are distributed in the periodontal ligament as well as muscle spindles of the masticatory muscles
Clinically, many cohort studies have demonstrated that poor oral health leading to tooth loss and periodontal diseases are major risk factors for the progression of cognitive impairment
It has been suggested that tooth loss has effects on the progressive development of dementia due to chronic inflammation caused by periodontitis
The previous issue of tooth loss has shown of how masticatory reduction, poor dental hygiene, and edentulism affect cognitive function.
However, these proposed mechanisms for the association between tooth loss and the central nervous system (CNS) are indirect, and the direct neurodegenerative pathway from Vmes to the hippocampus after tooth loss needs to be elucidated.
That is, it is not how the state of tooth loss affects the progression of AD, but how the neurodegeneration caused by tooth loss is involved in the progression of AD.
If tooth loss is associated with the onset of AD, the question arises as to why elderly but not young people develop AD when they lose their teeth.
In elderly individuals in the MCI stage, the amount of A␤ in the cerebrospinal fluid has already reached a plateau
Although major pathological changes are found in the cerebrum, A␤ accumulation occurs in the brainstem in even 2-month-old 3×Tg-AD mice
As the vulnerability of specific brain regions to A␤ deposition has been found in AD
Thus, the death of Vmes neurons with cytotoxic A␤ deposits due to aging may affect the progression of AD through the neurodegeneration of LC neurons.
To evaluate whether the neurodegeneration of Vmes neurons is the trigger for the progression of AD, we investigated whether neurodegeneration in the Vmes induced by tooth extraction can spread to the LC and even the hippocampus.
Additionally, we examined the neurodegeneration of Vmes neurons by tooth extraction may accelerate the progression from the predementia stage to the dementia-like stage in female 3×Tg-AD mice.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Animals
Female homozygous 3×Tg-AD mice harboring three AD-related genetic loci, human PS1 M146V , human APP swe , and human tau P301L
Food and water were available ad libitum, and animals were maintained under a 12 h : 12 h light-dark cycle.
The experiments were approved by the Committee for Animal Experiments of Kagoshima University (approval number: D17016).
Female C57BL/6 mice were used as wild-type controls.
For brain histology, we analyzed mice at 2, 4, and 7 months of age.
The mice were sacrificed 7, 14, and 30 days after tooth extraction.
For the behavior test, 4-, 5-, 6-, 7-, and 8-month-old mice with or without tooth extraction were used.
For tooth extraction, mice were deeply anesthetized with a combination anesthetic of medetomidine (0.15 mg/kg; Kobayashi Kako, Fukui, Japan), midazolam (2 mg/kg; Astellas Pharma, Tokyo, Japan), and butorphanol (2.5 mg/kg; Meiji Seika Pharma Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan)
All mice were sacrificed by deep anesthesia with sodium pentobarbital (75 mg/kg body weight) and transcardial perfused with of 10 ml of phosphatebuffered saline (PBS; pH 7.3), followed by 100 ml of 4% paraformaldehyde, 75% saturated picric acid, and 0.1 M Na 2 HPO 4 (adjusted to pH 7.0 with NaOH).
The brains were then removed and postfixed with the same fixative for 4 h at 24 • C.
After cryoprotection with 30% sucrose in PBS, the brainstems were cut on a freezing microtome, divided into 14 blocks containing six adjacent series of 50-m sections from the rostral side to the caudal side of the Vmes, and stored at 4 • C in PBS.

Surgery
For the tooth loss model, female 4-month-old 3×Tg-AD mice were anesthetized with a combination anesthetic as described above.
In the extraction group, the bilateral 6 maxillary molar teeth were extracted using a dental probe.
The mice in the sham group underwent the same general anesthesia and mouth opening without tooth extraction.
The animals were given powdered food (Rodent LabDiet 5L37, Nutrition International, Brentwood, MO, USA), and the weight of each animal was checked every month.

Immunohistochemistry
Immunohistochemistry was performed on freefloating mouse tissue sections.
The primary antibodies used in this study were as follows: mouse anti-A␤ (1 : 2000, 6E10; Covance, Princeton, NJ), rabbit anti-Piezo2 (1 : 1000, NBP1-7862, Novus Biologicals, Littleton, CO), rabbit anti-phosphorylated (p)-Tau (Ser396) (1 : 100, 44-752G, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA), mouse anti-A␤ 42 (1 : 2000; BC05, Fujifilm/Wako, Osaka, Japan), mouse anti-activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) (1 : 1000; 44C3a, Abcam, Cambridge, UK), mouse anti-tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) (1 : 1000; LNC1, Millipore, Bedford, MA), mouse anti-ionized calcium binding adaptor molecule 1 (Iba1) (1 : 1000, NCNP24, Fujifilm/Wako, Osaka, Japan), rabbit anti-caspase-3 (1 : 200, NB600-1235, Novus Biologicals), and rabbit anti-CD86 (1 : 200, BS-1035R, Bioss, MA).
For immunofluorescence, the sections were incubated overnight at 24 • C with primary antibodies in PBS containing 0.3% Triton X-100, 0.02% sodium azide, 0.12% lambda-carrageenan, and 1% donkey serum (PBS-XCD) and then for 4 h with 1 mg/ml Alexa Fluor 647-, 555-, and 488-conjugated goat anti-mouse or anti-rabbit antibody (1 : 1000, Thermo Fisher Scientific) in PBS-XCD.
All of the above incubations were performed at 24 • C and were followed by rinsing with PBS containing 0.3% Triton X-100 (PBS-X).
Some sections were incubated with NeuroTrace green (1 : 200, N21480, Thermo Fisher Scientific).
The sections were observed under a confocal scanning laser microscope (LSM700, Zeiss; Oberkochen, Germany) or a Nikon Eclipse E800M microscope (Nikon, Tokyo, Japan) equipped with a COMOS MP-102300A digital camera (Bio Tools Inc., Gunma, Japan).
For immunoperoxidase staining, the sections were incubated with 1% H 2 O 2 in PBS for 30 min, washed with PBS-X.
Then the sections were incubated with mouse anti-A␤ (1 : 2000, 6E10; Covance) overnight, biotinylated goat anti-mouse IgG (1 : 200; Vector Labs, Burlington, CA) in PBS-XCD for 3 h, and then avidin-biotin-peroxidase complex (1 : 100; elite variety, Vector) in PBS-X for 1 h.
Finally, sections were incubated with 0.02% diaminobenzidine tetrahydrochloride and 0.005% H 2 O 2 in 0.05 M Tris-HCl buffer (pH 7.6) for 10 min.
The sections were mounted on gelatin-coated glass slides and stained with 0.1% cresyl violet solution for 30 min, then observed under an Olympus BX51 microscope (Olympus, Tokyo, Japan) with a DP25 camera (Olympus) and cellSens software (Olympus).

Retrograde labeling
In three female 4-month-old 3×Tg-AD mice, a 2% fluorogold solution (FG; Fluorochrome, Englewood, CA) in 0.1 M cacodylate buffer, pH 7.3, was iontophoretically injected into the ipsilateral dorsal hippocampus through a glass micropipette.
After 7 days, mouse tissues were fixed as described above.
The sections were immunostained by incubating overnight at room temperature with rabbit anti-FG polyclonal primary antibody (1 : 1000; AB153, Chemicon, Temecula, CA) in PBS-X, followed by biotinylated goat anti-rabbit IgG (1 : 200; Vector Labs) in PBS-XCD for 3 h, and then avidin-biotinperoxidase complex (1 : 100) in PBS-XCD for 1 h.
Finally, the sections were incubated with 0.02% diaminobenzidine tetrahydrochloride and 0.005% H 2 O 2 in 0.05 M Tris-HCl buffer for 10 min, and counterstained with Nissl.
The sections were observed under an Olympus EX51 microscope (Olympus) equipped with an Olympus OP25 camera (Olympus).

Behavior test
For the assessment of spatial learning and memory, we used a Barnes maze with a diameter of 120 cm and 20 holes.
One of these holes was connected to a shelter in a desirably darkened and enclosed target box below the table, which allowed the mouse to escape from an aversive bright light stimulus (150 W)
For habituation to the test equipment, each mouse was carefully placed at the center of the table, and gently guided to the correct escape hole.
Next, the mouse was placed in a black cylinder at the center of the maze for 15 s.
Subsequently, the cylinder was removed, and the mouse was allowed to explore the maze until it found and entered the target box.
A trial ended when the mouse found and escaped into the target box within 3 min.
The next day was designated day 1.
Two trials were conducted each day for 5 consecutive days.
Each mouse was allowed to stay in the target box for 1 min and was then returned to the home cage.
If a mouse could not find the escape box after 4 min, it was gently guided toward the escape hole and left there for 35 s.
The latency to find the escape hole, the number of passes over the target, freezing time on the target, and freezing time off the target (i.e., on the wrong hole) were recorded.
We defined the number of passes over the target as the number of passes through the escape hole before the mouse entered the escape hole.
We also defined freezing time on the target as the total freezing time at the edge of the escape hole and freezing time off the target as the total freezing time at the wrong hole edge.

Statistical analysis
All numerical values and error bars in the graphs represent the means ± SDs except for the latency data in the Barnes maze test (mean ± SEMs).
Statistical comparison of mean values was performed using unpaired Student's t test or two-way ANOVA followed by Tukey's post hoc analysis using R package.

RESULTS

Differences in intraneuronal Aβ deposition by neurons in the trigeminal nervous system
We first examined where A␤ deposits, a characteristic neurodegenerative lesion in AD, appears most prominently in trigeminal neurons using female 4-month-old 3×Tg-AD mice.
As a positive control, the amygdala and hippocampus of female 4-month-old 3×Tg-AD mice were examined using an anti-A␤ antibody (6E10) (Fig.
Strong A␤ immunopositivity was observed in neurons in the amygdala, and weak A␤ immunopositivity was observed on the relatively dorsal region in the hippocampus.
Since 6E10 antibody does not react with mouse A␤, we used tissue of C57BL/6 mice as a negative control, and no immunoreactivity of A␤ was observed in the Vmes in C57BL/6 mice (Fig.
Neither C57BL/6 trigeminal nerve cells were positive for 6E10 immunoreactivity (Supplementary Figure
In the trigeminal nervous system, intensely A␤-immunoreactive (IR) neurons were found in the Vmes (Fig.
Scattered A␤-IR neurons were observed in the trigeminal motor nucleus (Vmo) (Fig.
Few A␤-IR neurons were found in the trigeminal ganglion (TG) (Fig.
Based on these findings, the Vmes had the strongest A␤ deposition in the trigeminal nervous system in 3×Tg-AD mice.

Progression of Aβ deposition in Vmes neurons in 3×Tg-AD mice
To use female 3×Tg-AD mice as a model of predementia, it was necessary to clarify when A␤ deposit appears in Vmes neurons.
The level of age-related A␤ deposition in the Vmes of 2-, 4-, and 7-month-old 3×Tg-AD mice was examined.
Vmes neurons were widely distributed from the vicinity of the aqueduct at the distal end of the cingulate cortex to the rostral part of the 4th ventricle (Fig.
In the rostral part of the Vmes, several neurons immunoreactive for Piezo2, a marker of Vmes neurons, were distributed along the edge of the periaqueductal gray matter (Fig.
In the caudal part, Piezo2-IR-neurons were spread obliquely from the lateral edge of the fourth ventricle in a triangular pyramid shape (Fig.
In 2-month-old 3×Tg-AD mice, 73.7% of neurons in the caudal part of the Vmes were A␤-IR, while 25.7% of neurons in the rostral part of the Vmes were A␤-IR.
In 4-month-old 3×Tg-AD mice, the ratio of A␤-IR neurons in the rostral part of the Vmes reached a similar level as that in the caudal part of the Vmes (Ro, 62.5% ± 8.8%; Ca, 74.1% ± 5.1%).
In 7-month-old 3×Tg-AD mice, both the rostral and caudal parts of the Vmes showed slight increases in the ratio of A␤-IR neurons to approximately 80% (Ro, 74.3% ± 18.8%; Ca, 82.8% ± 7.1%.)
(Fig.
Additionally, p-Tau-IR neurons were found in the rostral and caudal parts of the Vmes in 4-monthold 3×Tg-AD mice, and the axons of Vmes neurons were also immunopositive for p-Tau (Fig.
Based on these results, 4-month-old 3×Tg-AD mice were used in subsequent experiments as the state of disease progression was similar to that in the human MCI phase.

Vmes neurons and microglia after tooth extraction
Mice had three molars (M1-M3) bilaterally in the maxilla (Fig.
One month after maxillary molar extraction, the sockets of the teeth were covered by new bone (Fig.
In female 4-month-old 3×Tg-AD mice, LC neurons were observed along edge of the caudal part of the Vmes (Fig.
Before tooth extraction, Vmes neurons in 4-month-old 3×Tg-AD mice were strongly immunopositive for cytotoxic A␤ 42 , as determined using a mouse anti-A␤ 42 (BC05) antibody (Fig.
By high-power magnified fluorescence imaging, A␤ 42 immunopositivity was observed in granular structures in Vmes neurons (Fig.
Two weeks after tooth extraction, ATF-3-IR nuclei in Vmes neurons were found close to TH-IR LC neurons, indicating that Vmes neuronal damage was transferred from nerve endings at periodontal ligaments to the soma of Vmes neurons through the extraction of the maxillary molars (Fig.

Loss of Vmes neurons after tooth extraction
One month after tooth extraction, the number of A␤-IR Vmes neurons in a section of each block was examined (Fig.
Control specimens were obtained from age-matched (5-month-old) 3×Tg-AD mice that did not undergo tooth extraction.
The Vmes was equally divided into 14 blocks along the rostrocaudal axis, and the number of A␤-IR Vmes neurons in a section of each block was determined.
The sections were visualized using 3,3 -diaminobenzidine (DAB) (Fig.
After tooth extraction, the number of Vmes neurons was reduced in blocks 6 to 11, whereas Vmes neurons were localized close to LC neurons in the blocks 9 to 14 (Fig.
The number of Vmes neurons in the control and extraction groups was significantly different (twoway ANOVA, p = 0.002).
The total number of Vmes neurons was significantly reduced after tooth extraction (t-test, p = 0.003; Fig.
Furthermore, we confirmed degeneration of Vmes neurons after tooth extraction using cleaved caspase-3 immunocytochemistry and found a cleaved caspase-3/A␤ 42 -IR neuron in the Vmes at 10 days after tooth extraction (Fig.
Interestingly, we found cleaved caspase-3-IR but A␤ 42 -immunonegative Vmes neurons in the same section, which means that the intracellular deposition of A␤ 42 in Vmes neurons is not always necessary for the death of Vmes neurons after tooth extraction.

Neurodegeneration of Vmes neurons and the activation of microglia after tooth extraction
A␤ 42 deposition was found in neurons in the caudal part of the Vmes in 4-month-old 3×Tg-AD mice (Fig.
Two weeks after tooth extraction, A␤ 42 -IR neurons with unclear cell membranes were observed (Fig.
One and two weeks after  tooth extraction, the number of Iba 1-IR microglia on the caudal side of the Vmes and LC increased, and many were larger than those in the controls (Fig.
As the number of CD86-IR microglia is known to be increased in the presence of cytotoxic A␤ 42
CD86-IR and Iba 1 immunonegative cell was observed on Vmes neuron.

LC neurons and hippocampal neurons after tooth extraction
TH-IR neurons in the LC nucleus were found on the ventral side of the Vmes in rectilinear contact with Vmes neurons (Fig.
One month after tooth extraction, TH-IR neurons was in irregular contact with Vmes neurons (Fig.
The number of TH-IR LC neurons decreased significantly from the center to the rostral side (two-way ANOVA, p = 0.027), and a significant difference was found at the center of the LC (Tukey's post hoc analysis, p = 0.034; Fig.
The total number of LC neurons was significantly different between the control and extraction groups (t test, p = 0.007, Fig.
After the injection of FG into the hippocampus (Fig.
The number of hippocampal neurons in the CA1 and CA3 regions in 3×Tg-AD mice at one month after tooth extraction (H) and in sham-operated mice was investigated (Fig.

Behavioral changes observed after tooth extraction
Finally, we performed the Barnes maze experiments to assess how tooth loss affects the cognitive functions of female 3×Tg-AD mice (Fig.
No significant differences in body weight were observed between the control group and the tooth extraction group (Supplementary Figure
To identify the changes in behavior between mild and progressed dementia in 3×Tg-AD mice, the latency to escape into the target, the number of passes through the target (Fig.
In 7month-old 3×Tg-AD mice, sham mice showed that the latency to escape into the target decreased gradually from day 1 to day 5, while tooth extracted  mice did not show the decrease from day 1 to day 5. On the 5th day, a significant difference in latency was observed between the sham group and the tooth extraction group (Tukey's post hoc analysis; day 5, p = 0.0031: Fig.
In 8-month-old 3×Tg-AD mice, no decreases in latency between day 1 and day 5 were found in both sham and tooth extraction groups (Fig.
A significant increase in latency was generally observed in the extracted group compared to the sham group (two-way ANOVA, p = 0.0004).
Assuming that the behavior pattern of dementia in mice does not decrease latency, it was considered that the control was pre-dementia up to 7-month-old and the dementia stage from 8-month-old.
From 1 to 4 months after tooth extraction, the latency to escape into the target of all tooth-extracted mice increased gradually on day 5 (Fig.
In the extracted group, a pattern of dementia stage was already observed at 5-month-old, 1 month after the tooth extraction.
In 7-month-old 3×Tg-AD mice, the number of passes over the target increased on day 5 compared with day 1 in both the control and extraction groups, but the difference was not significant (Tukey's post hoc analysis; day 1, p = 0.69, day 5, p = 0.84; Fig.
Interestingly, 3×Tg-AD mice in the tooth extraction group showed a significantly longer on-target freezing time even on day 5 compared with day 1 (Tukey's post hoc analysis, p = 0.033; Fig.
The off-target freezing time of 7month-old 3×Tg-AD mice on day 5 was significantly longer in the extraction group than in the control group (Tukey's post hoc analysis, p = 2.5 × 10 -4 ; Fig.

DISCUSSION
The progression of AD requires both aging, which is the greatest risk factor, and other triggers.
In this study, we focused on A␤ deposition in neurons due to aging, and the neurodegeneration of Vmes neurons resulting from tooth extraction as triggers.
The results of pathological analyses provided evidence for the induction of neurodegeneration, the deposition of cytotoxic A␤ 42 , and the activation of microglia in Vmes neurons due to tooth loss in 3×Tg-AD mice.
The loss of neurons in the Vmes was associated with loss of LC neurons and even the loss of hippocampal neurons.
All of these events resulted in the acceleration of the onset of dementia-like behavior.
The initiation of human MCI is characterized by a plateau in the deposition of A␤ in the CNS
Initially, A␤ is deposited in neurons rather than as amyloid plaques
Therefore, it is important to determine which neurons should be used as the baseline.
There are three sensory trigeminal nuclei, i.e., the trigeminal mesencephalic, principal, and spinal trigeminal nuclei.
Our results showed that A␤ was deposited earliest and strongest in Vmes neurons among neurons in the three sensory trigeminal nuclei of 3×Tg-AD mice.
Consistent with our findings, a previous study showed that A␤ deposition begins on Vmes neurons in 2-month-old 3×Tg-AD mice
In the present study, the deposition of A␤ in rostral Vmes neurons also reached a high level similar to that in the caudal region in 4-month-old 3×Tg-AD mice.
In addition, the ratio of A␤ between these two regions reached a plateau between 4 and 7 months of age.
Therefore, we used 4-month-old 3×Tg-AD mice as an experimental model of the predementia state and performed tooth extraction in these animals.
In human AD, A␤ peptides are known to exist in various forms, among which A␤ 42 is known to be a highly toxic subtype
In terms of A␤ cytotoxicity, the aggregation of A␤ 42 in neurons is toxic to neurons
Granules containing A␤ 42 were also observed in Vmes neurons in 4-month-old 3×Tg-AD mice.
Although it is not well understood where in the cell membrane APP is processed to produce A␤, especially highly cytotoxic A␤ 42 , our findings suggest that A␤ 42 is produced in the granules of neurons.
According to the recently proposed traffic jam theory
Another study reported that kinesin phosphorylation is involved in A␤PP processing
In 4-month-old 3×Tg-AD mice, most of Vmes neurons possessed strong A␤ 42 -IR vesicles: however, we did not observe any abnormal behavior at this age, which suggests that the accumulation of A␤ 42 -IR granules in neurons itself is not a trigger for the progression of AD.
The Vmes is not only the area where A␤ shows the earliest and strongest deposition among the trigeminal nuclei in 4-month-old 3×Tg-AD mice
Vmes neurons project to the periodontal ligament, and tooth extraction causes degeneration of the nerve endings of Vmes neuron
After tooth extraction, ATF3 immunoreactivity was found in some Vmes neurons adjacent to the LC.
The presence of ATF3 immunoreactivity in Vmes neurons was considered to be the result of damage responses due to the extraction of maxillary molars.
Indeed, damage to Vmes neurons by peripheral nerve transection has been reported
The results of the present study revealed cell death in A␤ 42 -IR Vmes neurons 2 weeks after tooth extraction.
These findings suggested that extracting the molars of 4-month-old 3×Tg-AD mice leads to damage to Vmes neurons, resulting in the release of cytotoxic A␤ 42 peptides into the extracellular space.
Interestingly, we found cleaved caspase-3-IR but A␤ 42 -immunonegative Vmes neurons in the same section, which means that the intracellular deposition of A␤ 42 in Vmes neurons is not always necessary for the neuronal death of Vmes neurons after tooth extraction.
An increase in the number of activated microglia was found in the Vmes and LC 1-2 weeks after tooth extraction.
Most of the microglia were immunonegative for CD86, which is a marker of M1 polarity.
However, some microglia adjacent to the Vmes were positive for CD86, possibly due to the release of A␤ 42 peptide in this brain region as a result of the death of Vmes neurons.
As M1 microglia are involved in the removal of amyloid plaques and the initiation of proinflammatory responses
CD86 + /Iba1cells were also observed, it may be active astrocyte, but further study is needed about this type of cell.
The LC is located adjacent to the Vmes in the brainstem.
As the Vmes is involved in occlusion and chewing
However, axons projecting from the Vmes to the LC have scarcely been found
In this study, the release of cytotoxic A␤ peptides due to the death of Vmes neurons triggered by tooth loss, may have played an important role in how the Vmes affected LC neurons.
These findings suggest that the effects of Vmes neurons on LC neurons are not caused by the loss of neuronal connections but by the cytotoxic effects of A␤ 42 released from degenerated Vmes neurons.
Early neurodegeneration has been reported to occur in the olfactory area, basal nucleus of Meynert, and LC during the development of dementia in humans
Of these, only the LC is directly involved in the trigeminal nervous system.
In addition, the LC projects axons to many areas and plays an important role as a central noradrenaline producer, and damage to the LC is known to affect hippocampal function directly
As norepinephrine protects against amyloid-induced toxicity via the activation of cAMP/PKA signaling pathway by beta-adrenergic receptors.
In this study, FG was injected the CA1 and CA3 regions of the hippocampus, and retrogradely labeled cell bodies in the LC were found to be close to the Vmes.
In our experiments, as in a previous report
It is not easy to judge by behavioral tests whether mice ultimately experience dementia.
A previous study reported that human MCI stage and AD correspond to stages of moderate and severe impairment, respectively
A number of behavioral tests, such as the Morris water maze
The Barnes maze has been reported to be the most sensitive test for detecting these cognitive deficits in 3×Tg-AD mice
Furthermore, memory deficits have been observed in 3×Tg-AD mice using a modified Barnes maze protocol
In our study, we used 4-month-old 3×Tg-AD mice in which the neuronal deposition of A␤ had reached a plateau as a predementia model and to compensate for latency analysis, we measured the number of passes over the target, freezing time on the target, and freezing time off the target.
Our results of modified Barnes maze analysis showed a gradual decrease in the latency for the mice to escape into the target box from day 1 to day 5 in the control group until 7 months of age, whereas 8-month-old mice did not show the decrease in the latency.
The increased latency observed in 8month-old mice was also observed in 5-month-old mice 1 month after tooth extraction, and the average latency increased according to the time after tooth extraction.
Based on our protocol, we found that the progression of dementia was associated with increased latency, and off-target freezing and ontarget freezing.
Furthermore, there was a tendency toward dementia in 8-month-old 3×Tg-AD mice that did not undergo tooth extraction, whereas 1 month after tooth extraction, the progression of dementia had already occurred.
In our study, the neurodegeneration cascade triggered by tooth extraction was shown to accelerate the onset of dementia-like behavior in 3×Tg-AD mice.
Applying these findings to humans suggests that the loss of teeth in elderly people who already have A␤ deposition in Vmes neurons may accelerate the progression to dementia.
Periodontal disease has been suggested as a risk factor of AD in the elderly, and the effects of bacterial toxins due to periodontal disease and masticatory disorders due to tooth loss following periodontal disease have been pointed out.
Here we demonstrated that neurodegeneration during tooth loss could directly trigger neuronal loss in the hippocampus.
Regardless tooth loss due to periodontal disease or surgical tooth extraction, we suggest that tooth loss in the elderly may accelerate the progression of AD.
Further research is needed on the relationship between the timing of tooth extraction and progression of dementia in the elderly.
In addition, patients with Down's syndrome or familial AD patients have A␤ deposition even when they are young
Based on evidences that the loss of teeth causes neurodegeneration in the Vmes neurons, the involvement of the LC in the initial development of dementia was examined by performing tooth extraction when cytotoxic A␤ 42 was sufficiently accumulated in Vmes neurons.
In 4-month-old 3×Tg-AD mice, aggregated cytotoxic A␤ 42 was found in granules in Vmes neurons.
Neuronal death in the Vmes occurred after tooth extraction, resulting in the release of A␤ 42 and an increase in activated microglia.
Released A␤ 42 damaged LC, and then induced a significant reduction in hippocampal neurons receiving projections from the LC.
Measures of cognitive deficits using the Barnes maze revealed an earlier shift toward dementia-like behavior after tooth extraction.
The cascade of neurodegeneration from tooth loss to the progression of AD is summarized in Fig.
These findings suggest that tooth extraction in predementia stage can trigger spread of neurodegeneration from the Vmes to the LC and hippocampus and accelerate the onset of dementia-like behavior.



Fig. 1 .
Fig.1.
The distribution of A␤-IR neurons in the cerebrum and the trigeminal nervous system in 4-month-old 3×Tg-AD mice using an anti-A␤ antibody (6E10).
A, B) In the positive control, strong A␤-IR neurons were found in amygdala, and relatively weak A␤ immunopositivity was observed in the hippocampus.
C) In wild-type C57BL/6 mice, which were used as negative controls, no A␤-IR Vmes neurons were found.
D-H) In the trigeminal nervous system intensely A␤-IR neurons were found in the trigeminal mesencephalic nucleus (Vmes), weak scattered A␤-IR neurons were observed in the trigeminal motor nucleus (Vmo), trigeminal principal nucleus (Vpr), and trigeminal spinal nucleus (Vsp).
Small number of A␤-IR neurons were found in the trigeminal ganglion (TG).
The sections were counterstained with cresyl violet.
LC, locus coeruleus.
Scale bars: A, B, E-H, 200 m; C, D, 50 m.



Fig. 2 .
Fig. 2. Position-and age-dependent amyloid ␤ (A␤) deposition in Vmes neurons in 3×Tg-AD mice.
A) The positions of the histological sections from the rostral (Ro) and caudal (Ca) sides of the Vmes (Green).
B, C) Immunofluorescence images of Piezo2 inVmes neurons in the rostral (B) and caudal (C) regions.
PAG, periaqueductal gray; 4V, 4th ventricle.
D) Immunofluorescence images of A␤ and Pezo2 in the rostral (Ro) and caudal (Ca) parts of the Vmesin 2-, 4-, and 7-month-old 3×Tg-AD mice.
E) Age-dependent ratios of A␤-IR Vmes neurons in the rostral and caudal regions of the Vmes.
The data are the means ± SDs, n = 10.
F) p-Tau-IR neurons in 7-month-old 3×Tg-AD mice.
The rostral (upper) and caudal (lower) parts of Vmes.
The arrowheads indicate p-Tau-IR axons of Vmes neurons.
Scale bars: B, C, 200 m; D, F, 50 m.



Fig. 3 .
Fig. 3. Tooth extraction and damage to Vmes neurons.
A, B) The maxillary first to third molars (M1-M3) of 4-month-old 3×Tg-AD mice and the sockets of the roots were covered by new bone (arrows) 1 month after tooth extraction.
C) Fluorescence images of the Vmes and LC stained with Neuro Trace green.
LC, locus coeruleus.
D) In 4-month-old 3×Tg-AD mice, before tooth extraction, amyloid ␤ 1-42 (A␤ 42 )-IR neurons in the Vmes were found using an anti-A␤ 42 antibody (BC05) and A␤ 42 -IR granules were distributed in Vmes neurons (d, rectangle in D).
E) Fluorescence images of the Vmes and LC immunostained for tyrosine hydroxylase (TH)/ATF3 at 2 weeks after tooth extraction.
In addition to the TH immunoreactivity in the LC, some nuclei of Vmes neurons showed ATF3 immunoreactivity (arrows) (d, rectangle in D).
Scale bars: A, B, 1 mm; C, E, 100 m; D, 30 m; d, 10 m, e, 20 m.



Fig. 4 .
Fig. 4. Neuronal loss in the trigeminal mesencephalic nucleus (Vmes) after tooth extraction.
A) The positions of the histological blocks from the rostral (1) and caudal (14) ends of the Vmes (green).
B) Immunocytochemical localization of A␤ (6E10)-IR Vmes neurons in the rostral (left, block #3) and caudal (right, block #10) regions in 5-month-old 3×Tg-AD mice.
C) The number of Vmes neurons in each block from rostral (1) to the caudal (14) ends of the Vmes in 5-month-old 3×Tg-AD mice without tooth extraction (Con, control) and with extraction (Ext, 1 month after extraction).
Blocks 6-14 from the Vmes were adjacent to the locus coeruleus.
D) The total number of Vmes neurons in 14 sections from each 5-month-old 3×Tg-AD mice in the Con and Ext groups.
The data are the means ± SDs, n = 10.
*p < 0.01, unpaired t test.
E) Cleaved caspase-3-IR Vmes neurons (arrows), A␤ 42 -IR Vmes neurons, and cleaved caspase-3-/A␤ 42 -IR Vmes neuron (arrowhead) and a cleaved caspase-3-IR but A␤ 42 -immunonegative Vmes neuron (double arrowheads) 10 days after tooth extraction in 4-month-old 3×Tg-AD mice.
Scale bars: B, 200 m; E, 20 m.



Fig. 5 .
Fig. 5. Degeneration of Vmes neurons and the activation of microglia after tooth extraction.
A) A␤ 42 (BC05)-IR Vmes neurons (arrows) in 4-month-old 3×Tg-AD mice.
B) Two weeks after tooth extraction a damaged A␤ 42 -IR neuron with an unclear cell membrane was observed.
b) A higher magnification image of the rectangular area in (B).
C) Immunofluorescence images of CD86-IR and Iba1-IR microglia after tooth extraction.
Immunofluorescence images of microglia in the Vmes and LC at 0 (Con), 7, and 14 days after tooth extraction.
Immunofluorescence images of Iba1-IR, and CD86-IR cells and merged images.
The arrows indicate an Iba1 + /CD86 + microglia.
Double arrows indicate an Iba1 -/CD86 + cell.
Scale bars: A, 100 m; B, 30 m; b, 10 m; C, 50 m.



Fig. 6 .
Fig. 6.
Association of neuronal loss between the LC and hippocampus after tooth extraction.
A, B) Immunofluorescence images of TH-IR LC neurons in 5-month-old control 3×Tg-AD mice (Con) and 5-month-old 3×Tg-AD mice (1 month after tooth extraction) (Ext).
The LC neurons linearly contact with the Vmes (arrowheads) (A), whereas irregularly contacts the Vmes (arrows) after tooth extraction (B).
C) The number of LC neurons (red) in each block from the rostral (9) to caudal (14) ends of the Vmes.
The block positions are the same as in Fig. 3. D) The number of LC neurons in each block from the rostral (9) to caudal (14) ends of the LC in 5-month-old 3×Tg-AD mice in the Con and Ext groups.
The data are the means ± SDs, n = 6.
*p < 0.05, two-way ANOVA followed by Tukey's post hoc analysis.
**p < 0.01, unpaired t test.
E) The total number of LC neurons in 5-month-old 3×Tg-AD mice in the Con and Ext groups.
The data are the means ± SDs, n = 10.
*p < 0.01, unpaired t test.
F) Fluorogold labeling was visualized with DAB in the CA1 and CA3 regions of the hippocampus.
Nissl staining with 0.1% cresyl violet was used to visualize neurons.
G) Retrograde labeling of the LC close to the Vmes.
g1, 2) Higher magnification images of the rectangle in (G).
Fluorogold labeling in LC neurons (arrowheads).
H, I) The position of the measured area (rectangular area) was in the CA1 and CA3 regions of the hippocampus in 7-month-old control 3×Tg-AD mice without tooth extraction (Con) (H) and 3×Tg-AD mice with tooth extraction (Ext) (I).
Neuro Trace green staining.
J, K) The number of neurons in the CA1 (J) and CA3 (K) regions of the hippocampus in 7-month-old control 3×Tg-AD mice without tooth extraction (Con) and 3×Tg-AD mice with tooth extraction (Ext).
The data are the means ± SDs, n = 10.
*p < 0.01, unpaired t test.
Scale bars: B, F, H, I, 500 m; G, 200 m; g1, g2, 10 m.



Fig. 7 .
Fig. 7. Effects of tooth extraction on the behavioral performance in 3×Tg-AD mice.
All tooth extracted 3×-Tg-AD mice had the operation at the age of 4-month-old.
A-D) The Barnes maze system.
HL, halogen light.
The arrow indicates the target hole (A), representative photographs showing passing over the target (B), freezing on the target (C), and freezing off the target (D).
E-G) The latency(s) to locate the escape hole is plotted.
A trial ended when the mouse found the escape box or 3 min had elapsed.
The changes of average latency (s) from day 1 to day 5, comparing to sham 3×Tg-AD mice (no tooth extraction) and the 3×Tg-AD mice that underwent tooth extraction.
Graphs shows the comparisons of latency in 7-month-old (E) and 8-month-old (F) 3×Tg-AD mice with and without tooth extraction on days 1 to 5. The changes of latency after the tooth extraction are shown in (G).
The data are the means ± SEMs, n = 10.
**p < 0.01, one-way ANOVA followed by Tukey's post hoc analysis.
H-J) The effects of tooth extraction on the number of passes over the target (H), total time of on-target freezing (I), and total time of off-target freezing (J) on days 1 and 5.
The data are the means ± SDs, n = 10.
*p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, one-way ANOVA followed by Tukey's post hoc analysis.



Fig. 8 .
Fig. 8. Schematic to show the cascade from tooth loss to the progression of Alzheimer's disease via the trigeminal mesencephalic nucleus, locus coeruleus, and hippocampus.
Aging leads to increase the intracellular A␤ accumulation in trigeminal mesencephalic nucleus (Vmes) neurons, and tooth loss leads to Vmes neuronal death.
Release of A␤ by Vmes neuronal death causes neurodegeneration of adjacent locus coeruleus (LC) neurons, resulting in neuronal degeneration of hippocampal neurons that the LC neurons project.
This neurodegenerative cascade of Vmes, LC and hippocampus accelerates the progression of Alzheimer's disease.