Aberrant accrual of BIN1 near Alzheimer’s disease amyloid deposits in transgenic models
Bridging integrator 1 (BIN1) is the most significant late-onset Alzheimer's disease (AD) susceptibility locus identified via genome-wide association studies.
BIN1 is an adaptor protein that regulates membrane dynamics in the context of endocytosis and membrane remodeling.
An increase in BIN1 expression and changes in the relative levels of alternatively spliced BIN1 isoforms have been reported in the brains of patients with AD.
BIN1 can bind to Tau, and an increase in BIN1 expression correlates with Tau pathology.
In contrast, the loss of BIN1 expression in cultured cells elevates Aβ production and Tau propagation by insfluencing endocytosis and recycling.
Here, we show that BIN1 accumulates adjacent to amyloid deposits in vivo.
We found an increase in insoluble BIN1 and a striking accrual of BIN1 within and near amyloid deposits in the brains of multiple transgenic models of AD.
The peri-deposit aberrant BIN1 localization was conspicuously different from the accumulation of APP and BACE1 within dystrophic neurites.
Although BIN1 is highly expressed in mature oligodendrocytes, BIN1 association with amyloid deposits occurred in the absence of the accretion of other oligodendrocyte or myelin proteins.
Finally, super-resolution microscopy and immunogold electron microscopy analyses highlight the presence of BIN1 in proximity to amyloid fibrils at the edges of amyloid deposits.
These results reveal the aberrant accumulation of BIN1 is a feature associated with AD amyloid pathology.
Our findings suggest a potential role for BIN1 in extracellular Aβ deposition in vivo that is distinct from its wellcharacterized function as an adaptor protein in endocytosis and membrane remodeling.

INTRODUCTION
The vast majority of patients with Alzheimer's disease (AD) develop clinical symptoms after 65 years of age.
Despite showing significant heritability, these individuals with lateonset AD (LOAD) do not present with a clear pattern of Mendelian inheritance.
Genome-wide association studies have identified the gene encoding bridging integrator 1 (BIN1), within a major susceptibility locus for late-onset AD
BIN1 is a member of the Bin/Amphiphysin/Rvs family of adaptor proteins that regulate membrane dynamics
Alternate splicing of BIN1 generates ubiquitous and tissue-specific isoforms, which differ in their tissue distribution, subcellular localization and function.
BIN1 can bind to the endocytic adaptor proteins clathrin and AP2 via a CLAP domain present only in the brain-specific BIN1 isoforms, leading to the suggestion that the function of BIN1 in the brain is to regulate clathrin-mediated endocytosis.
An increase in BIN1 expression has been reported in the brains of individuals with LOAD
Although a microarray-based splicing analysis revealed no significant change in BIN1 splicing profile in the temporal cortex in relation to AD-related tangle pathology
The mechanism through which BIN1 confers risk in the LOAD population remains unclear.
The loss of BIN1 expression in cultured cortical neurons was recently shown to elevate Aβ production
Subsequent interrogation of the molecular mechanism in HeLa cells pointed to reduced endosomal-lysosomal trafficking and degradation of BACE1
Recent evidence also suggested that reduced expression of BIN1 in neurons prevented BACE1 exit from early endosomes leading to the increased spatial proximity between BACE1 and APP and a subsequent increase in Aβ production
In addition, BIN1's SH3 domain can directly bind to a proline-rich domain in Tau, leading to the suggestion that increased expression of BIN1 in AD exacerbates Tau pathology
In contrast, the knockdown of BIN1 expression in cultured neurons promoted cell-to-cell Tau pathology propagation by modulating endocytic flux of Tau aggregates, whereas the overexpression of BIN1 inhibited the process
In the human brain, BIN1 appears to be predominantly expressed in oligodendrocytes and white matter tracts
In agreement, proteomic analysis identified BIN1 in human and mouse brain myelin preparations
Indeed, BIN1 is among the top 50 highly expressed genes in cultured rat oligodendrocytes in a microarray study
The upregulation of BIN1 during synchronous differentiation of cultured oligodendrocytes
Interestingly, whereas neuronal BIN1 is extremely low in controls, neurons in AD cases have readily-detectable levels of BIN1
How these observations translate to increased risk for AD is not clear.
There has been considerable interest in the contribution of microglial mechanisms in LOAD
Although high-level BIN1 transcripts have been reported by RNAseq analysis in acutely-isolated microglia
A systematic analysis of large-scale genomic, transcriptomic, and proteomic data identified BIN1 among a core oligodendrocyte/myelin-enriched gene set that is strongly dysregulated in AD
In contrast, another integrative analysis found no significant correlation of the oligodendrocyte gene module with aging or AD
Thus, although large-scale integrative studies have been informative, they also yield seemingly contradicting results.
Therefore, careful investigations of BIN1 using model systems are needed to glean insights on how BIN1 influences AD progression.
In this study, we explored the relation between BIN1 and Aβ pathology using transgenic models for AD and post-mortem brain samples from patients with AD.
Our results describe for the first time an aberrant accumulation of insoluble BIN1 within or near the core of the amyloid deposits in transgenic models of AD.
BIN1 accumulated with an amorphous pattern, distinct from dystrophic neurites and white matter projections.
BIN1 protein was not detected in astrocytes or microglia cells accumulating at deposit sites, confirming our previous observations
Finally, we used super-resolution microscopy and immunogold electron microscopy (immunogold-EM) to precisely define extracellular BIN1 accumulation in a particulate pattern in close spatial proximity to the Aβ fibrils of the deposits.
Altogether, our study describes for the first time the accumulation of BIN1 in the form of aggregates near AD-associated amyloid deposits in transgenic models.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Experimental animals
Animals of both sexes were used in the study.
5XFAD mice
APP/PS1 (line 85)
TgF344-AD rat transgenic model has been described
All procedures related to animal care and treatment conformed to the policies of the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee at the University of Chicago.

Sequential detergent fraction
Freshly harvested hemi-brains from 5-month-old nontransgenic (NTg) and 5XFAD mice were sequentially extracted by homogenizing in PBS and TEN buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 1 mM EDTA and 100 mM NaCl) containing 0.5% NP-40, 2% sodium deoxycholate or 1% SDS as described previously
The SDS-insoluble pellet was resuspended in TEN buffer containing 1% SDS.

Immunoblot analysis
Protein samples were resolved on 4%-20% SDS-PAGE gels and analyzed by immunoblots using the antibodies listed in Supplementary Table
The blots were developed with IR680 anti-rabbit and IR800 anti-mouse secondary antibodies and imaged with the Odyssey Infrared Imaging System (Li-COR Biosciences).
Quantification was performed using ImageJ software

Immunofluorescence staining
Mice were anesthetized by isoflurane inhalation before perfusion with PBS containing 4% paraformaldehyde and 4% sucrose.
Brains were harvested and post-fixed overnight in the same fixative and then stored at 4°C in PBS containing 30% sucrose.
Forty µm-thick coronal sections were cut on a cryostat and processed for free-floating immunofluorescence staining.
The sections were subjected to epitope retrieval by incubating for 2 h at 85°C in 10 mM trisodium citrate (pH 6) buffer containing 0.05% Tween-20.
Brain sections were incubated with the indicated primary antibodies (Supplementary Table
The antibodies were diluted in TBS containing 10% donkey serum, 3% BSA, and 0.25% Triton-X100.
Nuclei were labeled using Hoechst stain (Molecular Probes) before mounting the sections on slides with Vectashield mounting medium (VectorLabs) for confocal microscopy or Prolong Diamond (Life Technologies) for stimulated emission depletion (STED) microscopy.

Passive CLARITY and immunofluorescence labeling
The system and reagents for tissue clearing were from Logos Biosystems.
50 µm-thick brain slices were processed following the passive CLARITY technique
Briefly, the sections were incubated in the hydrogel solution overnight before polymerization with the X-CLARITY polymerization system.
Slices were then washed in PBS before passive clearance for 5 h at 37°C using electrophoretic tissue clearing solution.
Cleared sections were incubated with primary and secondary antibodies at 37°C for 72 h and 48 h, respectively.
The slices were then mounted in X-CLARITY mounting solution.

Immunohistochemistry
Human post-mortem brain samples from individuals with and without AD were obtained from the University of Chicago autopsy archives and the University of Kentucky Alzheimer's Disease Center biobank (Supplementary Table
Briefly, 5 µm thick paraffin-embedded brain sections (humans and mice) were rehydrated, treated with antigen retrieval buffer (DAKO, S1609) in a steamer for 20 min, followed by a 5 min incubation with 3% H 2 O 2 and permeabilized with PBST (PBS containing 0.025% Triton-X 100).
The sections were blocked with 10% normal rabbit serum in PBST and then sequentially incubated with the indicated primary and secondary antibodies.
The antigen-antibody reactions were detected by Envision+ kit (Dako).
The nuclei were counterstained using hematoxylin.
The slides were scanned using CRi Pannoramic Scan Whole Slide Scanner and analyzed by Pannoramic Viewer (3DHISTECH).

Fluorescence Microscopy and STED image acquisition
Epifluorescence image stacks were acquired on a Nikon TE 2000 microscope using 60X (NA 1.49) objective.
The z-stacks were deconvolved using Huygens Professional software (Scientific Volume Imaging).
Confocal images were acquired on a Leica SP5 or Leica SP8 microscope using 10X (NA 0.4), 20X (NA 0.75), 40X (NA 1.25), 63X (NA 1.4) and 100X (NA 1.4) objectives.
For Supplementary Figure
Super-resolution images of BIN1 (BSH3-Alexa555) and Aβ (mAb 3D6-Alexa647) were acquired on a Leica SP8 3D, 3-color gated STED laser scanning confocal microscope.
A white light laser was used for excitation of the red and far red dyes (at 561 and 633 nm, respectively) and a pulsed 775 nm depletion laser was used to deplete both the dyes.
For STED imaging emission was acquired between 567 and 640 nm for Alexa568 and 638 and 744 nm for Alexa647.
The detector time gates were set from 0.5 to 6 ns and 0.7 to 6 ns for the red and far red channels.
Single plane images of 1024 × 1024 pixels were acquired at 8 kHz scan rate with line averaging of 64, using a 100X (1.40) objective with digital zoom factor 5, yielding 23 nm pixels.

Image quantification

Fluorescence
intensities were quantified from epifluorescence image stacks acquired on a Nikon TE 2000 microscope using 20X (NA 0.75) objective.
Images of Thioflavin S (ThioS) fluorescence were thresholded to generate a binary mask for each image, and individual deposits were defined using integrated morphometry analysis tools in Metamorph 7.5 (Molecular Dynamics).
The integrated intensities of ThioS and BIN1 staining were measured for well-segmented deposits to obtain the relative ratio for individual deposits.
A similar approach was used to obtain the relative antibody staining intensities of BIN1 as compared with Aβ (mAb 3D6), BACE1, GFAP and Iba1.
The STED images were deconvolved using Huygens Professional using the gated STED module (SVI).
The images were analyzed using the built-in particle analysis function in Fiji and colorcoded using Matplolib-Inferno look up table
The data were plotted using Prism 7.

Pre-embedding immunogold electron microscopy
EM reagents were from Electron Microscopy Sciences (Hatfield, PA) unless otherwise noted.
Samples were processed as previously described
Briefly, 6-months-old female 5XFAD mice were anesthetized by isoflurane, transcardially perfused with acidic followed by basic fixative (2% paraformaldehyde and 1% glutaraldehyde).
70 µm-thick coronal sections were treated with 1% NaBH 4 in TBS for 30 min followed by antigen retrieval with citrate buffer at 90°C for 30 min.
Sections were incubated in blocking solution (10% normal goat serum (NGS) in TBS) for 30 min and incubated overnight at 4°C in pAb BSH3 diluted 1:700 in 2% NGS + 0.1% Triton X-100 in TBS.
Sections were then incubated in secondary blocking buffer (2% NGS + 1% BSA + 0.3% cold water fish skin gelatin in TBS) for 1 h followed by incubation in Ultra Small Immunogold (Aurion) anti-rabbit secondary antibody at 1:100 in 2% NGS + 1% BSA-C + 0.3% cold water fish skin gelatin for 48 h at 4°C.
Immunogold antibodies were fixed with 2% glutaraldehyde in PBS for 1 h and silver enhanced with R-Gent SE-EM Plus enhancement mixture (Aurion) for 90 min.
Sections were osmicated in 0.4% OsO 4 for 10 min, stained en bloc with 1% aqueous uranyl acetate for 10 min, dehydrated and flat-embedded in Araldite 502.
Regions of interest (cortex and CA1 of hippocampus) were dissected and re-embedded in Araldite 502.
Blocks were mounted perpendicular to the original plane of sectioning such that depth from the section surface (antibody penetration) was easily discernable.
500-nm-thick histological sections were cut by ultramicrotome and stained with toluidine blue to confirm regions of interest.
Serial sections (52 nm thick) were then collected on formvar-coated, nickel slotted grids and counterstained with uranyl acetate and lead citrate.
Images were acquired with a Zeiss Sigma SE-EM in STEM mode with an accelerating voltage of 29 kV at a pixel size of 2 nm.

RESULTS
A fraction of BIN1 becomes insoluble in the brains of transgenic AD mouse models Previously, it was reported that an accumulation of Aβ in cerebral deposits in APP/PS1 transgenic mice (line 85) is accompanied by the loss of solubility of numerous cytoplasmic proteins
We sought to assess whether cerebral amyloid deposition in transgenic mice affects BIN1 solubility.
First, we examined proteomic datasets of SDS-insoluble fractions prepared from line 85 and other transgenic mouse models of AD amyloidosis
Multiple peptides corresponding to BIN1 were found among the spectra identified by LC-MS/MS analysis in mouse models of AD (Supplementary Table
The presence of peptides derived from residues encoded by exon 7 ( 190 LQAHLVAQTNLLR 202 ; amino acid numbering based on NP_033798), the junction of exons 7 and 8 ( 203 NQAEEELIK 211 ), exon 12 ( 313 VNHEPEPASGASPGATIPK 331 ) and exon 13 ( 338 KGPPVPPPPK 347 ) in the SDS-insoluble fractions indicate that multiple BIN1 isoforms, including the brain-enriched BIN1 isoform 1 (BIN1iso1), become insoluble in the brains of mice with amyloid deposition.
To validate the MS data, we analyzed BIN1 solubility by performing biochemical fractionation of brain tissue from the well-characterized 5XFAD Tg model
Soluble and insoluble proteins were sequentially extracted from 5-month-old 5XFAD mice and NTg littermates using PBS, NP-40, DOC and SDS and subjected to Western blot analysis.
As expected, BIN1 was predominantly recovered in the PBS soluble fractions, with only minor recovery in NP40-soluble and SDS-insoluble fractions (Figure
Whereas BIN1 levels in total brain homogenates and soluble fractions were similar between NTg and 5XFAD mice, a significant increase in the levels of SDS-insoluble BIN1 was observed in 5XFAD mice as compared with NTg animals (Figure
Although the ~60 kDa BIN1:L ubiquitous isoforms and the ~80 kDa BIN1:H neuronal isoforms were found in the SDS-insoluble fractions of Ntg and 5XFAD mice, BIN1:H isoforms preferentially became insoluble in 5XFAD mice.
This finding is consistent with the identification of peptides that are unique to the BIN1:H isoforms by LC-MS/MS analysis (Supplementary Table
As previously reported
Also, as expected from previous studies
Unlike BIN1, its paralog Amphiphysin 1 remained soluble in PBS and NP-40, with no difference between NTg and 5XFAD mice (Figure
As controls, we analyzed the levels of synaptophysin (presynaptic protein), PSD-95 (post-synaptic protein), aspartoacylase (ASPA, an oligodendrocyte enzyme enriched in the nucleus and cell body), and CNPase (myelin-associated enzyme).
While there were differences in the extent to which these marker proteins were differentially extracted in PBS and detergents, there were no quantitative differences in the levels of these proteins in the SDS-insoluble fractions from 5XFAD mice and NTg mice (Figure
These biochemical data suggest that a subset of the BIN1:H isoform becomes insoluble in the brains of 5XFAD mice and other mouse models of amyloid deposition.

Aberrant localization of BIN1 near amyloid deposits in transgenic models of AD
Cytosolic proteins that undergo secondary misfolding, such as dynamin, clathrin heavy chain 1, phosphoglycerate kinase 1, and 14-3-3 protein localize in abundance within amyloid deposits or in adjacent dystrophic neurites
To assess whether the localization of BIN1 may be altered in the brain with AD pathology, we performed immunohistochemistry using brain tissue from 5-month-old 5XFAD mice.
In serial paraffin brain sections immuno-stained with multiple BIN1 antibodies (rabbit mAb EPR13463, mouse mAb 2F11 and rabbit pAb BSH3; Supplementary Figure
In addition, a striking accumulation of BIN1 that closely resembled the distribution of amyloid deposits (revealed by an antibody against fibrillar Aβ (rabbit pAb M78) or an N-terminal Aβ mAb 3D6) was apparent within the cortex, hippocampal CA fields and subiculum (Figure
In higher magnification images, granular and/or globular BIN1 immunoreactivity appeared restricted to a discrete, central region of the larger amyloid deposits, which was quite distinct from the strong BACE1 immunoreactivity associated with dystrophic neurites encircling the deposits (Figure
We performed immunofluorescence imaging using mAb 2F11 and pAb BSH3 to compare BIN1 expression in the brains of 8-month-old 5XFAD mice and their NTg littermates.
In both NTg and 5XFAD brain, BIN1 staining was strongest within the corpus callosum and other white matter tracts, and along slender processes with short barbed branches in the cortex.
In addition, BIN1 staining in the cortex of 5XFAD mice revealed numerous small granular patches in deep cortical layers that coincided with amyloid deposits, visualized by pAb M78 (Figure
In the subiculum, a region with the highest density of amyloid  deposits in this transgenic model, virtually every mAb 3D6-positive deposit was associated with aberrant BIN1 staining (Supplementary Figure
High-resolution confocal imaging revealed that the irregular-shaped edematous BIN1-immunoreactive patches were found within or in juxtaposition to amyloid deposits (Figure
Quantitative analysis of the number of deposits positive for BIN1 in the cortex using two antibodies (goat pAb N19 and pAb BSH3; Supplementary Figure
Similar results were obtained using a third antibody, mAb 2F11, which is specific for BIN1 isoforms lacking the exon 7-encoded residues (88.73 ± 1.44%).
The 5XFAD mice display a sharp increase in cerebral Aβ levels coinciding with robust amyloid deposition between 4 and 6 months of age
Intracellular amyloid and a few extracellular amyloid deposits developed in deep layers of the cortex as early as 1 month of age, as visualized by staining with antibody M78, which selectively reacts with fibrillar Aβ (Figure
BIN1 accumulation in amyloid deposits can be observed even at these early (ie, less dense) deposits (Figure
Moreover, amyloid deposit associated-BIN1 was also observed at late stages of pathogenesis (13-month-old animals; data not shown).
These findings indicate that the association of BIN1 with amyloid deposits is neither a terminal feature of the pathology nor specific for early stages of pathogenesis.
We wanted to exclude the possibility that the epitope retrieval step required for optimal staining of BIN1 in oligodendrocyte and processes could have contributed to non-selective BIN1 staining in and near amyloid deposits.
To this end, we optimized the conditions for BIN1 staining of brain tissue processed using passive CLARITY technique, without the need for epitope retrieval
In optimally cleared brain sections from a 2-month-old 5XFAD animal, we could visualize BIN1 localization in smaller oligodendrocyte cell bodies and along parallel-oriented processes with short barbed branches (Supplementary Figure
Under these staining conditions, we readily observed BIN1 accumulation in amorphous structures adjacent to Aβ deposits, visualized by mAb 3D6 (Supplementary Figure
In addition to extracellular deposits, intracellular Aβ accumulation in neuronal perikaryal and apical dendrites is apparent at this early stage of pathogenesis in this model
However, these intraneuronal Aβ accumulations showed no overlap with BIN1 staining (Supplementary Figure
Interestingly, we also observed lower-intensity BIN1 staining of indeterminate structures that are virtually devoid of Aβ staining (Supplementary Figure
To confirm the findings from 5XFAD mice, we performed immunostaining of brain tissue from additional transgenic mouse and rat models of amyloid deposition
Aberrant BIN1 accumulation in close proximity to amyloid deposits was confirmed in three transgenic mouse models: PDAPP mice (APP V717F ; line 109), APP/PS1 mice (APP Swe /PS1 ΔE9 ; line 85) and Tg21 (APP Swe /PS1 L166P ) mice
Finally, BIN1 immunoreactivity associated with amyloid deposits was also observed in a transgenic rat model of AD (APP Swe /PS1 ΔE9 ; line TgF344-AD) (9) (Figure
Thus, antibodies raised in three different species against nonoverlapping epitopes of BIN1 reveal amyloid depositassociated BIN1 immunoreactivity in independent transgenic models of AD.
To determine whether the BIN1immunoreactivity associated with amyloid deposits is also present in human AD, we performed immunohistochemistry on serial sections of frontal cortex Brodmann Area 9 in patients with AD.
As reported in our previous work
A closer examination revealed patchy and edematous BIN1 immunoreactivity within and tangential to the area occupied by amyloid plaques (Figure
Despite these abnormalities, BIN1 immunoreactivity does not show an obvious association with senile plaques of individuals with AD, when observed using the available commercial and in-house antibodies.

Characterization of BIN1 localization with amyloid deposits
Dystrophic neurites and neuropil threads in the corona of senile plaques in human AD and in transgenic models accumulate APP, BACE1, ubiquitin and other proteins
To further characterize BIN1 immunoreactivity associated with amyloid deposits, we performed immunofluorescence confocal microscopy analysis of the relative localization of BIN1 in comparison to APP and BACE1.
As expected, APP and BACE1 localized to bulbous structures around amyloid deposits in the cortex and hippocampus of 5XFAD mice.
However, BIN1 did not localize to these axonal swellings, indicating that BIN1 is not a component of the dystrophic neurites encircling amyloid deposits (Figure
To confirm the above findings, we performed staining of BIN1 with APP in brain tissue processed using passive CLARITY technique.
Whereas APP localized within dystrophic neurites is striking, BIN1 appeared to flocculate in the area enclosed by dystrophic neurites but was not present within the swollen neurites (Supplementary Figure
In addition, we observed BIN1 accumulation in amorphic structures surrounded by APP-positive dystrophic neurites (Supplementary Figure
To further validate the notion that amyloid deposit-associated BIN1 does not represent the accumulation within axonal structures, we performed co-immunofluorescence analysis of BIN1 and its paralog Amphiphysin 1, which is enriched axons and axon terminals
Amphiphysin 1 staining appeared punctate, which is consistent with its presynaptic localization, but was absent in the area occupied by amyloid deposits.
There was little, if any, co-localization of Amphiphysin 1 with BIN1 that has accumulated near amyloid deposits (Figure
Furthermore, as reported previously
However, BIN1 staining showed no overlap with these dystrophic structures containing phospho-neurofilament-H (Figure
The presence of an increased number of activated astrocytes and microglia near amyloid deposits is a characteristic neuroinflammatory feature of AD pathology
We considered the possibility that deposit-associated BIN1 might represent an elevated BIN1 expression mediated by neuroinflammation during amyloid deposition.
To test this hypothesis, we performed confocal microscopy analysis of BIN1 and glial cell markers.
In 5-month-old 5XFAD mice, numerous GFAP+ reactive astrocytes were found surrounding the sites of amyloid deposition, visualized by ThioS staining.
However, these hypertrophic astrocytes were found negative for BIN1 staining (Figure
Similarly, numerous Iba1+ reactive microglia, whose processes were modeled to a bushy or phagocytic morphology, were detected near amyloid deposits, visualized by mAb 3D6.
In some cases, phagocytic processes emerging from amoeboid microglial cell bodies were found adjacent to BIN1 immunoreactivity near amyloid deposits.
Although there was certain coincidental overlap between strong Iba1 staining and punctate BIN1 staining, the microglial cell body as well as their slender processes showed little resemblance to the overall shape of BIN1+ oligodendrocytes or depositassociated BIN1 (Figure
The lack of BIN1 staining of Iba1+ microglia was further validated in brain tissue processed using the CLARITY technique and immunostained using mAb 2F11 (Supplementary Figure
Thus, the accrual of BIN1 in deposits does not represent an upregulation of BIN1 expression in microglia or astrocytes, two key players in the inflammatory response in AD pathology.
In the above experiments, we observed that at the sites of cortical amyloid deposition, BIN1 staining appeared to be closer to the core relative to mAb 3D6 staining (Figure
In hippocampal amyloid deposits, BIN1 accumulated morphologically in various shapes from a central dense mass to multiple smaller irregular or circular accretion within mAb 3D6-immunoreactivity (Supplementary Figure
The quantification of ThioS intensity and BIN1 immunoreactivity in individual amyloid deposits revealed a significant correlation between amyloid fibril deposition and adjacent BIN1 accrual (Figure
Similarly, we observed a positive correlation between amyloid deposit-associated BIN1 intensity with Aβ (mAb 3D6), BACE1, GFAP and Iba1 immunoreactivity (Supplementary Figure
As noted above, there was a decrease in the density of BIN1-positive fibers in the area immediately around the amyloid deposits in 5XFAD mice and human patients (Figure
Staining with independent antibodies revealed that slender BIN1-positive fibers appear to lead toward, but are detached from, the BIN1 accumulation near and within amyloid deposits (Figure
In light of our previous characterization of predominant BIN1 expression in mature oligodendrocytes and myelinated processes
Immunofluorescence analysis revealed no overlap of amyloid deposits with ASPA and TPPP25, two oligodendrocyte cell markers (Figure
Furthermore, whereas there was considerable overlap between BIN1 and MBP in slender myelinated processes, the irregular-shaped BIN1 accumulation near deposits showed no MBP staining (Figure
However, based on the presence of weak immunostaining for MBP in brain sections processed by CLARITY (and stained without epitope retrieval) we cannot formally rule out the possibility that the deposit-associated BIN1 could have originated from disintegration of oligodendrocyte processes in the vicinity of amyloid deposits (Supplementary Figure

Super-resolution and immuno-EM analysis of BIN1 accumulation near amyloid deposits
In order to map the localization of BIN1 with high spatial resolution within the context of amyloid deposits, we performed two-color super-resolution microscopy analysis of BIN1 and Aβ immunostaining using stimulated emission depletion (STED)
Figure
The region indicated by the boxed area was then imaged at higher resolution with a 100X objective to reveal individual amyloid deposits and associated BIN1.
A sub-region indicated by an arrow was then imaged using confocal and STED microscopy settings (Figure
The gain in resolution becomes readily apparent when the confocal and STED images are compared.
Several individual dots are discernible within the diffraction-limited structures when the STED and confocal images are overlaid (Supplementary Figure
The full-width-half-maximum of isolated small fluorescent spots in BIN1 STED images (analyzed by line scan and Lorentzian curve fit) was 33.03 ± 1.28 nm, confirming that we achieved diffractionunlimited resolution (Supplementary Figure
Particle analysis of BIN1-immunoreactive spots revealed that individual spots were present in sizes ranging in Feret's diameter (the maximum distance between two points along the perimeter of an individual spot) between 64 and 684 nm (mean size 104.2 ± 0.62 nm).
Moreover, ~45% of BIN1positive structures were 2585 nm 2 or smaller in area (corresponding to 5 or fewer pixels in the STED image), and circular or small rectangular in shape (aspect ratio 1.5-1.6)
(Supplementary Figure
The fluorescence intensity of individual spots showed a high positive correlation with the measured area, but their aspect ratio showed little correlation with the measured area (Supplementary Figure
Higher magnification of the pseudo colored STED images corresponding to Aβ and BIN1 immunostaining and an image overlay are depicted in Figure
The images show speckles of BIN1positive spots lining Aβ-positive elongated structures, with very little overlap between them.
In addition, a greater density of slightly larger BIN1-positive spots was found in adjacent regions devoid of Aβ staining.
These results confirm the accumulation of BIN1 with a high level of granularity in close proximity of Aβ in deposits.
To confirm the STED analysis, we used pre-embedding immunogold-EM to determine BIN1 ultrastructural distribution near Aβ deposits in the cortex and hippocampus of 6-month-old female 5XFAD mice using BSH3 antibody.
In ultrathin sections, we observed a high density of BIN1 immunogold particles associated with oligodendrocyte perikaryal and processes in the corpus callosum and the alveus (data not shown), confirming BIN1 expression in mature oligodendrocytes
Figure
In higher magnification images, BIN1-positive immunogold particles were found projected in-between and decorating the tips of, but clearly not within, Aβ fibrils (Figure
Notably, the particles in the proximity of amyloid fibrils were neither associated with oligodendrocyte cell body and their processes nor with membranous organelles of defined size or shape.
Moreover, the gold particles were not found within dystrophic neurites containing abundant multilaminar bodies.
A similar distribution of immunogold labeling of BIN1 adjacent to amyloid fibrils was found in hippocampal deposits in 5XFAD (Figure
BIN1 ultrastructural localization around the amyloid core of the deposits confirms our confocal microscopy analysis of BIN1 accumulation around ThioS-positive Aβ deposits.
Altogether, our results from confocal and STED microscopy combined with immunogold-EM localization demonstrate that BIN1 accumulates around Aβ deposits.

DISCUSSION
In this study, we have presented evidence for diseaseassociated BIN1 protein insolubility and aberrant localization and accumulation adjoining Aβ deposits in independent transgenic models of AD, including 5XFAD, APP/PS1, PDAPP and TgF344-AD rat model.
Abnormal BIN1 localization was also observed in the proximity of senile plaques in brains of patients with AD.
On the basis of observations from high-resolution imaging by confocal and STED microscopy, we determined that BIN1 accumulated in amorphous structures near the amyloid core but not within dystrophic neurites encircling Aβ deposits.
Finally, ultrastructure of peri-deposit BIN1 in the 5XFAD model showed shapeless aggregation decorating the edges of the amyloid fibrils.
These findings suggest that AD-associated pathological changes trigger BIN1 to coacervate near amyloid deposits.
Whereas the previously proposed BIN1 function in limiting Aβ production and Tau propagation predict regulation of neuronal endocytic trafficking by BIN1 as the mechanism that elevates the risk for LOAD
Neurodegenerative diseases are characterized by an accumulation of insoluble proteins over time.
Proteomic approaches have characterized changes in protein solubility in brains of humans with AD or animal models of AD pathogenesis
Along with Aβ, a set of proteins, including APOE, APOJ/Clusterin, complement proteins, α1-antichymotrypsin, histone H1 and amylin are deposited in senile plaques
In addition to extracellular protein accumulation, numerous proteins, including BACE1, APP, synaptophysin, LAMP1, cathepsin D, progranulin, Rag-C GTPase, kinesin heavy chain and Dynamitin aberrantly accumulate in neuronal dystrophies surrounding deposits in an age-dependent manner
Except for the proximity to presumably growing edges of amyloid fibrils, we found no association of BIN1 immunogold particles with any identifiable cellular structure or membranous organelle.
The immunogold-EM data along with the high granularity appearance of BIN1 as observed by STED microscopy lead us to infer that the peri-deposit BIN1 might represent pathology associated extracellular accumulation.
The identification of several exon-specific BIN1 peptides by proteomics analysis combined with immunoblot analysis indicates that multiple BIN1 isoforms, including the brainspecific isoform 1, become insoluble in mouse models of AD amyloidosis.
Antibodies raised against non-overlapping epitopes within the N-terminal BAR domain (N-19, 2F11, 13679) and the C-terminal SH3 domain (BSH3 and 13463) reacted with deposit-associated BIN1.
These findings and the lack of breakdown products of BIN1 in SDS-insoluble brain fractions provide evidence that it is full-length BIN1 molecules, and not some cleavage product, accumulate with Aβ in deposits.
Consistent with the data reported by Gowrishankar et al
Thus, the previously reported lack of BIN1 staining near amyloid deposits in the 5XDFAD model
In this regard, BIN1 immunostaining near and within amyloid deposits appears robust in brain sections cleared by the CLARITY method.
Although the reported roles for BIN1 in BACE1 endocytic trafficking and Aβ production
Nevertheless, the positive correlation we observe between BIN1 and ThioS or mAb 3D6 staining intensity suggests a close relationship between amyloid deposition and aberrant BIN1 accrual.
If the absence of BIN1 in dystrophic neurites suggests that the deposit-associated BIN1 did not originate from the same subcellular compartment, what then is the cellular origin of this BIN1?
BIN1 accumulating in the proximity of Aβ deposits could be stained with mAb 2F11, which is specific for BIN1 isoforms lacking the exon7-encoded residues.
In the human and rodent brain, mAb 2F11 prominently immuno-stains mature oligodendrocytes and their processes and the white matter and reacts on immunoblots with multiple low-molecular-weight BIN1 isoforms that are more abundant in the white matter in comparison to the gray matter
These results indicate that at least a subset of the Aβ deposit-associated BIN1 originates from dying oligodendrocytes or degenerated oligodendrocyte processes which may have detached from dystrophic neurites surrounding the deposits.
White matter atrophy, the attrition of myelination, a reduction in myelin-specific proteins, and focal demyelination have been well documented in the human AD
There is a diminution as well as an abnormal appearance of myelin basic protein staining in the vicinity of amyloid deposits in the 5XFAD brain.
This finding is in agreement with previously reported demyelination, defragmentation and edematous swellings of myelinated fibers reported in the 3xTg-AD, Tg2576 and APP/PS1 mouse models of amyloidosis
In addition to MBP, the pernicious influence of Aβ deposition in plaques led to the loss of TPPP25 and ASPA (this study) as well as myelin oligomeric protein MOG (3) in the immediate area surrounding the deposits, consistent with degenerating and decomposing myelin tracts.
Thus, the accumulation of BIN1 near amyloid deposits appears to be selective among the proteins expressed by mature oligodendrocytes.
Our findings reveal some differences patterns of deposit-associated BIN1 accumulation in the five animal models.
Despite similar amyloid deposit characteristics (ie, congophilic, neuritic and amyloid deposits with a compact core), these models differ in the onset of amyloid deposition and the extent of neuronal loss.
Whereas the deposits begin to appear as early as 1-2 month in the 5XFAD and Tg21 models
Similarly, in the rat model only occasional deposits are observed at 6 months of age and profuse deposition is documented at 15 months of age
Thus, it is plausible that the onset of the high Aβ concentration needed to initiate amyloid deposition within the animal's lifespan and the morphology of the amyloid deposit itself influences how BIN1 accumulates near the deposits.
In comparison to BIN1 accumulation near Aβ deposits in rodent models of AD, a somewhat different pattern of BIN1 staining, characterized by the presence of fragmented edematous BIN1-positive punctate structures but not frank accumulation, was observed near senile plaques in the brains of patients with AD.
This differential accumulation between the mouse model and human could be the result of non-exclusive independent processes.
First, the intensity and efficiency of the inflammatory response between human AD and mouse models could lead to disparate outcomes in the levels of extracellular BIN1 in the proximity of Aβ deposits
In comparison to the slower process of senile plaque formation (which occurs over decades), amyloid deposition occurs rapidly in mouse models of AD [in just several weeks
The temporal difference could account for an optimal inflammatory response in the human AD, which localizes microglia and astrocytes to senile plaques, to efficiently eliminate the accumulation of aggregated proteins without getting overburdened.
Second, it is conceivable that the BIN1 enrichment in the mouse models is related to the rapid degeneration of glial cells near amyloid deposits, whereas in the human cases, such as precipitous glial cell degeneration near senile plaques is not present.
Third, mouse models of AD amyloidosis do not recapitulate the entire process of human brain senile plaque formation and the same degree of neurodegeneration
For example, potential differences could exist in the mouse vs. human brain in how efficiently extracellular BIN1 could be cleared from the brain via the glymphatic system, which has been recently recognized as a major efflux pathway for Aβ peptides in the human brain
Finally, our immuno-EM analysis suggests the possibility that BIN1 immunogold particles could be present within neuronal intracytoplasmic compartment surrounding amyloid deposits, which has been extensively characterized by EM analysis of deposits in the PDAPP model
In comparison to the rodent brain, the human brain gray matter (from individuals without AD) has lower levels of neuronal BIN1 isoforms (Supplementary Figure
Thus, the reduced BIN1 immunostaining near the deposits in the human AD might be related to a paucity of neuronal BIN1 isoform expression in humans and the apparent AD-associated decrease in BIN1:H isoform resulting from profound neuronal loss in the gray matter despite readily-detectable levels of BIN1 in the soma of a subset of neurons in AD cases
A more detailed analysis of BIN1 expression and localization during the progression of AD in a large number of cases would be needed to experimentally test the above possibilities.
Our findings on the accrual of BIN1 near the vast majority of amyloid deposits may have implications for understanding the role of BIN1 as a risk factor in AD.
Notably, BIN1 accumulation near the deposits commenced in transgenic mice as young as 1-month of age (a stage with only a few deposits) and persisted in older mice at 8-month of age (Figure
Thus, the aberrant accumulation is not a stage-specific event in the context of pathogenesis in AD.
Elucidating the mechanisms by which BIN1 becomes insoluble and accumulates near amyloid deposits, as well as determining what if any role these BIN1 deposits have in AD pathogenesis, will be a focus of our future investigation.
method followed.
The boxed region in the overlay image is shown at higher magnification at the bottom.
BIN1 (green) accumulates near at the core of an amyloid deposit (white arrow) but is absent from intricate microglial processes (Iba1; magenta) and dystrophic neurites (APP staining; blue) surrounding the deposit.
In addition, BIN1 was not observed in homeostatic microglia (magenta; yellow arrowhead) or neurons (APP staining in blue; white arrowheads).
Asterisks indicate BIN1 staining in oligodendrocyte soma.
The partial overlap between BIN1 Iba1 staining appears to be coincidental because the shapes of the individual BIN1 and Iba1 staining are distinct.
Scatter plot analysis of individual BIN1 immunofluorescence spot intensity with the measured area shows a strong correlation.
D. Scatter plot analysis indicates that BIN1immunoreactive particles aspect ratio is not correlated with the measured area.
Overall, these results suggest BIN1 particles are mainly amorphous, scattered, and tiny.



Figure 1 .
Figure 1.
BIN1 becomes insoluble in the 5XFAD mouse model of AD. A. Brains from 5-month-old 5XFAD mice and NTg littermates were subjected to sequential extraction using PBS, NP-40, sodium deoxycholate (DOC), and SDS and fractions were analyzed by immunoblots.
B. Quantification of ~80 kDa BIN1 isoforms (BIN1:H) extracted in each fraction as a percentage of total BIN1:H.
A non-specific immunoreactive species found in the input and NP-40 soluble fraction is



Figure 2 .
Figure 2. Aberrant BIN1 immunoreactivity near amyloid deposits in 5XFAD mice.
Brains from 4-month-old 5XFAD mice were analyzed by immunohistochemistry. Lower magnification (10X) images of the hippocampal layers are shown on the top and higher magnification (40X) images taken from the cortex are shown at the bottom.
Aberrant patchy



Figure 3 .
Figure 3. BIN1 accumulates in nearly all amyloid deposits in the 5XFAD mouse model.
A. Representative images of BIN1 (2F11; green) and fAβ (M78; magenta) immunolabeling in the cortex of 8-months-old NTg and 5XFAD mice.
B. Representative high-magnification image (63X) reveals irregular staining and patchy BIN1 accumulation in proximity to amyloid



Figure 4 .
Figure 4. BIN1 accumulates in amyloid deposits at early stages of pathogenesis and in multiple models of amyloidosis.
A. Immunofluorescence staining for fAβ (M78; Blue) or Aβ (3D6; red) and BIN1 (N-19, green) in the cortex of a 1-month-old 5XFAD mouse.
Strong BIN1 immunofluorescence is apparent within amyloid deposits (white arrows) and in oligodendrocytes (yellow asterisks).
B. Representative images (deconvolved projection of z-stacks) of BIN1 (BSH3; green)



Figure 5 .
Figure 5. BIN1 accumulates with an amorphous profile distinct from dystrophic neurites and glial cells.
A. Representative images of spatial separation of BIN1 immunofluorescence (green) from dystrophic neurites (white arrows) containing APP and BACE1, and from presynaptic Amph1 labeling (magenta) in 4-months-old 5XFAD mice.
Strong BIN1 immunofluorescence is observed in proximity to the area of the ThioSpositive amyloid core (T; demarcated by a white outline but the staining is not shown for simplicity).
B. pNF-H (magenta) immunofluorescence observed in axons and bulbous swellings (white arrows) near ThioS stained amyloid deposits (indicated by T) shows no overlap with BIN1



Figure 6 .
Figure 6.
Peri-deposit, BIN1 positive fibers extend into amyloid deposits but are distinct from oligodendrocyte cell markers.
A. Immunofluorescence staining of BIN1 (BSH3 top panels and 2F11 bottom panels; green) in the 5-months-old 5XFAD cortex shows BIN1positive fibers (arrows) adjacent to the core accumulation (asterisks), within Aβ deposits (3D6 top panels and M78 bottom panels; red).
B. The BIN1-positive fibers (arrows) observed by immunostaining with an antibody specific for BIN1-exon7 isoforms (2F11; green) within the area of fibrillar Aβ deposits (M78; red).
C. Representative images



Figure 7 .
Figure 7. Super-resolution microscopy resolution of BIN1 accumulation as distinct puncta adjacent to amyloid fibrils.
A. Representative confocal images of 4-months-old 5XFAD mouse subiculum (Sub) show BIN1 (BSH3; green) accumulation in almost all Aβ deposits (3D6; magenta).
The boxed region in the left panel (20X magnification) is shown at higher magnification (100X) in the right panel.
B. The boxed region indicated by an arrow (right panel) was imaged at diffraction-limited resolution by confocal microscopy (top panels) and diffraction-unlimited super-resolution by STED microscopy (bottom panels).
Note the marked increase in resolution by STED imaging and the elimination of out of focus blur artifact caused by high laser intensity.
(C) Higher magnification of the boxed region of the subdiffraction image in panel B shows the close juxtaposition of Aβ and BIN1 immunofluorescence.
CC, corpus callosum.



Figure 8 .
Figure 8. Ultrastructural localization of BIN1 in amyloid deposits in the 6-months-old 5XFAD model.
A. Low magnification micrograph of ultrathin (52 nm) section with an amyloid deposit located in layer VI of the cortex near corpus callosum (CC).
View of the amyloid core (A; red mask) with unmyelinated dystrophic neurites (DN; blue masks).
Around the deposit, the core-fibers were decorated with gold particles (BSH3 immunostaining of BIN1) and apparent lack of immunogold reactivity in the dystrophic neurites.
B. Representative micrograph from serially stained sections of a cortical deposit imaged at higher magnification shows numerous immunogold particles surrounding the "hairs" of the amyloid core.
C. Higher magnification confirmed the absence of BIN1 immunogold particles within dystrophic neurites.
D. Representative higher magnification image revealing the presence of BIN1 adjacent to amyloid fibrils in a hippocampal deposit.



Figure S5 .
Figure S5.
BIN1 accumulation in deposits correlates with glial activation and neuronal dystrophy.
The scatter plots represent BIN1 staining intensity plotted against Aβ (3D6), BACE1, Iba1, or GFAP intensity in individual amyloid deposits (Aβ, n = 380; BACE1, n = 382; Iba1, n = 680; GFAP, n = 739 deposits from 12 animals at 4-months-old).Immunofluorescence intensity of peri-deposit BIN1 correlates with amyloid deposition, the extent of axonal dystrophy (BACE1), and the accumulation of glial cells at deposit sites.



Figure S6 .
Figure S6.
Super-resolution imaging of BIN1 localization by STED microscopy.
A. Combined diffraction-limited confocal image (red) and subdiffraction-resolution STED image (white) depicts the gain of resolution achieved by STED imaging mode.
B. Illustration of spot analysis performed on STED images using line scans across the smallest spots.
C. Lorentzian curve fit for normalized intensities of BIN1 immunofluorescence spots quantified by line scan analysis.
The profile of individual BIN1 fluorescence spots has a fullwidth at half-maximum (FWHM) of 33 nm.



Figure S7 .
Figure S7.
Particle analysis around the deposits using STED based imaging.
A. A larger area of the STED image