Retinal imaging in Alzheimer’s disease
Identifying biomarkers of Alzheimer's Disease (AD) will accelerate the understanding of its pathophysiology, facilitate screening and risk stratification, and aid in developing new therapies.
Developments in non-invasive retinal imaging technologies, including optical coherence tomography (OCT), OCT-angiography and digital retinal photography, have provided a means to study neuronal and vascular structures in the retina in people with AD.
Both qualitative and quantitative measurements from these retinal imaging technologies (e.g.
thinning of peripapillary RNFL, inner retinal layer, and choroidal layer, reduced capillary density, abnormal vasodilatory response) have been shown to be associated with cognitive function impairment and risk of AD.
The development of computer algorithms for respective retinal imaging methods has further enhanced the potential of retinal imaging as a viable tool for rapid, early detection and screening of AD.
In this review, we present an update of current retinal imaging techniques and their potential applications in AD research.
We also discuss the newer retinal imaging techniques and future directions in this expanding field.

Introduction
Alzheimer's disease (AD), the most common form of dementia, is a major public health and clinical challenge globally.
Despite decades in research, the pathophysiology of AD remains unclear.
The current thinking is that the neuropathology of AD, as characterised by accumulation of misfolded amyloid-β and tau protein, begins years before the onset of clinical symptoms.
Given this long natural history, there are opportunities for early disease detection and thus timely intervention.
Indeed, recent clinical trials have suggested the efficacy of certain measures (e.g.
lifestyle interventions or medication) in improving symptoms or slowing progression of AD.
Thus, biomarker confirmation has been proposed to improve the precision of AD diagnosis and now even biomarkers are indispensable for an AD diagnosis.
0]
The 2018 National Institute on Aging and Alzheimer's Association Research Framework defines AD in vivo by abnormal biomarkers of cerebral amyloidβ deposition and pathologic tau and treats cognitive impairment as a symptom or sign of the disease.
This implies the cognitive function of a person affected by AD can thus range from cognitively unimpaired (preclinical AD), to mild cognitive impairment (MCI) (AD MCI), to dementia (AD dementia).
Although this latest framework encourages in vivo detection and study of AD at an earlier stage (e.g.
preclinical AD or AD MCI), current technologies to detect amyloidβ and tau pathology using positron emission tomography (PET) brain imaging or cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) examination are limited due to their high cost, technical complexity, invasiveness of the procedures, and/or the necessity of using radioactive tracers.
Thus, identifying alternative, more accessible technologies and biomarkers of pre-clinical AD prior to onset of cognitive impairment may accelerate the understanding of the pathogenesis of AD, facilitate screening and stratification of risk, and ultimately aid in the discovery, development and testing of new treatments or preventive therapies in clinical trials.
e retina, a neurosensory layered tissue lining the back of the eye and directly connected to the brain via the optic nerve, receives light that the lens has focused, converts the light into neural signals, and sends these signals on to the brain for visual recognition.
The retina has long been considered a "platform" to study disorders in the central nervous system (CNS), as it is an accessible extension of the brain in terms of embryology, anatomy and physiology (Box 1).
gure
shows the optic nerve head, macular area, nerve fiber layer, arterioles and venules captured from a retinal photograph.
Similar to the neurovascular unit (NVU) in the CNS, the retinal NVU contains neurons (ganglion cells, amacrine cells, horizontal and bipolar cells), glial cells (Müller cells and astrocytes) and vascular cells (endothelial cells and pericytes).
Evidence of retinal involvement in AD dementia has been shown in histopathological studies of postmortem specimens.
S1 Associations of AD dementia with common eye diseases with overt clinical signs, such as age-related macular degeneration (AMD), diabetic retinopathy (DR) and glaucoma, have also been reported.
In addition to digital retinal photography (Figure
These retinal imaging technologies which include optical coherence tomography (OCT) (Figure
nerve fiber layer, ganglion cell layer and inner-plexiform layer) and microvasculature (e.g.
foveal avascular zone), respectively.
Table
Details of these technologies are summarized in Supplementary Section 1.
In comparison to brain imaging technology, retinal imaging has the advantages of being non-invasive, comparatively low cost, increasingly widely available in non-tertiary (e.g.
primary care and community) settings, and having different variables for quantifying the structures of retina.
The development of next generation computational techniques such as artificial intelligence (AI) and deep learning (DL)   algorithms have further enhanced the potential of data rich retinal imaging as a promising tool and a source of biomarker for AD, particular for individuals at preclinical AD stage.
However, most of the retinal imaging technologies are still specialized equipment and the interpretation of data requires expertise from ophthalmologists or visual scientists.
In this review, we present an update of the current retinal imaging technologies, recent research findings, and future research applications in the study of AD.

Common Eye Diseases and AD
Vision itself may be an important stimulus for the maintenance of cognitive health or reflect possible relationships between AD with underlying eye diseases.
S2-S7 Population-based and clinical studies have consistently shown that visual impairment S8-S14 and a range of common eye diseases
For example, in one study, older persons with visual impairment were twice as likely to have cognitive dysfunction than those with good vision.
S11
Supplementary Table
These epidemiological relationships suggest shared risk factors (e.g., hypertension, smoking) and possibly pathogenic pathways (e.g.
neurodegeneration, amyloid-β deposits, chronic microvascular insults) between these ocular diseases and AD dementia.
However, the associations have not been consistently observed in the literature, particularly in studies at a population-level using large data linkage.
compared with the reference cohort) and glaucoma (rate ratio: 1.01 [0.96, 1.06], compared with the reference cohort) with AD dementia.
S2,S7 Lee et al. however suggested that the patterns of associations between eye diseases and AD dementia may be different when the ocular conditions are categorized as recent (diagnosed within 0-5 years) or established (>5 years) diagnoses.
I 2 =38%).
Hence, it is likely that AD dementia and common eye diseases are linked via complex, inter-linked, multi-mechanistic pathophysiology and pathways.

Retinal Imaging Measures and AD

Retinal neuronal layer changes at optic disc and macula
AD is classically characterised by loss of neurons and synapses in the cerebral cortex and specific subcortical regions.
Previous histological studies have demonstrated that patients with AD also have loss of retinal ganglion cells (RGCs) and their axons.
The retinal nerve fiber layer (RNFL) surrounding the optic disc (peripapillary RNFL) reflects RGC axons (Figure
RNFL thickness can be measured by techniques including timedomain OCT (first generation of OCT)
Spectral-domain OCT (SD-OCT) and swept-source OCT, a newer generation of OCT, provides information on inner retinal layers with greater resolution, such as the ganglion cell layer and the inner-plexiform layer (Figure
These studies first showed that SD-OCT measurements of both peripapillary RNFL (inter-visit intra-class correlation coefficient
[ICC]: 0.927 [range: 0.845-0.961]
and coefficients of variation [CoV]: 3.83% [range: 2.71-5.25%]),
and GC-IPL (inter-visit ICC was 0.968 (0.941-0.985), and CoV was 1.91% [range: 1.24-2.32%])
are reproducible in patients with cognitive impairment.
I 2 = 89%) and macular GC-IPL (SMD= -0.46,
I 2 = 71%) compared with controls,
the two SD-OCT measurements, some studies suggested that macular GC-IPL may be more sensitive than peripapillary RNFL for assessing neurodegeneration related to AD.
who also have thinner RNFL and thinner inner retinal layers.
First, the cerebral pathology of AD may affect the neuronal connections of the visual tract and cause retrograde degeneration of the optic nerve and retinal layers, resulting in thinner retinal neuronal and axonal layers including RNFL and GC-IPL.
However, peripapillary RNFL could not discriminate controls from AD patients with posterior cortical atrophy, a clinical variant of AD with dominant involvement of parieto-occipital (i.e.
visual) cortex, where one would explicitly expect this retrograde degeneration to occur.
8]
In addition, longitudinal data from the UK Biobank (n=32,038) enrolling healthy community dwelling participants also showed that thinner RNFL is a precursor of future decline in cognitive function.
ecifically, they found that those in the lowest 2 quintiles of baseline peripapillary RNFL distribution had twice the likelihood of a developing a decline in cognitive function over a 3-year follow-up interval compared with those in the top RNFL quintile.
In regard to GC-IPL, data from the Rotterdam Study showed that thinner GC-IPL is only associated with prevalent dementia (per 1-µm decrease odds ratio: 1.03 [1.00, 1.09]), but not with incident dementia (per 1-µm decrease hazard ratio: 1.02 [0.99, 1.05]) or incident AD dementia (per 1-µm decrease hazard ratio: 1.02   [0.99, 1.05]).
The Rotterdam study group speculated that there may be a time delay between optic nerve degeneration (reflected by RNFL thinning) and RGC loss (reflected by GC-IPL thinning) as the damage to the optic nerve may cause swelling or gliosis formation of the RGC axons (i.e.
RNFL).
Therefore, the neurodegenerative process may manifest itself in the retina initially as thinner peripapillary RNFL, after which thinning of GC-IPL follows.

Retinal arteriolar and venular changes
There is also substantial evidence indicating a vascular disease component in AD pathophysiology.
Clinical and epidemiological studies show that vascular diseases and their risk factors commonly accompanies AD.
morbidity of cerebrovascular disease and amyloid-β is associated with cognitive decline and neurodegeneration.
In particular, microvascular or small vessel disease is now thought to be a major contributor to dementia and cognitive decline.
S49-S52 For example, an autopsy-based neuropathological study showed that a large majority of patients diagnosed with AD without clinical evidence of mixed (vascular) dementia, had microvascular pathology including lacunes, cerebral microbleeds and multiple microinfarcts indicative of small vessel disease.
e retinal circulation of arterioles and venules, measuring 100-300 µm in size, are the only optically accessible small blood vessels in the human body.
The retinal vasculature can be imaged by either conventional retinal photography (Figure
However, because dye-based fluorescein angiography is invasive, conventional retinal photography has been the most commonly used retinal imaging technique to capture clinical vascular disease signs, such as those typically seen in patients with diabetes or hypertension (e.g.
retinal hemorrhage, cotton wool spots, microaneurysms, arteriovenous nicking, enhanced arteriolar light reflex).
In addition to these qualitative signs, computerized algorithms have been developed to measure quantitative changes in the retinal vasculature, for instance the calibre of arterioles and venules.
7]
Based on Murray's principle of minimum work, the human circulatory system is a branching system that conforms to optimum design principal to minimize the energy required to maintain blood flow.
Several algorithms can be used to analyze retinal photographs taken by conventional retinal cameras.
Figure
Other software and algorithms include IVAN (Integrative Vessel Analysis),
S58 Supplementary Table
In general, these studies showed a sparser retinal vascular network (indicated by decreased retinal vascular fractal dimension) is associated with AD dementia,
For example, Frost et al found that decreased arteriolar fractal dimension (1.201 vs. 1.235, p=0.008) and venular fractal dimension (1.171 vs.   1.210, p<0.001) in AD dimension, compared with controls.
Cheung et al found that decreased arteriolar fractal dimension (per-standard deviation [SD] decrease odds ratio 1.35 [1.08, 1.68]) and venular fractal dimension (per-SD decrease odds ratio 1.47 [1.17, 1.84]) are associated with AD dementia.
These findings suggest that changes in the retinal vascular fractal dimension may also reflect a departure from optimal integrity of the cerebral microcirculation (e.g., rarefaction) related to cognitive impairment.
Studies also showed that narrower retinal venular calibre is associated with AD dementia, which may be related to an increased venous wall thickness due to collagen deposition in cerebral veins.
Although some studies observed significant associations between retinal vascular tortuosity and AD dementia, the relationship remains equivocal.
Cheung et al.
It is noted that increased retinal vascular tortuosity is associated with higher blood pressure and diabetes,
participants in the study by Cheung et al had higher prevalence of both hypertension and diabetes than participants in studies by Williams and Frost).
On the other hand, if different pathophysiological mechanisms occur at different stages of AD,
Thus, clinical and demographic data and stages of AD should be taken into account when interpreting findings across studies.

Retinal capillary changes
In addition to the arterioles and venules, changes at the capillary level (5 to 15 µm) may also be studied for their relationship to AD.
Images captured by OCT-A (Figure
p=0.002) and an enlarged foveal avascular zone area (0.47mm 2 vs. 0.33mm 2 , p=0.001) in 26 patients with AD dementia, compared with 26 age-and sex-match controls.
S74 These observations are in line with disturbances in the morphology and function of cerebral capillary networks observed as antecedents to neurodegenerative changes associated with AD in animal models and postmortem studies.
S76-S78 However, the current literature is not entirely consistent.
For example, Querques et al. and den Haan et al. did not observe any differences in capillary network density and foveal avascular zone between patients with AD dementia and controls.
diabetes, axial length of the eyeball).

Choroidal vasculature changes
Deep to the retina, the choroid contributes blood supply to the outer retina.
In addition to the retinal vasculature (arterioles, venules, capillary network), SD-OCT with enhanced depth imaging, or swept-source OCT, has now made it possible to image the choroidal vasculature.
Figure
A few case-control studies have observed thinning of the choroidal layer as assessed by SD-OCT with enhanced depth imaging in AD dementia (Supplementary Table
p=0.001) in 21 patients with mild to moderate AD dementia, compared with controls.
It was postulated that choroidal thinning indicates an abnormal choroidal blood supply associated with vasoregression or atrophic changes related to a series of pathologic events (e.g.
inflammatory cascade) triggered by amyloid-β deposition in the brain.
µm), compared with controls.
S81 This finding is consistent with a report on postmortem eyes from AD dementia patients and animal models of AD.

Vasodilatory response changes
The retinal NVU contains neurons, glial cells and vascular cells, similar to the NVU in the CNS.
This dynamic reaction of retinal vessels to flickering light is influenced by neurovascular coupling and can therefore be used to assess the function of NVU in the retina.
A few studies have explored to use DVA to investigate the flicker-induced vasodilatory response in AD, but the current findings are still preliminary and inconclusive.
Kotliar et al.   observed that overall flicker-induced vasodilatory response is delayed in AD dementia (arterial time to reach 30% of maximum dilation: 7.0 seconds vs. 5.0 seconds, p<0.001), compared with controls, suggesting delayed arterial reaction in AD.
They also demonstrated that this DVA parameter can discriminate AD dementia with an AUROC of 0.853.
However, Golzan et al.
only   found a positive correlation between neocortical amyloid-β standardised uptake value ratio (SUVR) measured by PET with the amplitude of retinal arterial pulsations, but did not observe any correlations with dynamic flicker-induced retinal arteriolar or venular dilation in an elderly cohort.
It is noteworthy that patients with diabetes and DR have reduced flicker-induced vasodilatory response.
S85,S86 Kotliar's and Golzan's studies did not specifically exclude those with diabetes and with ocular diseases, which may confound the results reported.
Querques et al.
recently conducted a similar study but excluded subjects with diabetes and optic nerve or retinal diseases and reported that retinal arteriolar dilation in response to flickering light is reduced in the AD dementia group, compared with controls (0.77% vs. 3.53%, p=0.002) and the MCI group (0.77% vs. 2.84%, p=0.045).
This observation suggests that decreased retinal and cerebral blood flow (i.e.
hypoperfusion) might impair the endothelial function and the production of nitric oxide, which is vital for the vasodilatation process. 52,
S71

Retinal vessel oxygen saturation changes
The retina is one of the most metabolically active tissues in the human body.
Retinal vessel oxygen saturation can now also be measured noninvasively, based on estimation of haemoglobin oxygen saturation in retinal vessels by taking two simultaneous retinal photographs with 570-and 600-nm light.
Retinal venules were 51.9±6.0%
saturated in moderate AD compared with 49.7±7.0% in healthy subjects (p=0.02).

Peripheral retinal changes
Drusen deposits are the hallmark of AMD.
Amyloid-β has been found in drusen deposits in the retina.
They found that patients with AD dementia are more likely to have drusen deposits in the peripheral retina compared to controls (25.4% vs. 4.2%, p=0.04), especially in the superior nasal quadrant.
Supplementary Figure
In addition, Ukalovin et al. also found that the severity of cerebral amyloid angiopathy, a vascular feature associated with AD dementia and cognitive decline,
p<0.05).
macular and optic disc regions).
Further studies are required to determine whether the peripheral retinal changes have similar or additional predictive value for AD dementia or cognitive decline, and to develop better understanding of the significance of these associations, particularly since peripheral changes can also occur in the intermediate to advanced stage of AMD.

Retinal fluorescence lifetime changes
The retina has several kinds of endogenous fluorophores, including lipofuscin, advanced glycation end products, collagen, melanin, and elastin.
Retinal fluorophores can be excited by monochromatic light (e.g.
laser) and gain a higher level of energy before returning to their ground state by emitting photons of longer wavelengths than the exciting light (i.e.
fluorescence lifetime).
S94 Each fluorophore possesses a characteristic fluorescence lifetime.
Fluorescence lifetime imaging ophthalmoscopy (FLIO) is a technique for measuring fluorescence lifetime, which is calculated by the average amount of time a fluorophore remains in the excited state following excitation, to allow detecting metabolic alterations in the retina for various retinal disease such as AMD at an early stage.
S94 Jentsch et al. found that a longer retinal fluorescence lifetime measured by FLIO is correlated with higher tau protein concentration in CSF in patients with AD dementia.
9 ± 93.3, 454.4 ± 38.6   picosecond; 475.0 ± 71.6, 394.1 ± 28.2 picosecond in short spectral channel and long spectral channel of AD and control groups, respectively, p = 0.036 and 0.024), which is also correlated with GC-IPL thickness, amyloid-β and tau protein in CSF.

Age-related effect on the retina
Age-related changes are well-reported in the retinal neuronal and vascular structures as well as in the choroid.
RNFL and GC-IPL thicknesses decrease with increasing age in healthy adults.
Although most of the reported studies were casecontrol study design matched with age or included age as a confounding factor in the statistical models, how to taking aging effect into account during image interpretation in clinical practice should be further addressed.

Evidence of AD pathology in the retina is equivocal
Amyloid-β protein plaques and neurofibrillary tangles comprised of hyperphosphorylated tau protein are pathological hallmarks of AD.
Several histopathological studies have identified retinal amyloid-β deposits in animal models of AD
S1 A clinical study by Koronyo et al. also demonstrated an increased presence of amyloid-β in the retina of AD dementia patients compared to controls, especially in the peripheral superior quadrant, often clustered along blood vessels.
S1 Moreover, it is possible that accumulation of retinal amyloid-β plaques occurs earlier than in the brain and the amount increases with disease progression.
S44 Similar to those in the brain, retinal amyloid-β deposition also showed to be associated with marked neurodegeneration.
La Morgia et al.   demonstrated that there is amyloid-β deposition in and around degenerating melanopsin RGCs, suggesting amyloid-β is toxic to retinal neurons.
Koronyo et al. also reported that, when compared to matched controls, reduced cell counts in the RGC layer, inner nuclear layer and outer nuclear layer are observed in AD dementia patients along with accumulation of amyloid-β.
S43,S109,S110 These findings from animal studies are therefore consistent with the observations of clinical studies reporting thinner RNFL and GC-IPL in patients with AD dementia discussed above.
Apart from retinal amyloid-β deposition, animal studies also showed that there are tau aggregates in the retina of transgenic mice with a tau mutation.
S21,S114,
On the other hand, although amyloid is proclaimed as a toxic substance, it triggers the pathological process in the very initial state of the disease.
For instance, hippocampal volume is characteristically reduced in AD with congruent tau pathology in the corresponding region, whereas it lacks amyloid pathology in hippocampal region.
Furthermore, studies on relationships among amyloid, tau and retinal changes in the pathological study of AD are warranted.

Future Research
Studies to date suggest a range of retinal imaging technologies can be utilized to study different stages of AD.
However, more research is clearly needed.
For example, studies on relationships between retinal imaging measures and "standard" biomarkers of AD pathophysiology, as well as direct comparisons between different retinal imaging measures to determine relative sensitivity/specificity of each measure for AD clinical diagnosis or biomarker status are warranted.
Furthermore, some neuronal and vascular changes in the retina are similar between AD and ocular disease.
Some of these researches are discussed below.

Framework of Development and Validation of Retinal Imaging as a Source of Biomarkers
Disease-modifying treatments for AD are most likely to be successful if initiated early in the disease process, ideally before irreversible neurodegeneration and functional decline set in.
Therefore, discovering effective biomarkers of AD is a priority for development of new treatment.
A biomarker is defined as an objective substance, characteristic, or other parameter of a biological process that enables the assessment of a disease risk or prognosis and provides guidance for diagnosis or monitoring of treatment.
Different groups have proposed frameworks or roadmaps for biomarker development and validation for AD.
r example, Frisoni et al.
proposed a five-phase framework to foster the clinical validation of biomarkers for an early diagnosis of AD, adapted from the approach for cancer biomarkers.
These include preclinical exploratory studies, clinical assay development for AD pathology, retrospective studies using longitudinal data available in repositories, prospective diagnostic accuracy studies, and disease burden reduction studies.
A consistent framework to assess the validity of biomarkers for different clinical purposes is essentially important for implementation and clinical use in AD.
Currently, retinal imaging technologies cannot yet be considered a source of biomarker of AD as many areas of research remain conflicting and evidence-based guidelines on the use and interpretation of retinal imaging are currently lacking.
Most published studies have focused on demonstrating measure difference compared with controls and associations (linear or logistic regression models) between a set of retinal imaging measures with AD dementia only.
Moreover, studies on preclinical AD are largely lacking.
Table
In addition, some of the reported associations may not account for potential confounding factors (e.g.
ocular diseases and systemic conditions) and clinical stages of AD.
The current retinal imaging features (e.g., RNFL loss) are also non-specific to AD and not designed to fully describe and characterize the spectrum of AD-related disorders.
For example, there is a lack of consensus on how best to differentiate between retinal changes seen in glaucoma and AD dementia.
Typically, in patients with glaucoma, the reduction in peripapillary RNFL occurs in inferior and superior sectors
Many prior studies have also not evaluated retinal imaging for a specific clinical purpose such as screening, diagnosis, prognosis or monitoring of AD dementia.
Appropriate statistical analysis of biomarker validation should be performed (e.g.
performing area under the receiver operating characteristic curve to evaluate discriminative performance).
Finally, the definition of AD in the reports did not consistently include confirmation from current available biomarkers.
Thus, there is inadequate evidence on the clinical usefulness of retinal imaging measures as a biomarker for AD.
We suggest the following framework of research (Supplementary Table
First, studies should be designed and conducted to validate biomarkers from retinal images with a specific clinical purpose (e.g.
screening or risk stratification).
Second, diagnosis of AD should be defined in a consistent manner with the latest available criteria (e.g.
confirmation with current biomarkers).
Third, standard statistical measures of accuracy of biomarkers should be reported.
For example, if a study evaluates measures from retinal images as a potential screening tool, the sensitivity, specificity, false-positive and false-negative rates of retinal imaging should be reported.
The degree of abnormality and the prevalence (i.e.
how frequent is the abnormality found in AD) should be described.
Fourth, studies should be designed carefully to take into account many agerelated ocular conditions.
The effects of ocular factors (e.g.
axial length of the eyeball) on retinal imaging measures and the associations with common eye diseases (e.g.
glaucoma and AMD) should be determined and considered in the analysis and interpretation.
Fifth, the reproducibility of the retinal imaging measures should be determined, particularly if retinal imaging is used for disease diagnosis and monitoring on multiple follow-up visits.
Finally, the incremental benefit and cost-effectiveness of retinal imaging as well as acceptability to patients in different settings should be evaluated.
These areas should be reported in the framework of retinal imaging studies for AD.

Other New Retinal Imaging Technologies Related to AD
Several new retinal imaging technologies are also being explored which might provide additional value in this field.
Retinal hyperspectral imaging obtains a series of hyperspectral reflectance images, combing both spectral and spatial information, by scanning the retina with a continuous range of wavelengths of light.
S120,S121 This finding was further validated in recent in vivo human clinical studies by showing optical density spectral profiles are different between AD and controls, S122 and cases who are amyloid-β positive and negative on PET can be discriminated from the reflectance of hyperspectral retinal images with a machine learning based model for the classification.
Another major area of future research in the analysis of retinal images is AI.
The current retinal imaging measures (e.g.
reduction in RNFL thickness) are not necessarily specific to AD and not designed to fully describe and characterize the spectrum of AD-related disorders.
Recent developments of AI, particularly in DL, have potential to transform imaging technology in healthcare.
In retinal imaging, AI and DL technology have been developed in several areas, the two most prominent ones being first, in the assessment of retinal photographs for detection and screening of DR, S132-S137 AMD, S138-S140 glaucoma,
DL could be used to recognize specific pattern of retinal changes secondary to AD pathology (i.e.
"retinal fingerprint" of AD) potentially.
How might AI based retinal imaging be used potentially?
Supplementary Figure
By providing a simple 2-tier risk stratification output, this algorithm could assist physicians to identify asymptomatic individuals who are more likely to have AD in the community.
The availability of retinal imaging in eye clinics for assessing ocular diseases allows opportunistic screening for AD on a large scale.
Introducing retinal imaging in neurology clinics for subjects with memory issues would add a complementary risk profiling tool for assessing the risk of AD.
Higher-risk patients could then benefit from subsequent more intensive and specific (but expensive) examinations (e.g.
PET imaging of CSP analysis for identification of underlying disease pathologies).
This would potentially benefit the treatment workflow of AD if a disease-modifying therapy is successfully developed.

Clinical trials and outcome monitoring
While retinal imaging cannot fully replace current tests such as PET imaging or CSF analysis for detecting AD pathology (e.g.
amyloid-β and tau accumulation), retinal imaging offers several unique advantages over current biomarkers.
First, retinal imaging offers lower costs methods to identify appropriate study cohorts (i.e.
cognitively normal individuals with AD-related retinal characteristics) for recruitment into clinical trials of new treatments for dementia (e.g.
antiamyloid therapy to delay cognitive decline).
Measurements from retinal imaging (e.g.
neuronal and vascular changes) may also be used to assess optimal or suboptimal therapeutic response to medical intervention.
For example, the ENVIS-ion study, which aims to determine the effectiveness of low-dose aspirin in reducing the development of white-matter lesion and silent brain infraction, is also validating retinal vascular changes as potential treatment outcomes.
In addition, blood-based biomarkers, a less invasive and potentially cheaper approach, are being explored for aiding AD detection at early stage.
S151-S152 Combining both retinal imaging and blood-based biomarkers (i.e.
"multiple marker approach") may increase the accuracy to identify appropriate study cohorts for recruitment into the clinical trials, compared with using only a single marker.

Conclusions
There is an increasing body of research using current and emerging retinal imaging technology to study AD.
Newer retinal imaging technologies are increasingly available, are non-invasive, and comparatively low cost and easy to use for clinical and population studies.
While current research shows promising evidence that many retinal imaging measures show associations with AD, longitudinal studies are lacking and larger replication studies are necessary.
A framework for retinal imaging development and validation in AD should be developed, and followed by future studies to allow consistent comparison of findings.
Newer computational technology, such as AI hold promise to use retinal imaging as a "point of care" level test for screening, early risk assessment and stratification.
Contributorship TYW, CC and CYC conceptualized and designed the article.
CYC drafted the article.
CYC, VM, PJF, ET, CC and TYW were responsible for revising it critically for important intellectual content.
All authors approved this version to be published.
Furthermore, the retinal tissue is isolated by the blood-retinal barrier which maintains a distinct immunological and physiological environment, similar to the blood-brain barrier.
This has one of the highest blood flows per volume unit of any structure in the body.

Physiological
 There are many physiological similarities between retina and brain.
First, a NVU is present in both retina and brain, widely known as the "blood-retinal barrier" and "blood-brain barrier", respectively.
S156 The NVU allows functional coupling and interdependency of neurons, glia and the vasculature, for example, regulating blood flow in response to neural activity or metabolic demands.
S154 A thickness of RNFL layer in peripapillary region to assess retinal ganglion cell (RGC) axon.
Traditionally, peripapillary RNFL thickness is calculated along a 3.4 mm circle around optic disc.

Macular ganglion cell inner plexiform layer (GC-IPL) thickness
A combined thickness of ganglion cell layer and inner plexiform layer in macular region to assess RGC cell bodies and dendrites.

Macular ganglion cell complex (GCC) layer
A combined thickness of RNFL, ganglion cell layer and inner plexiform layer in macular region to assess RGC axon, cell bodies and dendrites.

Macular thickness or volume
A thickness or volume between inner limiting membrane and the retinal pigment epithelium at macular region.

Quantitative retinal vasculature analysis with retinal fundus photography

Central retinal artery equivalent (CRAE)
A summary index reflecting the average width of retinal arterioles.

Central retinal venule equivalent (CRVE)
A summary index reflecting the average width of retinal venules.

Fractal dimension
A measure of a fractal structure, that exhibits the property of self-similarity, characterizing the distribution of the branching retinal vasculature.

Tortuosity
A measure of the straightness/curliness of the retinal vessels.
Length-diameter-ratio A measure of the ratio of the length between 2 branching points to trunk vessel width.

Optical coherence tomography angiography (OCT-A)
Vessel density A measure of the area occupied by blood vessels (including capillaries) over total area within the interested region.

Foveal avascular zone (FAZ) area
A capillary-free area in the central macula with highest cone photoreceptor density and oxygen consumption.
Optical coherence tomography with enhanced depth imaging (OCT-EDI)

Choroidal thickness or volume
A thickness or volume between the outer border of retina pigment epithelium and sclera-choroidal interface.

Dynamic vessel analyzer Flicker-induced vessel dilation
An average percentage increase in the vessel diameter in response to the flickering-light during measurement cycles, relative to the baseline diameter size.

Retinal oximetry Retinal vessel oxygen saturation
A measure of the oxygen saturation in retinal arterioles and venules to detect changes in oxygen metabolism.

Ultra-widefield retinal photography Presence of peripheral hard drusen
Presence of small and distinct yellow deposits under retina in the periphery.

Fluorescence lifetime imaging ophthalmoscopy (FLIO)
Fluorescence lifetime A measure to describe the average time a single fluorophore remains in its electronically excited state after absorbing the energy of a photon and before returning to the ground state by emitting a photon.
Table
The summary of current findings on retinal neuronal changes, retinal capillary changes, retinal arteriolar and venular changes, and choroidal vasculature changes.

Preclinical AD or MCI AD dementia

Retinal Neuronal Changes
Peripapillary RNFL Thickness  Some studies showed reduced peripapillary RNFL, macular GC-IPL and GCC thicknesses, compared with controls  But a few studies showed no differences in the measures, compared with controls and AD dementia  A few studies also showed thickened peripapillary RNFL and macular GC-IPL thicknesses in MCI, compared with controls  Majority of studies and meta-analysis showed reduced peripapillary RNFL, macular GC-IPL and macular thicknesses, compared with controls  But a few studies showed no differences in the measures, compare with controls  A few studies also showed thickened peripapillary RNFL and macular GC-IPL thicknesses, compared with controls  In a population-based study, reduced peripapillary associated with incident AD dementia

Retinal Capillary Changes
Vessel density and foveal avascular zone  Majority of studies showed decreased vessel density and enlarged foveal avascular zone area, compared with controls  But a few studies showed no differences in the measures, and one study showed increased vessel density in preclinical AD, compared with controls.
 Majority of studies showed decreased vessel density and enlarged foveal avascular zone area, compared with controls  But a few studies showed no differences in the measures.

Retinal Arteriolar and Venular Changes
Vessel caliber (CRAE and CRVE) CRAE=central retinal artery equivalent; CRVE=central retinal vein equivalent; GCC=ganglion cell complex; GC-IPL=ganglion cellinner plexiform layer; MCI=mild cognitive impairment; RNFL=retinal nerve fiber layer.

Supplementary Section 1. Details of Retinal Imaging Technology for Specific Structures
1. Spectral-domain optical coherence tomography for imaging retinal neuronal and axonal layers Optical coherence tomography (OCT) is an optical imaging technique that utilises a low-coherence light source near the infra-red spectrum to penetrate biological tissue and provides cross-sectional imaging of the retinal layered structure.
inner limiting membrane, nerve fibre layer, ganglion cell layer, inner plexiform layer and retinal pigment epithelium) are segmented automatically for different thickness and volume measurements (e.g.
retinal nerve fibre layer (RNFL) thickness, ganglion cell-inner plexiform layer (GC-IPL) thickness, macular thickness and macular volume) at different locations by built-in segmentation algorithms in commercial OCT systems.
In addition to thickness measurement, built-in normative databases from healthy subjects are also provided for comparing the measured thickness or volume to age-matched data.
The normative database uses a colour code to indicate the normal distribution percentiles (red: <1%, below normal limits; yellow: within 1% to 5%, suspect below normal; green: within 5%-95%, normal limits; light yellow: within 95%-99%, above normal limits; light red: >99%, above normal limits).
For example, areas flagged in red indicate significant thickness reduction, compared with normative database.

Optical coherence tomography angiography for imaging retinal capillary networks
Optical coherence tomography-angiography (OCT-A) is based on mapping red blood cells movement over time from volumetric OCT scans.
The degree of motion contrast is corresponding to angiographic flow, as the only expected motion in the retina is blood flow in vessels.
Based on different image processing algorithms such as OCT Angiography Ratio Analysis (OCTARA), S174 split-spectrum amplitude-decorrelation angiography (SSADA)
It is noteworthy that the definition of "segmentation of retinal capillary plexuses" vary in different algorithms.
For example, in the OCTARA, at macular region, the superficial capillary plexus default segmentation is defined as the region between the inner limiting membrane (ILM) + 2.6 Quantification of capillary network from OCT-A to identify early and subtle microvascular changes objectively is one of the next important milestones for the application of OCT-A into clinical practice.
Currently, several quantitative OCT-A measurements (e.g.
vessel density, foveal avascular zone area and circularity, fractal dimension, vessel density index) have been defined and different automated and semi-automated algorithms developed to quantify the capillary networks.
The choroid is the posterior part of the eyeball, which is sandwiched between the retina and the sclera, and is one of the most vascularized structures in the human body.
Although SD-OCT can image the layered retina in details, imaging the choroid with SD-OCT is impeded by poor signal penetration beyond the heavily pigmented retinal pigment epithelium.
subfovea, macula, peripapillary) can be subsequently measured by computer software.
age, axial length of eyeball, intraocular pressure) in normal individuals.
S181 Choroidal vascularity index, defined as the ratio of vascular area to the total choroidal area, is recently proposed to quantify choroidal vascular alterations in a more reliable manner as it has lesser variability and influence by these factors.
respectively.
S185 Subsequently, newer retinal geometric branching parameters were defined to quantify the optimal state of retinal vasculature in recent computer software systems (e.g.
SIVA (Singapore I Vessel Assessment) software

Dynamic vessel analyzer for measuring the flicker-induced vasodilatory response
The principle of dynamic vessel analyzer (DVA) is based on dynamic reaction of retinal vessels to flickering light which stimulates activity of the neural retina and leads to retinal vessel dilation influenced by neurovascular coupling.
In order to generate flickering light during DVA imaging, an optoelectric shutter is inserted in a retinal camera to produce a bright-to-dark contrast ratio of at least 25:1.
The responses to flickering light can be represented as an average increase in the retinal arteriolar and venular diameters during several cycles, and defined as the percentage increase relative to the baseline diameter size.
One of the two wavelengths is sensitive to oxygen saturation (isosbestic wavelength of 570nm), i.e. the light absorbance changes with the oxygen saturation, while the other is insensitive to oxygen saturation (nonisosbestic wavelength of 600nm) and is used to calibrate the light intensity.
The oxygen saturation can therefore be estimated by comparing light absorption at oxygen sensitive wavelengths for assessing retinal oxygen metabolism.
S87 Nevertheless, the choroid may have a considerable role in oxygenating the inner retina under some circumstances (e.g.
100% oxygen breathing), but this is not accounted for in the current estimation of haemoglobin oxygen saturation.
The technology of ultra-wide field retinal photography is based on confocal laser scanning microscopy combined with a concave ellipsoidal mirror, or white-light light-emitting diode illuminator, which enable a wide field of view to be imaged without the need for pupillary dilation.
drusen deposits, diabetic retinopathy), compared with conventional retinal photography
S189,S190 The confocal laser scanning microscopy based system can allow for fundus autofluorescence imaging at the same time.

Supplementary Table 2.
Recent clinical studies of spectrum of Alzheimer's diseases (AD) (AD dementia, mild cognitive impairment (AD MCI), preclinical AD), and retinal imaging measures, as defined from spectral-domain optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT), OCT-angiography, enhanced depth imaging (EDI) with OCT and retinal photography.
It is noted that the definition of AD varies in the existing literature: not all publications have included AD biomarkers for their AD diagnosis.
The evolution in definition and diagnostic criteria of AD and other dementias may account for some of the variations and differences seen between studies discussed in this review.
(6.11 vs. 6.22),
GCL (6.27 vs.  6.45)
• A larger reduction in macular RNFL (-0.032mm 3 vs.
-0.019mm 3 , p=0.050), ONL (-0.029mm 3 vs.
-0.007mm 3 , p=0.026), and IPL (-0.014mm 3 vs.
-0.006mm
[1.27, 3.19]), arteriolar (OR  1.35 [1.08, 1.68]) and venular (OR 1.47 [1.17, 1.84]) FDs, and increased arteriolar (OR 1.80 [1.40, 2.31]) and venular (OR 1.94 [1.48, 2.53]) tortuosity associated with AD dementia.


Figure 2B and 2C show an example of GC-IPL and RNFL measurement in a MCI subject with a positive cerebral amyloid PET imaging.
Finally, these OCT studies are also consistent with research on other neurodegenerative diseases, such as patients with Parkinson disease and Lewy body dementia,



Figure 1 :
Figure Legends:



Figure 2 :
Figure 2: (A) Cross-sectional view of retina captured by optical coherence tomography (OCT).



Figure 3 .Box 1 .Embryological 12 Anatomical
Figure 3. Imaging of retinal capillary network using optical coherence tomography angiography



μm
to the inner plexiform layer (IPL)/ inner nuclear layer (INL) border + 15.6 μm, while the deep capillary plexus default segmentation is defined as the region from the IPL/INL border + 15.6 μm to the IPL/INL border + 70.2 μm.
In the SSASD, the superficial capillary plexus upper border is at 3 µm below ILM to the lower border at 15 µm below the IPL, while the deep capillary plexus spans from 15 µm below the IPL to 70 µm below the IPL.S176


S182



4 .
photographs can be performed with computer software and standardized photographic protocols.



8 .
Fluorescence lifetime imaging ophthalmology for measuring and quantifying lifetimes of retinal fluorophore Retinal fluorophores, including lipofuscin, advanced glycation end products, collagen, melanin, and elastin, absorb and emit light at specific wavelengths.
Electrons in retinal fluorophores are excited by absorbing photons from a monochromatic light source (e.g.
laser), thus moving to a higher level of energy.
They return to their energy ground state by emitting photons of longer wavelengths than the exciting light.
Fluorescence lifetime imaging ophthalmoscope (FLIO) is based on a commercial scanning laser ophthalmoscope which is equipped with an infrared camera for active eye tracking to correct for eye movements.S94
During imaging, the excitation laser raster scans the retina in multiple periods, detects the emitted fluorophore and builds up a distribution histogram over time.
The fluorescence lifetime describes the average time a single fluorophore remains in its electronically excited state after absorbing the energy of a photon and before returning to the ground state by emitting a photon.
Every fluorophore is characterized by its own excitation and emission wavelength spectrum and exhibits an individual fluorescence lifetime.
Therefore, it can produce quantitative images based on the lifetimes of the different retinal fluorophores.S191



Table 1 :
Glossary of retinal imaging technologies and parameters used in studying Alzheimer's disease.



Table 1 .
Recent clinical studies of common primary age-related ocular diseases and Alzheimer's diseases (AD) dementia.


AD=Alzheimer's disease; HR= hazard ratio; OR=odds ratio; RNFL= retinal nerve fiber layer; RR= relative risk; PET=positron emission tomography.


3 , p=0.020) volumes, in preclinical AD over a 27-month follow-up, compared with controls.Decreased density of retinal vascular network, superficial vascular plexus, and deep vascular plexus in AD dementia (p<0.05),compared with controls.Decreased density (45.40% vs. 48.67%,p=0.002)
and enlarged foveal avascular zone area (0.47mm 2 vs. 0.33mm 2 , p=0.001) of superficial capillary plexus in AD dementia, compared with controls.O'Bryhim et al. (2018) S74 14 preclinical AD (Aβpositive from PET or CSF but not dementia) and 16 normal control subjects Foveal avascular zone area.•
Enlarged foveal avascular zone area (0.364mm 2 vs. 0.275mm 2 , p=0.002) in preclinical AD, compared with controls, with AUROC of 0.8007.


Increased vessel density of retinal vascular network at inner ring macula (difference: 0.81%, p=0.002) and outer ring macula (difference: 0.50%, p=0.024), and around optic nerve head (difference: 0.83%, p=0.015) in preclinical AD, compared with controls.•AUROCs
for vessel densities in inner and outer ring of the macula and around the optic nerve head were 0.651, 0.640 and 0.764, Zabel et al. (2019)S73


Decreased vessel density of deep capillary plexus(43.95%vs.
47.44% vs. 49.46%,p=0.0006)
and enlarged foveal avascular zone area (0.32mm 2 vs. 0.26mm 2 vs. 0.21mm 2 , p<0.001) in AD dementia, compared with open-angle glaucoma and controls.
No differences in vessel density of radial peripapillary capillary between AD-related cognitive impairment and normal control subjects.


Decreased CRAE (122.9µm vs. 129.1µm,p=0.01),CRVE(169.7µm vs. 182.7µm,p<0.001),arteriolarFD(1.201 vs. 1.235, p=0.008), venular FD (1.171 vs. 1.210,  p<0.001), venular tortuosity (6.953x10 -5 vs. 7.660x10 -5 , p=0.024) and venular branching coefficient(1.347 vs.  1.253, p=0.019)inAD dementia, compared with controls.•
Increased venular branching asymmetry factor (p=0.01) and arteriolar length-to-diameter ratio (p=0.02) in preclinical AD, compared with Aβ-negative subjects.


AD=Alzheimer's disease; AUROC=area under receiver operating characteristic curve; CRAE=central retinal artery equivalent; CRVE=central retinal vein equivalent; CSF=cerebrospinal fluid; EDI=enhanced depth imaging; FD=fractal dimension; GCC=ganglion cell complex; GC-IPL=ganglion cell-inner plexiform layer; GCL= ganglion cell layer; HR=hazard ratio; INL=inner nuclear layer; IPL=inner plexiform layer; MCI=mild cognitive impairment; OPL=outer plexiform layer; ONL=outer nuclear layer; OR=odds ratio; RNFL=retinal nerve fiber layer; RPE=retinal pigment epithelium; OCT=optical coherence tomography; PET=positron emission tomography.