Functional Metabolic Mapping Reveals Highly Active Branched-Chain Amino Acid Metabolism in Human Astrocytes, Which Is Impaired in iPSC-Derived Astrocytes in Alzheimer's Disease
The branched-chain amino acids (BCAAs) leucine, isoleucine, and valine are important nitrogen donors for synthesis of glutamate, the main excitatory neurotransmitter in the brain.
The glutamate carbon skeleton originates from the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle intermediate α-ketoglutarate, while the amino group is derived from nitrogen donors such as the BCAAs.
Disturbances in neurotransmitter homeostasis, mainly of glutamate, are strongly implicated in the pathophysiology of Alzheimer's disease (AD).
The divergent BCAA metabolism in different cell types of the human brain is poorly understood, and so is the involvement of astrocytic and neuronal BCAA metabolism in AD.
The goal of this study is to provide the first functional characterization of BCAA metabolism in human brain tissue and to investigate BCAA metabolism in AD pathophysiology using astrocytes and neurons derived from human-induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSCs).
Mapping of BCAA metabolism was performed using mass spectrometry and enriched [ 15 N] and [ 13 C] isotopes of leucine, isoleucine, and valine in acutely isolated slices of surgically resected cerebral cortical tissue from human brain and in hiPSC-derived brain cells carrying mutations in either amyloid precursor protein (APP) or presenilin-1 (PSEN-1).
We revealed that both human astrocytes of acutely isolated cerebral cortical slices and hiPSC-derived astrocytes were capable of oxidatively metabolizing the carbon skeleton of BCAAs, particularly to support glutamine synthesis.
Interestingly, hiPSCderived astrocytes with APP and PSEN-1 mutations exhibited decreased amino acid synthesis of glutamate, glutamine, and aspartate derived from leucine metabolism.
These results clearly demonstrate that there is an active BCAA metabolism in human astrocytes, and that leucine metabolism is selectively impaired in astrocytes derived from the hiPSC models of AD.
This impairment in astrocytic BCAA metabolism may contribute to neurotransmitter and energetic imbalances in the AD brain.

INTRODUCTION
Branched-chain amino acids (BCAAs) comprise three essential amino acids, leucine, isoleucine, and valine, which all have multiple functions in the brain
BCAAs are important nitrogen donors essential for nitrogen homeostasis and neurotransmitter cycling
Furthermore, BCAAs can be utilized by brain cells as energy substrates in the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle.
BCAA metabolism is initiated by reversible transamination catalyzed by the branched-chain amino acid transaminase (BCAT) producing the corresponding branchedchain α-keto acids (BCKAs) and glutamate.
BCAT exists as two isozymes, one cytosolic (BCATc/BCAT1), which is only found in brain, ovaries and testes, and one mitochondrial (BCATm/BCAT2), which is expressed in most tissues
The subsequent irreversible oxidative decarboxylation of BCKAs is catalyzed by the branchedchain α-keto acid dehydrogenase (BCKDH) complex, followed by multiple other reactions (Figure
Discrepancies on the cellular location of the metabolic machinery of BCAA metabolism have prompted the suggestion that astrocytes have a limited BCAA metabolism capacity
Based on immunohistochemical studies, it has been suggested that human astrocytes do not express BCAT or BCKDH
However, this matter has not been functionally investigated.
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a complex neurodegenerative disorder characterized by a heterogeneous pathology comprising defective protein clearance
AD pathology gradually leads to common clinical manifestations, such as cognitive and memory impairment
Although research has mainly focused on neurons, increasing evidence points toward the involvement of non-neuronal cells, namely, astrocytes, microglia, and oligodendrocytes, in the progression of the disease
However, the glial contribution in AD is yet to be fully unraveled
Alterations in brain glucose metabolism is one of the earliest biomarkers of AD development
Brain energy metabolism is closely related to neurotransmission
Interestingly, disrupted excitatory glutamate signaling is strongly implicated in AD as well as several other neurodegenerative disorders
Only a small fraction of glutamate from the circulating peripheral blood plasma crosses the blood-brain barrier (BBB), thus the majority of brain glutamate must be de novo synthesized
In the brain, glutamate is synthesized from TCA cycle intermediate α-ketoglutarate, providing the carbon backbone
Particularly, BCAAs play an essential role as nitrogen donors, and they account for approximately one-third of the amino groups used for brain glutamate synthesis
Furthermore, the carbon skeleton of BCAAs, entering cellular metabolism as either acetyl CoA or succinyl CoA, may serve as auxiliary fuels for brain cells, hereby supporting the failing energy metabolism in AD
Astrocytes take up the majority of synaptic glutamate released from neurons and hereby play a crucial role in terminating excitatory signaling.
In astrocytes, most of the synaptic glutamate is converted into glutamine by the action of the enzyme glutamine synthetase (GS), which is selectively expressed in astrocytes
The glutamine is subsequently released and taken up by neurons, which is essential to replenish the neuronal glutamate pool.
This exchange of metabolites between neurons and astrocytes is known as the glutamate-glutamine cycle and is particularly important during extensive glutamatergic signaling
Given the involvement of astrocytes in AD pathology, the importance of brain BCAA metabolism for neurotransmitter homeostasis, and the energetic crisis of AD, it is important to functionally investigate astrocyte BCAA metabolism in relation to AD pathology.
The goals of this study were to perform the first functional profiling of BCAA metabolism in human astrocytes and identify metabolic alterations in BCAA metabolism in the pathophysiology of AD using human induced pluripotent stem cell-derived astrocytes and neurons.
First, we demonstrate that astrocytes of acutely isolated human brain slices as well as astrocytes derived from hiPSCs are capable to oxidatively metabolizing the carbon skeleton of BCAAs, particularly for the synthesis of glutamine.
Furthermore, astrocytes with mutations in the amyloid precursor protein (APP) or presenilin-1 (PSEN-1) genes known to result in familial forms of AD exhibited decreased synthesis of glutamate, glutamine, and aspartate derived from leucine metabolism.
These results uncover highly active astrocytic BCAA metabolism and suggest a possible neurotransmitter imbalance in AD related to leucine metabolism.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Materials
The stable isotopes [ 15 N]leucine, [ 15 N]isoleucine, [ 15 N]valine, [U-13 C]leucine, [U-13 C]isoleucine, [U-13 C]valine (all L-isomers of 98% chemical purity) were purchased from Cambridge Isotope Laboratories (Tewksbury, MA, United States).
All the other chemicals and reagents used were of purest grade available from regular commercial sources.

Animals
Male NMRI mice were purchased from Harlan (Horst, The Netherlands) and housed at the Department of Drug Design and Pharmacology, University of Copenhagen, in a specific pathogenfree and humidity-and temperature-controlled facility with a 12h light/dark cycle.
The mice were acclimatized for 2 weeks before the experiments and single-housed in individually ventilated cages with free access to food and water.
In total, six 12-to 13week-old mice were used for the experiments (body weight: 42.4 ± 0.4 g).
The experiments were approved by the Danish National Ethics Committee and performed according to the European Convention

Brain Tissue
Human neocortical tissue was obtained from six patients (four females, two males) aged 25-52 years.
Additional information on patient cohort characteristics can be found in
The use of human neocortical tissue was approved by the local Ethics Committee in Copenhagen (H-2-2011-104) with written informed consent from all the patients prior to surgery.
Human neocortical tissue of the temporal lobe was resected at Rigshospitalet (Copenhagen, Denmark) in order to facilitate access to the mesial temporal lobe, e.g., amygdala, hippocampus, and parahippocampal gyrus, involved in generating epileptic seizures.
Immediately after resection, the tissue was transferred to ice-cold artificial cerebrospinal fluid (ACSF) containing (in mM): NaCl 128, NaHCO 3 25, D-glucose 10, KCl 3, CaCl 2 2, MgSO 4 1.2, and KH 2 PO 4 0.4 with pH = 7.4, and transported on ice to the laboratory.
Histopathological examination of the neocortical tissue revealed no abnormal pathological features for any of the patients.
The metabolic integrity of resected cerebral cortical human tissue has been established previously

Cell Lines
Human-induced pluripotent stem cell lines were plated on Matrigel-coated plates (BD Matrigel; STEMCELL Technologies, Canada Inc.) with an E8 essential culture medium (STEMCELL Technologies, Canada Inc.).
A fresh E8 medium was added every day until the cells reached 90-100% confluency, usually achieved after 7 days of culturing.
The hiPSCs used in this study have been previously characterized by
The APP cell line contains a heterozygous double KM670/671NL mutation resulting in an amino acid change from lysine (K) and methionine (M) to asparagine (N) and leucine (L) into the APP gene.
The PSEN-1 cell line contains a homozygous E280A mutation resulting in an amino acid change from glutamic acid (E) to alanine (A) into the PSEN-1 gene
Nucleotide substitution was confirmed by restriction digest and followed by DNA sequencing.
Pluripotency of the gene-edited lines was confirmed by immunocytochemistry and quantified by flow analysis.
The hiPSC lines used in this study will be referred to as AD astrocytes or AD neurons.
These mutations are hallmarks of familial forms of AD with early onset.
The healthy hiPSC line was used as the parental control (wild type).

Neural Progenitor Cell Generation and Cell Differentiation
Neural induction was achieved by dual SMAD inhibition using LDN193189 (S2618, Selleck Chemicals, Houston, TX, United States) and SB431542 (S1067, Selleck Chemicals, Houston, TX, United States), inhibiting the BMP and TGFß pathways, respectively, through a three-dimensional (3D)-sphere method
After 7 days of induction, neuronal progenitor cells (NPCs) were plated on Matrigel in a medium supplemented with basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF) (10 ng/ml) (CYT-557; ProSpec, Rehovot, Israel) and EGF (10 ng/ml) (CYT-217; ProSpec, Rehovot, Israel).
Neuronal rosettes were selected for further passages.

Astrocytic Differentiation
The astrocytes were differentiated based on a modified protocol by
Briefly, when the NPCs reached 70% confluency, they were plated on Matrigel in an astrocytic maintenance medium (AMM), which promotes the generation of astrocyte progenitor cells (APCs).
To switch from neurogenesis to gliogenesis, the APCs were re-plated several times until passage five.
The APCs (last passage) were plated at a seeding density of 50,000 cells/cm 2 in an astrocytic differentiation medium (ADM).
The ADM was changed every other day, and the cells were kept under differentiation conditions for 7 weeks until they reached maturation for metabolic assays.

Neuronal Differentiation
The neurons were differentiated according to
When the NPCs reached 70% confluency, they were plated on Matrigel in a neural expansion media (NEM).
The NEM was supplemented with 20 ng/ml of bFGF, and EGF.
The NPCs were re-plated several times until passage three.
Then, they (for last passage) were plated on 0.001% Poly-L-Ornithine (P4957; Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, United States) and a 5 µg/ml laminin (L2020; Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, United States) coating in a neural maturation media (NMM) for 10 days.
The NMM was supplemented with 20 ng/µl brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) (CYT-207; Prospec, Rehovot, Israel), 10 ng/µl glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF) (CYT-305; Prospec, Rehovot, Israel), 200 µM L-ascorbic acid 2-phosphate (A8960, Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, United States), and 50 µM dibutyryl-cyclic adenosine monophosphate (db-cAMP) (A6885; Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, United States).
Half media change was performed every 3 days.
Ten-day immature neurons were passaged a last time on PLO-Laminin coated plates with the NMM at a seeding density of 50,000 cells/cm 2 until they reached maturation for the metabolic assays.

Brain Slice Incubations
Incubation of acutely isolated cerebral cortical brain slices of mice and humans was performed as described previously
For mouse brain slices, the experiments were performed one mouse at a time.
The mouse was euthanized by cervical dislocation and decapitated.
The brain was quickly excised from the cranial vault and submerged in slushed ice-cold ACSF.
Cerebral cortices of the mouse brain were dissected, and the rest of the brain was discarded.
The isolated mouse cerebral cortices or human neocortical tissue was sliced (350 µm) on a McIlwain tissue chopper (The Vibratome Company, O'Fallon, MO, United States), and slices were separated under a microscope.
Two to six mouse cerebral cortical slices or one human slice (gray matter only) was kept just below the surface of 10 ml 37 • C oxygenated (5% CO 2 /95% O 2 ) ACSF and pre-incubated for 60 min to recover from slicing in a custom-made incubation apparatus
Subsequently, the media was exchanged for ACSF containing 2 mM 15 N or 13 C-labeled leucine, isoleucine, or valine, with a D-glucose concentration of 5 mM, for additional 60 min.
Incubations were terminated by transferring the slices to ice-cold 70% ethanol.
The slices were sonicated, centrifuged (20,000 g × 20 min), and the supernatant was lyophilized before gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS) and highperformance liquid chromatography (HPLC) analysis.
Protein content of the pellet was determined by the Pierce method using bovine serum albumin (BSA) as standard protein.

Cell Culture Incubations
Cultures of 7-week-old human-induced pluripotent stem cellderived astrocytes and neurons were used for dynamic metabolic mapping.
The culturing medium was removed, and the cells were washed twice with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) at 37 • C. The cells were then incubated for 90 min at 37 • C in ACSF containing 2 mM [U-13 C]valine, [U-13 C]leucine, or [U-13 C]isoleucine plus 2.5 mM unlabeled glucose.
These BCAA concentrations were chosen based on previous studies
The glucose concentration represents physiological conditions.
After incubation, the medium was collected, and the cells were washed with cold PBS (4 • C) to stop metabolic reactions.
The cells were lysed and extracted with 70% ethanol and centrifuged at 20,000 g for 20 min at 4 • C to separate soluble and insoluble components.
Cell extracts were lyophilized and solubilized in water for further GC-MS and HPLC analysis.
Pellets were dissolved in 1 M potassium hydroxide (KOH) at room temperature and analyzed for protein content by the Pierce BSA assay.

Dynamic Metabolic Mapping by Gas Chromatography-Mass Spectrometry (GC-MS)
The 15 N and 13 C-enrichment of TCA cycle metabolites and amino acids was determined by GC-MS analyses, according to a previous method
Briefly, the extracts were reconstituted in water and acidified, and the metabolites were extracted into an organic phase with 96% ethanol/benzene and derivatized using N-tertbutyldimethylsilyl-N-methyltrifluoroacetamide.
Natural 15 N and 13 C-abundance was corrected and calculated as described elsewhere
Data are presented as percentage of labeling of the isotopolog M+X, where M corresponds to the molecular weight of the unlabeled molecule, and X is the number of 15 N or 13 C-enriched carbon atoms in the molecule

Quantitative Analysis of Amino Acid Amounts Performed by High Performance Liquid Chromatography (HPLC)
Reconstituted extracts were used for the quantification of amino acid amounts, by reverse phase high-performance liquid chromatography using 1260 Infinity (Agilent Technologies, Sta. Clara, CA, United States), as described elsewhere
Amino acid separation and detection were performed by precolumn o-phthalaldehyde (OPA) online derivatization and fluorescent detection (λex = 338 nm, 10-nm bandwidth; λem = 390 nm, 20-nm bandwidth).
A gradient elution with Mobile phase A (10 mM NaH 2 PO 4 , 10 mM Na 2 B 4 O 7 , 0.5 mM NaN 3 , pH 6.8) and mobile phase B (acetonitrile 45%: methanol 45%: H 2 O 10% V:V:V) was performed with a flow of 1.5 ml/min.
The quantification of the amino acid amounts was achieved using calibration curves of external standards of the amino acids of interest with known increasing concentration ranging from 5 to 1,000 µM.

Statistical Analyses
Data are presented as mean (±) standard error of the mean (SEM) of values.
Experimental values from the brain tissue were biological replicates, and values from cell cultures were obtained from three independent experiments derived from at least two separate cell differentiations (batches) of three different cell lines, namely the parental control cell line and the two cell lines with the APP-and PSEN-1introduced mutations, respectively.
Statistically significant differences were set at p < 0.05 and tested by either one-way or two-way ANOVA with Bonferroni multiple comparison test or with paired t-test, as indicated in Figure

RESULTS

BCAA Nitrogen Metabolism in Human and Mouse Cortical Slices
The BCAAs, leucine, isoleucine, and valine, have been widely described as key nitrogen donors vital for neurotransmission and aid to maintain nitrogen balance in the brain
The transamination of BCAAs is catalyzed by branched-chain aminotransferase (BCAT) transferring the BCAA nitrogen into glutamate.
The nitrogen can subsequently be transferred to connected amino acids.
To assess the nitrogen metabolism of the BCAAs, mouse and human cerebral cortical slices were incubated with [ 15 N]leucine, [ 15 N]isoleucine, and [ 15 N]valine.
The labeling patterns from the human tissue were compared with the ones obtained from mouse cortical slices in order to distinguish specie-specific functional metabolic differences among cellular compartments (Figure
Substantial 15 Nenrichment was found for all three BCAAs in both mouse and human slices, suggesting a large BCAA uptake capacity.
BCAA 15 N-incorporation was slightly lower in the mouse cortical slices after incubation with [ 15 N]leucine and [ 15 N]isoleucine when compared with that of the human slices.
Increased 15 N-incorporation was observed in gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), aspartate, and glutamine after incubation with [ 15 N]leucine, [ 15 N]isoleucine, and [ 15 N]valine in the mouse cortical slices when compared with the human cortical slices.
Furthermore, 15 N-incorporation in glutamine and alanine was increased after incubation with [ 15 N]leucine and [ 15 N]isoleucine in the mouse cortical slices.
These results may suggest a higher BCAT activity in the mouse brain compared with the human brain.
Interestingly, of all the amino acids, the 15 N-enrichment was highest in glutamine for all the three [ 15 N]BCAAs in both mouse and human cortical slices.
This observation could indicate that a large proportion of BCAA nitrogen metabolism is being utilized for glutamine synthesis in astrocytes.

BCAA Oxidative Metabolism in Human and Mouse Cortical Slices
The carbon skeleton of the branched-chain keto acid derived from BCAAs can enter the TCA cycle as either acetyl CoA or succinyl CoA (illustrated in Figure
The metabolic oxidation of BCAAs is initiated by BCKDH complex activity where irreversible oxidative decarboxylation of the BCKAs occur and via multiple subsequent enzymatic reactions yield acetyl CoA or succinyl CoA.
To assess BCAA oxidative metabolism, the human and mouse cortical slices were incubated with [U-13 C]isoleucine, [U-13 C]leucine, or [U-13 C]valine, and 13 C-enrichment of TCA cycle intermediates and amino acids were determined by GC-MS (Figure
The metabolism of [U-13 C]leucine and [U-13 C]isoleucine (M+6) (Figure
Following incubation with [U-13 C]leucine, 13 C-enrichment in M+2 (via acetyl CoA) was higher in citrate (Figure
When incubating with [U-13 C]isoleucine, we observed increased M+3 labeling (via succinyl CoA) in α-ketoglutarate, succinate, and glutamate in the mouse cortical slices when compared with the human cortical slices.
Similarly, after incubation with [U-13 C]valine, 13 C-incorporation was higher in α-ketoglutarate and succinate in the mouse cortical slices.
Decreased 13 Cincorporation in malate, citrate, and glutamine was observed in the mouse cortical slices when compared with the human cortical slices after incubation with [U-13 C]valine.
The overall highest 13 C-enrichment was derived from [U-13 C]leucine metabolism in both the mouse and human cortical slices.
In accordance with the results of [ 15 N]BCAA metabolism, glutamine and citrate reached the highest 13 C-enrichment after incubation with all the three [U-13 C]BCAAs in both the mouse and human cortical slices.
These results demonstrate that oxidative metabolism of the BCAA carbon skeleton is utilized for amino acid synthesis, particularly for glutamine synthesis in astrocytes from both the mouse and human cerebral cortical slices.

BCAA Oxidative Metabolism in Human Astrocytes
The incubation experiments revealed that the brain slices of both mouse and humans have a large capacity for BCAA metabolism particularly supporting astrocyte glutamine synthesis.
To further substantiate these results, we next assessed if hiPSC-derived astrocytes could metabolize BCAAs through 13 C-incorporation into the TCA cycle.
Incubation with the three [U-13 C]BCAAs (Figure
C-enrichment was recovered in all TCA cycle metabolites and amino acids from [U-13 C]BCAA metabolism, which demonstrates that human astrocytes are capable of introducing and metabolizing the carbon skeleton of leucine, isoleucine, and valine in the TCA cycle.
Interestingly, the MCL obtained from incubation with [U-13 C]isoleucine appeared to be higher throughout all the TCA cycle intermediates and amino acids compared with leucine and valine.
However, as the metabolism of [U-13 C]isoleucine gave rise to both M+2 and M+3 labeling, the MCL is expected to be higher.
[U-13 C]valine had the lowest overall 13 C-enrichment in the TCA cycle intermediates and amino acids, which is in accordance with the results from mouse and human brain slices.
These results functionally demonstrate that hiPSC-derived astrocytes are able to oxidatively metabolize BCAAs.

Altered BCAA Oxidative Metabolism in AD hiPSC-Derived Astrocytes With APP or PSEN-1 Mutations
Studies on postmortem AD brains have reported alterations in the expression of enzymes involved in the metabolism of BCAAs, such as BCAT
However, functional BCAA metabolism in relation to AD pathophysiology has not been explored.
Given the central metabolic role of BCAAs in neurotransmission, we sought to determine whether BCAA oxidative metabolism is affected in hiPSC-derived astrocytes with APP or PSEN-1 mutation as models of AD pathology (referred to as AD astrocytes).
hiPSC-derived astrocytes from either ADmutated or parental control cell lines were, thus, incubated with [U-13 C]leucine, [U-13 C]isoleucine, or [U-13 C]valine, and 13 Cincorporation into the TCA cycle intermediates and amino acid were assessed (Figure
After incubation with [U-13 C]leucine, AD astrocytes with APP mutation exhibited increased labeling in glutamate and citrate (M+2) but reduced 13 C-enrichment was found in aspartate and malate when compared with control astrocytes.
The AD astrocytes with PSEN-1 mutation only exhibited increased labeling in citrate (M+2) but otherwise similar labeling patterns when compared with the control astrocytes (Figure
When incubated with [U-13 C]isoleucine, similar changes between AD and control astrocytes were observed in amino acid labeling (M+2) as observed in the [U-13 C]leucine incubation (Figure
For instance, in the AD astrocytes with APP mutation, glutamate (M+2) labeling was increased, while labeling in aspartate was decreased although not significantly, compared with the control astrocytes.
In the AD astrocytes with PSEN-1 mutation, however, the decrease in aspartate labeling was significantly different from that of the control astrocytes. 13
C-incorporation in citrate was increased only in the AD astrocytes with APP mutation, while labeling in malate (M+2) was decreased in both AD astrocytes when compared with the control astrocytes.
No significant differences were found in the labeling of α-ketoglutarate, succinate, and fumarate (Supplementary Table
Furthermore, after incubation with [U-13 C]valine (Figure
However, the TCA cycle metabolites, citrate, and malate showed increased 13 C-enrichment in both mutated AD astrocytes when compared with control.
Following [U-13 C]isoleucine metabolism, the AD astrocytes only exhibited lower labeling in aspartate (M+3) compared with the control astrocytes (Figure
No significant differences were found in the labeling of α-ketoglutarate, succinate, and fumarate (Supplementary Table
Collectively, these results suggest that BCAA oxidative metabolism in AD astrocytes is impaired particularly when the BCAAs enter the TCA cycle via acetyl CoA.

Decreased Aspartate Labeling in AD hiPSC-Derived Neurons With APP or PSEN-1 Mutations After Incubation With BCAAs
Astrocytes and neurons maintain tight metabolic interactions critical for cerebral homeostasis.
After finding alterations in the BCAA metabolism of AD hiPSC-derived astrocytes, we next assessed if BCAA oxidative metabolism could be affected in hiPSC-derived neurons with APP or PSEN-1 mutation as models of AD pathology (referred to as AD neurons).
hiPSC-derived neurons from AD-mutated or parental control cell lines were incubated with [U-13 C]leucine, [U-13 C]isoleucine, or [U-13 C]valine, and 13 C-incorporation into the TCA cycle intermediates and amino acids was assessed (Figure
After incubation with [U-13 C]leucine, no significant differences were observed in the labeling of glutamate or aspartate (M+2) in the AD neurons compared with the control neurons (Figure
In contrast, following incubation with [U-13 C]isoleucine (Figure
No significant differences between the AD and control neurons were observed in glutamate or aspartate labeling after incubation with [U-13 C]valine (Figure
Finally, reduced labeling in aspartate (M+3) derived from [U-13 C]isoleucine metabolism (via succinyl CoA) was found in both mutated AD neurons when compared with the control neurons (Figure
No significant differences were found in the labeling of citrate, α-ketoglutarate, succinate, fumarate, and malate (Supplementary Tables
These results demonstrate decreased 13 C-incorporation in aspartate (M+2 and M+3) after incubation with [U-13 C]isoleucine in AD neurons, suggesting that BCAA oxidative metabolism in AD hiPSCderived neurons is largely maintained in contrast to the AD hiPSC-derived astrocytes.

Decreased Amino Acids Amounts in AD hiPSC-Derived Astrocytes and Neurons After Incubation With BCAAs
Total and labeled amounts of intracellular amino acids from the hiPSC-derived astrocytes and neurons were determined by HPLC.
AD hiPSC-derived astrocytes with APP and PSEN-1 mutations showed decreased total and labeled M+2 amounts in glutamate, glutamine, and aspartate after [U-13 C]leucine-derived carbons entered the TCA cycle via acetyl CoA (Figure
As mentioned previously, [U-13 C]isoleucine-derived carbons can enter the TCA cycle via acetyl CoA or succinyl CoA, giving rise to double labeled (M+2) or three labeled (M+3) intermediates, respectively.
Labeled M+2 amounts and total amounts of aspartate were lower in the AD astrocytes with APP mutation when compared with the control astrocytes after incubation with [U-13 C]isoleucine (Figure
In contrast, no differences were observed in labeled M+3 amounts of any amino acid or in the total amounts of glutamate and glutamine in both mutated AD astrocytes when compared with the control astrocytes after [U-13 C]isoleucine incubation.
No significant differences were observed in labeled M+3 amounts of mutated AD astrocytes after [U-13 C]valine incubation (Figure
However, total amounts of glutamine were lower in the AD astrocytes with APP mutation compared with control.
After incubation with [U-13 C]leucine, total amounts of glutamate and aspartate (Figure
Similarly, the AD neurons with PSEN-1 mutation exhibited decreased amounts of labeled M+3 in aspartate (Figure
No significant differences were found in labeled or total amino acid amounts after incubation with [U-13 C]valine in the AD neurons when compared with the control neurons (Figure
These results confirm that synthesis of the amino acids glutamate, glutamine, and aspartate, derived from leucine metabolism, is impaired to a larger extent compared with isoleucine and valine metabolism in AD hiPSC-derived astrocytes.
Lastly, only the synthesis of aspartate derived from leucine and isoleucine metabolism was decreased in the AD hiPSC-derived neurons compared with the control neurons, which indicates that the metabolism of BCAAs is significantly affected in the AD astrocytes but generally maintained in the AD neurons.

DISCUSSION
This study represents the first functional evidence of active BCAA metabolism in human astrocytes.
We found that the metabolism of the BCAA carbon skeleton supported astrocyte glutamine synthesis in acutely isolated human brain slices, which was also observed in hiPSC-derived astrocytes.
Interestingly, we found reduced synthesis of amino acids derived from leucine metabolism in AD hiPSC-derived astrocytes when compared with the control astrocytes.
Furthermore, the synthesis of glutamate and aspartate derived from leucine metabolism was decreased in the AD neurons with PSEN-1 mutation.
Our findings are summarized in Figure

BCAA Metabolism in Mouse and Human Brain Slices
BCAA metabolism is important for cerebral nitrogen homeostasis and neurotransmitter recycling, as these amino acids are nitrogen donors for glutamate and GABA synthesis, whereas the carbon skeleton can be utilized as oxidative fuels
From incubations of acutely isolated brain slices, we found that brain slices of both mice and humans have a large capacity for BCAA nitrogen and oxidative metabolism (Figures
Generally, we observed a higher fractional enrichment of both 15 N and 13 C in the brain slices of mice when compared with human slices, which may suggest that the rodent brain have a higher capacity for BCAA metabolism.
Interestingly, immunohistochemistry studies have suggested that the cellular distribution of enzymes related to BCAA metabolism differs between the rodent and human brains
Specific isoforms of the initiating enzyme of BCAA metabolism, BCAT, have been located in both neurons (BCAT1 corresponding to BCATc) and astrocytes (BCAT2 corresponding to BCATm) in the rodent brain
This contrasts with the reported expression in the human brain, where both the BCAT and BCKDH expressions were found in neurons and endothelial cells, but were absent in astrocytes
These studies imply that both mouse and human astrocytes have a limited enzymatic capacity for BCAA metabolism.
Particularly, the complete absence of the rate-limiting enzyme BCKDH in astrocytes would imply that this cell type is unable to oxidatively metabolize the BCAA carbon skeleton in the TCA cycle.
However, multiple studies using mouse astrocyte cultures have functionally shown that astrocytes are able to metabolize BCAAs
Although most of the carbon skeleton may be released as the corresponding ketoacid or as ketone bodies
A recent proteomic study resolving the cellular protein expression of the mouse brain confirmed the differential expression BCATc in neurons and BCATm in astrocytes
However, the same study found higher expression of the two BCKDH isoforms (BCKDHA and BCKDHB) in both cultured and isolated astrocytes when compared with neurons
In the brain slices, we found the largest fractional 13 C-enrichment from 13 C-BCAA metabolism in glutamine (Figure
Since glutamine is exclusively synthesized in astrocytes, because of the selective expression of the enzyme glutamine α-keto acids (BCKAs), KIC, KIV, and KVM.
In the reverse reaction when α-ketoglutarate is formed from glutamate, the BCAT/GDH metabolon in the endothelial cells may release ammonia, and BCAAs can be released and taken up by neurons or astrocytes.
Alternatively, BCKAs from endothelial cells can be released or metabolized by the BCKDH/BCATm metabolon.
Likewise, in neurons, BCAAs can also be transaminated, producing BCKAs and glutamate.
BCKAs can be further metabolized by BCKDH, and glutamate can be used for neurotransmission.
Glutamate from neurons in the synaptic cleft can be taken up by astrocytes.
Astrocytes synthesize glutamine from glutamate and ammonia which is catalyzed by glutamine synthetase (GS) and is released for neuronal uptake to replenish the glutamate pool, in the so-called glutamate-glutamine cycle.
The data indicate that in astrocytes, BCAAs may be transaminated by the action of BCAT, and that the BCAA carbon skeleton can be oxidized by BCKDH activity.
This set of metabolic reactions give rise to acetyl CoA or succinyl CoA, replenishing TCA cycle intermediates and amino acids in the astrocytes.
Furthermore, we present evidence of reduced aspartate, glutamate, and glutamine total and labeling amounts after incubation with [U-13 C]leucine in AD astrocytes (represented within the dotted box).
This altered leucine metabolism in AD astrocytes may contribute to the disrupted neurotransmitter homeostasis observed in the AD brain.
BBB, blood brain barrier; BCATm, mitochondrial branched-chain aminotransferase; Glu, glutamate; α-KG, α-ketoglutarate, GDH, glutamate dehydrogenase, NH + 4 , ammonium; BCKA, branched-chain α-keto acids; KIC, α-ketoisocaproate; KIV, α-ketoisovaleric; KMV, α-keto-β-methylvalerate; BCAT, branched-chain aminotransferase; BCKDH, branched-chain α-keto acid dehydrogenase; Gln, glutamine; GS, glutamine synthetase; BCATc, cytosolic branched-chain aminotransferase; PAG, phosphate-activated glutaminase.
synthetase (GS)
Furthermore, of the TCA cycle intermediates, citrate displayed the highest 13 C-enrichment from 13 C-BCAA metabolism, which is also an indicator of astrocyte metabolism in acute brain slices
Finally, we also characterized oxidative BCAA metabolism in cultured human iPSC-derived astrocytes, where we likewise observed a conserved capacity for BCAA oxidative metabolism (Figure
Hence, the functional metabolic analyses conflict with the previous immunohistochemical investigations, and demonstrate active BCAA metabolism in both mouse and human astrocytes.
The discrepancy between the functional metabolic studies and the immunohistochemical studies may be related to methodological limitations of immunohistochemistry, as discussed in

BCAA Metabolism in AD
Branched-chain amino acid metabolism has been described to be altered in several neurological disorders.
These alterations can arise from deficiencies in the expression and function of metabolic enzymes as observed in Maple syrup urine disease, which is caused by deficiency in BCKDH and leads to severe neurological symptoms
Interestingly, decreased plasma and brain concentrations of BCAAs have consistently been reported in patients with Huntington's disease (HD), which correlates with disease severity
Using a mouse model of HD, we have previously reported an elevated capacity of BCAA metabolism in cerebral cortical and striatal slices
The enhanced BCAA metabolism was related to an increased expression of BCAA metabolic proteins and suggests that the reduced BCAA concentrations in HD may be due to compensatory increases in BCAA brain metabolism
Evidence from both disease models and patients strongly indicate involvement of BCAA metabolism in AD pathology.
For instance, it was found in patients with AD that genetic predisposition to elevated isoleucine plasma levels, but not leucine or valine, is positively associated with AD
Furthermore, a large reduction in the concentration of valine has been detected in the cerebrospinal fluid
Interestingly, elevated BCAA levels have been found in the APP/PS1 mouse model of AD
BCAA supplementation has been shown to be beneficial in disorders with systemic elevated ammonia levels, e.g., hepatic encephalopathy
In the periphery, BCAAs stimulate glutamine synthesis in muscles, hereby fixating ammonia
In the brain, glutamine synthesis is also the primary pathway of ammonia fixation and is strictly located in astrocytes
Interestingly, AD has been associated with elevated cerebral levels of ammonia
Since glutamine is derived from the TCA cycle intermediate α-ketoglutarate via glutamate, astrocyte TCA cycle function is crucial for glutamine synthesis
Multiple studies have revealed impaired astrocytic energy metabolism in AD
It could, therefore, be speculated that the reduced synthesis of glutamate from oxidative leucine metabolism observed in the AD astrocytes may be caused by deficient astrocyte TCA cycle function, which may further hamper glutamine synthesis in AD.
Furthermore, ammonia has been shown to inhibit oxidative astrocyte metabolism
Further studies are needed to explore the potential link of disrupted ammonia homeostasis and BCAA metabolism in AD.
Here we found that in the AD astrocytes, the TCA cycle oxidation of leucine, isoleucine, and valine was largely maintained (Figure
However, citrate from metabolism of [U-13 C]leucine, [U-13 C]isoleucine, and [U-13 C]valine displayed increased 13 C-enrichment in AD astrocytes.
It has been proposed that the astrocytic release of citrate may modulate neuronal excitability through the regulation of extracellular concentrations of Ca 2+ and Mg 2+
Furthermore, disruptions in brain citrate levels can alter neuronal excitability in the hippocampus, resulting in epileptic seizures
The results of increased citrate labeling from BCAA metabolism may reflect a supportive role of citrate transfer from astrocytes to neurons
BCAA metabolism is closely associated to the fate of glutamate.
Glutamate acts as the link between neurotransmission and energy metabolism
Glutamate synthesis in astrocytes occurs mainly as transamination, particularly via aspartate aminotransferase (AAT)
The conversion of αketoglutarate to glutamate may depend on nitrogen from BCAAs, primarily leucine, via BCAT activity.
It has been suggested that at least 20% of all glutamate nitrogen is derived from leucine in cultured astrocytes
Interestingly, the results show reduced amino acid synthesis derived from leucine metabolism in AD astrocytes (Figure
Since AD astrocytes exhibited decreased amounts of glutamate derived from leucine metabolism, it can be speculated that impaired leucine nitrogen metabolism could reduce glutamate metabolic pools in the AD astrocytes.
Leucine is also an efficient nitrogen donor for glutamine synthesis
This is in line with the results showing that nitrogen metabolism of BCAAs is mainly utilized for glutamine synthesis in human and mouse cortical slices.
Since glutamine is synthesized from glutamate, it can be suggested that the observed alterations in the glutamate pools could have a direct influence on glutamine synthesis, as observed in AD astrocytes.
Metabolism of the BCAA carbon skeleton will result in net transfer of nitrogen to nonessential amino acids
Interestingly, we found decreased amounts of labeling in amino acids derived from the oxidative metabolism of leucine in AD astrocytes.
This reduction in amino acid synthesis derived from leucine metabolism, particularly in glutamine, could influence neurotransmitter recycling and homeostasis in AD astrocytes.
Furthermore, onethird of the 13 C-incorporation from leucine metabolism will give rise to M+1 labeling in TCA cycle intermediates and amino acids.
AD astrocytes, not AD neurons, displayed altered M+1 labeling (Supplementary Table
The labeling of succinate, malate, and aspartate (M+1) from leucine metabolism was reduced in the AD astrocytes with APP mutation.
However, citrate (M+1) labeling was increased in both mutated AD astrocytes.
These results further confirm that oxidative leucine metabolism is altered in AD astrocytes but maintained in AD neurons.
We found that glutamate labeling amounts from the metabolism of BCAAs in AD neurons were unaltered (Figure
However, glutamate and aspartate total amounts from leucine metabolism were decreased in the AD neurons with PSEN-1 mutation.
BCAT isoforms are redox-sensitive proteins and are in their reduced form part of a metabolon with glutamate dehydrogenase (GDH) catalyzing the conversion of glutamate into α-ketoglutarate
An increase in oxidative stress (OS) might change the redox status, preventing this metabolon formation
The reduced glutamate and aspartate total amounts observed in AD neurons may be due to changes in the redox state of BCAT, causing reduced amino acid synthesis.
Furthermore, leucine is a positive allosteric modulator of GDH activity
Imbalanced redox states, caused by an excessive accumulation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and a decrease in antioxidant enzymes, leads to OS in AD
Alterations in glutathione (GSH), the most abundant brain antioxidant, have been described to be reduced in patients with AD
In several studies using different AD models, OS can also be induced by Aβ accumulation
Alterations in the mitochondria might represent the major source of OS observed in AD
These alterations in OS could contribute further to mitochondrial impairments, such as metabolic imbalances.
Branched-chain amino acids also have a regulatory role in the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) pathway.
The mTOR pathway is an environmental sensor, which regulates cell proliferation, protein synthesis, and autophagy through multiple signaling pathways
mTOR constitutes the catalytic subunit of two distinct complexes
mTOR complex 1 (mTORC1) plays a role in neuronal synaptic plasticity and phosphorylates substrates to promote synthesis of proteins, lipids, nucleotides, etc., while repressing the autophagic breakdown of cellular components.
mTORC1 activation is regulated by nutrients such as several amino acids, particularly leucine and arginine
Depletion of amino acids, low glucose concentrations, and OS can negatively impact mTORC1 regulation while stimulating autophagy
Some studies have reported that mitochondrial ROS are increased by high concentrations of BCAAs in human endothelial and peripheral blood cells
However, inhibition of the mTORC1 pathway, decreased BCAAs-induced pro-oxidant effects.
Likewise, alterations in mTORC1 regulation in AD pathology may result in accumulation of amyloid-β (Aβ) aggregates.
Increased mTOR activity and signaling were found in APP-transfected cell lines and in brains of 3xTg-AD mice
Interestingly, mTOR activity was reduced when preventing Aβ accumulation in the 3xTg-AD mice.
Apparently, high Aβ levels can exert toxicity through increased mTOR activity.
In addition, the use of rapamycin ameliorated cognitive deficits, and Aβ and Tau pathology in 3xTg-AD mice by increasing autophagy
It has been suggested that the alteration of mTOR signaling and autophagy occurs at early stages of AD.
The status of the mTOR pathway in AD post-mortem brain tissue has been investigated, where increased reduction in autophagy was observed as the disease progressed
Since leucine regulates the mTOR pathway, mTOR signaling in AD astrocytes could be impaired, leading to reduction in amino acids pools.
Leucine metabolism appears to be more affected in AD astrocytes than in AD neurons.
It can be speculated that the metabolic alterations in astrocytes may be an early event in AD progression, possibly influencing neuronal metabolic and neurotransmitter homeostasis.
The findings demonstrate reduced amino acid synthesis derived from leucine metabolism in AD astrocytes, possibly contributing further to neurotransmitter imbalances involved in AD.
Together, the results demonstrate extensive branchedchain amino acid metabolism in human astrocytes, identify disturbances in their metabolism in an AD pathological context, and highlight the need for further investigation on branchedchain amino acids metabolism, particularly in astrocytes, to possibly unravel additional pathological mechanisms implicated in neurodegenerative diseases.



FIGURE 1 |
FIGURE 1 | Primary 13 C-labeling patterns from [U-13 C]branched-chain amino acid (BCAA) metabolism.
(A) Metabolism of [U-13 C]leucine and [U-13 C]isoleucine (M+6) will result in acetyl coenzyme A (CoA), a process initiated by branched-chain aminotransferase (BCAT) catalyzing BCAA transamination and hereby producing branched-chain α-keto acids (BCKAs), α-ketoisocaproate (KIC), and α-keto-β-methylvalerate (KMV), respectively.
Subsequently, irreversible oxidative decarboxylation of the BCKAs occurs by the branched-chain α-keto acid dehydrogenase (BCKDH) enzyme complex and through multiple enzymatic reactions entering the TCA cycle as double-labeled acetyl CoA (M+2).
Filled circles (orange) represent labeled 13 C and empty circles unlabeled 12 C. (B) Valine and isoleucine can also enter into the TCA cycle via succinyl CoA.
[U-13 C]valine (M+5) and [U-13 C]isoleucine (M+6) will be transaminated, resulting in BCKAs, α-ketoisovaleric (KIV), and KMV, respectively, and then decarboxylated, entering TCA cycle metabolism, after numerous reactions, as succinate (M+3).
Filled circles (yellow) represent labeled 13 C and empty circles unlabeled 12 C. BCATs, branched-chain aminotransferase; BCKDH, branched-chain α-keto acid dehydrogenase; α-KG, α-ketoglutarate; KIC, α-ketoisocaproate; KMV, α-keto-β-methylvalerate; KIV, α-ketoisovaleric; β-MC CoA, β-methylcrotonyl CoA; MGC CoA, β-methylglutaconyl CoA; HIB CoA, β-hydroxyisobutyryl CoA; MHB CoA, α-methyl-β-hydroxyisobutyryl CoA; HMG CoA, β-hydroxy-β-methylglutaryl CoA; MAA CoA, α-methylacetoacetyl CoA; HIB, β-hydroxyisobutyrate; MMSA, methylmalonate semialdehyde; MAA CoA, α-methylacetoacetyl CoA.



FIGURE 2 |
FIGURE 2 | BCAA nitrogen metabolism of human and mouse brain slices.
After incubation with [ 15 N]BCAA (valine, leucine, or isoleucine), M+1 labeling was observed in glutamate, glutamine, gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), alanine, and aspartate, indicating significant nitrogen incorporation into amino acids supported by BCAA metabolism. 15
N-enrichment in intracellular amino acids was determined by gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS).
Values represent mean (±) standard error of the mean (SEM) (n = 6), *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01 (when compared with human cortical slices) analyzed by Student's paired t-test.
BCAA, branched-chain amino acid; BCKA, branched-chain α-keto acids; BCATs, branched-chain aminotransferase; GAD, glutamate decarboxylase; GDH, glutamate dehydrogenase; ALAT, alanine aminotransferase; AAT, aspartate aminotransferase; GS, glutamine synthetase.



FIGURE 3 |
FIGURE 3 | BCAA oxidative metabolism in human and mouse brain slices. 13
C-enrichment of tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle metabolites and amino acids in human and mouse cerebral cortical slices after incubation with [U-13 C]isoleucine, [U-13 C]leucine, or [U-13 C]valine.
M+2 and M+3 13 C-enrichment in (A) TCA cycle intermediates.
Increased M+2 13 C-enrichment in (B) glutamate, glutamine, and GABA after incubation with [U-13 C]leucine in mouse cortical slices when compared with human cortical slices. 13
C-enrichment in intracellular metabolites was determined by GC-MS.
Values represent mean (±) SEM (n = 6), *p < 0.05 analyzed by two-way ANOVA.
N/D, not detectable.



FIGURE 4 |
FIGURE 4 | BCAA oxidative metabolism in human induced pluripotent stem cell (hiPSC)-derived astrocytes.
hiPSC-derived astrocytes were incubated with [U-13 C]isoleucine, [U-13 C]leucine, or [U-13 C]valine.
Labeling in TCA cycle intermediates and amino acids represented as molecular carbon labeling (MCL) confirms hiPSC-derived astrocytes capability to oxidatively metabolize the BCAA isoleucine, leucine, and, to a lesser extent, valine by incorporating them in the TCA cycle.
Values represent mean ± SEM (n = 3) from different hiPSC-derived astrocyte set-ups individually depicted as circles.



FIGURE 5 |
FIGURE 5 | Reduced oxidative BCAA metabolism entering as acetyl CoA in Alzheimer's disease (AD) astrocytes.
(A) Increased glutamate and citrate M+2 labeling but decreased aspartate and malate 13 C-enrichment after incubation with [U-13 C]leucine and (B) [U-13 C]isoleucine in human AD astrocytes when entering via acetyl CoA.
(C) Increased TCA cycle metabolites M+3 labeling after incubation with [U-13 C]valine but (D) decreased aspartate 13 C-enrichment after incubation with [U-13 C]isoleucine in human AD astrocytes when entering via succinyl CoA.
Values represent mean (±) SEM (n = 3), *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001, # p < 0.0001, analyzed by two-way ANOVA.
WT, wild type; APP, amyloid precursor protein; PSEN-1, presenilin-1.



FIGURE 6 |
FIGURE 6 | Decreased aspartate synthesis from oxidative isoleucine metabolism in AD neurons.
(A) No significant differences were found in AD neurons after incubation with [U-13 C]leucine.
(B) Decreased glutamate M+2 and aspartate M+2 labeling after incubation with [U-13 C]isoleucine in AD neurons.
(C) No significant differences were found in AD neurons after incubation with [U-13 C]valine in AD neurons.
(D) Decreased aspartate M+3 labeling after incubation with [U-13 C]isoleucine in AD neurons when compared with control.
No significant differences were found in TCA cycle intermediates.
Values represent mean (±) SEM (n = 3), *p < 0.05, # p < 0.0001 analyzed by two-way ANOVA.
WT, wild type; APP, amyloid precursor protein; PSEN-1, presenilin-1.



FIGURE 7 |
FIGURE 7 | Selective disruptions of amino acid amounts in AD astrocytes with APP and PSEN-1 mutations following incubation with [U-13 C]leucine.
(A) nmol/mg protein in M+2 (via acetyl CoA) labeling and total amounts after incubation with [U-13 C]leucine.
(B) nmol/mg protein in M+2 (via acetyl CoA) and M+3 (via succinyl CoA) labeling and total amounts after incubation with [U-13 C]isoleucine.
(C) nmol/mg protein in M+3 (via succinyl CoA) labeling and total amounts after incubation with [U-13 C]valine in hiPSC-derived astrocytes.
(D) nmol/mg protein in M+2 (via acetyl CoA) labeling and total amounts after incubation with [U-13 C]leucine.
(E) nmol/mg protein in M+2 (via acetyl CoA) and M+3 (via succinyl CoA) labeling and total amounts after incubation with [U-13 C]isoleucine.
(F) nmol/mg protein in M+3 (via succinyl CoA) labeling and total amounts after incubation with [U-13 C]valine in hiPSC-derived neurons.
Values represent mean (±) SEM (n = 3), *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001 when compared with control, analyzed by one-way ANOVA.
No significant differences were found in M+3 labeling amounts in AD astrocytes.
WT, wild type; APP, amyloid precursor protein; PSEN-1, presenilin-1.



FIGURE 8 |
FIGURE 8 | BCAA oxidative metabolism and nitrogen transfer in human astrocytes and potential blood brain barrier-astrocyte-neuron axis.
BCAAs are taken up by the blood brain barrier (BBB) endothelial cells, and then BCAAs can undergo transamination by the action of BCATm, forming glutamate and the branched-chain