The Multilingual Naming Test (MINT) as a Measure of Picture Naming Ability in Alzheimer’s Disease
Objective: The present study investigated the ability of the Multilingual Naming Test (MINT), a picture naming test recently added to the National Alzheimer's Coordinating Center's (NACC) Uniform Data Set neuropsychological test battery, to detect naming impairment (i.e., dysnomia) across stages of Alzheimer's disease (AD).
Method: Data from the initial administration of the MINT were obtained on NACC participants who were cognitively normal (N = 3,981) or diagnosed with mild cognitive impairment (N = 852) or dementia (N = 1,148) with presumed etiology of AD.
Dementia severity was rated using the Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR) scale.
Results: Cross-sectional multiple regression analyses revealed significant effects of diagnostic group, sex, education, age, and race on naming scores.
Planned comparisons collapsing across age and education groups revealed significant group differences in naming scores across levels of dementia severity.
ROC curve analyses showed good diagnostic accuracy of MINT scores for distinguishing cognitively normal controls from AD dementia, but not from MCI.
Within the cognitively normal group, there was a robust interaction between age and education such that naming scores exhibited the most precipitous drop across age groups for the least educated participants.
Additionally, education effects were stronger in African-Americans than in Whites (a race-by-education interaction), and race effects were stronger in older than in younger age groups (a race-by-age interaction).
The MINT successfully detects naming deficits at different levels of cognitive impairment in patients with MCI or AD dementia, but comparison to age, sex, race, and educationcorrected norms to determine impairment is essential.
Several studies have validated the MINT as a bilingual proficiency measure (i.e., by testing with the MINT in both languages) in cognitively normal Chinese-English children
Clinical validation of the MINT was carried out in one study which showed that an abbreviated (32item) version of the MINT, which mainly includes only the more difficult items from the full version, detected mild dysnomia in English monolingual patients with MCI or mild-tomoderate AD dementia, and provided evidence that the loss was semantic in nature
This same study also found that the MINT detected naming impairments in Spanish-English bilinguals with AD, but only when they were tested in their dominant language.
The abbreviated (32-item) MINT recently replaced the short (30-item) version of the BNT in the National Alzheimer's Disease Coordinating Centers' (NACC) Uniform Data Set (UDS) neuropsychological test battery.
A cross-walk study that included both measures showed that the MINT and BNT were highly correlated (r = 0.76;
Preliminary normative data for the MINT have been recently published for the UDS (v.3)
but the ability of the MINT to capture impairments in language abilities across the various stages of cognitive impairment associated with AD has not been determined.
In addition, it has not been determined if the MINT, like the BNT and other naming tests
Thus, the goals of the present study were to (1) examine group differences on the MINT across increasing levels of cognitive impairment in a large sample of patients with MCI or dementia presumably due to AD, and cognitively healthy controls (>5,000 participants) and (2) assess the effects of sex, age, race, and education on MINT scores in normal aging, MCI, and AD dementia.

METHODS

Participants and Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria
Participants were tested on the MINT during their approximately annual UDS evaluation as part of their participation in longitudinal studies of AD at one of approximately 29 NIAfunded Alzheimer's Disease Centers (ADCs) across the United States.
Our analyses included data from March 2015 through May 2017 and included only the first administration of version 3 of the UDS.
The sample was restricted to individuals clinically diagnosed as cognitively normal or with MCI or dementia due to AD based upon diagnostic research criteria
Within each of the three clinically diagnosed groups, dementia severity was further stratified using the Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR), a semi-structured clinical interview to rate cognitive and functional performance
Participants with AD dementia were grouped into CDR scores of 0.5 (very mild), 1 (mild), or 2 (moderate).
Participants with a CDR score of 3 were excluded due to insufficient sample size.
Cognitively normal participants with CDR scores of >0 were excluded.
MCI participants had CDR scores of either 0 (n = 51) or 0.5 (n = 801).
Because the clinician's diagnosis and the CDR rating were conducted independently at some sites, CDR scores of 0.5 occurred in both the MCI and AD groups.
We included participants with concomitant medical or psychiatric conditions if those conditions were not primary or contributing causes of the observed cognitive impairment, with the exception that a few conditions judged to be contributing only were allowed (depression, anxiety, systemic illness, and current medications).
Participants with current alcohol abuse were excluded.
Only primary English speakers and participants with complete data for all variables of interest (i.e., age, sex, education, and MINT score) were included.
When a participant's education level was listed as greater than 20 years, it was re-coded as a maximum of 20.
Only participants age 50 and older were included in the analyses to better match age distributions across groups.
Table
Controls had significantly higher education than both MCI and AD, and MCI had significantly higher education than AD.
Controls were significantly younger than both MCI and AD; however, MCI and AD did not differ on age.
Chi-square tests showed that controls had a higher percentage of female participants than the MCI and AD groups, and controls had a slightly lower percent of White participants than the AD group; notably the effect sizes of these differences were small (Cramer's V ≤ 0.14).
Most of the participants in the overall sample were White (84%), and there were 14% African-American or Black, 1% Asian, and 1% Other Race, which reflects the overall distribution within the national ADCs.
Informed consent was obtained at the individual ADCs, as approved by individual Institutional Review Boards (IRBs), and sharing of de-identified UDS data was approved by the University of Washington's IRB (the site of the NACC data repository).

Dependent Variable-MINT Scores
The abbreviated MINT consists of 32 black-and-white line drawings of objects that are presented one at a time to be named beginning with relatively easier items and ending with relatively more difficult to name items.
If an individual encounters difficulty identifying an object, a semantic or phonemic cue is provided.
The number of spontaneous correct responses and correct responses following a semantic cue are summed to give a total score.
Thus, the abbreviated MINT total scores range from 0 to 32 and these were used as the primary outcome measure.

Statistical Methods
Correlation and simultaneous multiple regression analyses (with model comparisons) were carried out to assess the relationship between diagnostic group, age, education, sex, and race in an additional analysis, on MINT total score.
Inclusion of variables in the current models was based on previous research showing that naming tests are often affected by age and education, as well as the interaction between them.
Sex was examined as a main effect given a previous finding of a sex effect on the MINT
Race effects were also considered given previous research showing that disparities in quality of education and early life experiences can adversely impact cognitive test performance of older African-Americans
Age and education level were modeled as continuous predictors.
Sex (female, male), race (White, African-American), and diagnostic group (normal cognition, MCI, AD with CDR 0.5, AD with CDR 1, AD with CDR 2) were dummy-coded and modeled as categorical predictors (nominal or ordinal, respectively).
Before computing interaction terms, age and education were centered to avoid multicollinearity.
Age was modeled as a quadratic term for the cognitively normal group because a polynomial curve provided a better model fit, whereas education was modeled as a linear term because a polynomial term did not significantly improve model fit.
Participants were stratified into four age (<65, 65-75, 76-85, 86+) and three education (≤12, 13-15, 16+) groups for the purposes of conducting t-tests comparing age-and education-matched groups and providing tables with means, standard deviations, and cut-off scores corresponding to percentiles.
To identify the potential diagnostic utility of the MINT, the area under the curve (AUC), sensitivity, specificity, and ideal hypothetical cut-off MINT scores for predicting group membership were calculated separately for cognitively normal versus MCI and cognitively normal versus AD using Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curve analyses.
The AUC measure provides an overall indication of the diagnostic accuracy; a minimum value of >0.75 was considered clinically significant
Sensitivity (i.e., the true positive rate or hit) and specificity (i.e., the true negative rate or correct rejection) were calculated and sensitivity was plotted as a function of specificity.
Thus, the ROC curves illustrate diagnostic accuracy for all possible cut-off scores (from which an optimal cut-off can then be determined).
All data were analyzed using SPSS, version 24 (IBM; Chicago, IL) and R (version 3.3.3;
R Core Team, 2016) was used for graphs and robust regressions.
The statistical results from parametric tests (i.e., regression, t-tests) need to be interpreted with caution because the MINT scores and the standardized residuals were not normally distributed, and there were unequal variances between groups.
Given the very large sample sizes, however, violations of the normality assumption may not noticeably impact results, and transformations may actually bias estimates
Therefore, we chose to present nontransformed data, and used non-parametric tests such as Mann-Whitney U tests and robust regressions, whenever applicable (see below).

RESULTS

Regression Analyses
Correlations between age and education and total MINT score, shown for the overall sample and separately for Whites and African-Americans, the two most-represented groups in our overall sample, are presented in Table
When all participants were included, multiple regression analyses showed significant associations between naming ability and diagnostic group, sex, education, and age (all ps <.001; Table
This full model accounted for 39% of the variance in MINT scores (F1 (5, 5,975) = 760.0;
MSE = 13.5;
p < .001).
MINT scores decreased as dementia severity and age increased, and increased as education level increased, and were higher for males than females.
The main effect of sex can be visualized in Table
The main effects of age and education were qualified by a significant interaction between them, such that the association between naming ability and age depended on participants' education level (p = .008).
When this analysis was carried out within the cognitively normal group only, the same patterns of results were obtained (see Table
When the analysis was carried out within only the MCI and AD groups, there were significant associations between MINT score and diagnostic group, sex, age, and education, but the interaction between age and education did not reach significance (p = .25;
see Table
Given the small effect size and to overcome the limitations of parametric tests, we tested the robustness of the age-by-education interaction in the cognitively normal group with a linear regression method using MM-estimation ('robustbase' package in R) as well as with a Weighted Least Squares (WLS) regression, which is more equipped for heteroscedasticity.
Both analyses showed that the age-by-education interaction was indeed robust and persistent (β = 0.05; p< 0.001; and β = 0.04; p = 0.01, for robust and WLS regression, respectively), and all other main effects remained significant.
Finally, the analyses reported in Table
Planned comparisons collapsing across age and education using Mann-Whitney U tests (which do not assume a normal distribution or homogeneity of variances between groups) revealed that MINT scores were significantly different for cognitively normal versus MCI (U = 1,079,054; p < .001;
r = .24),
MCI versus AD with CDR 0.5 (U = 120, 490; p < .001;
r = .
21), AD with CDR 0.5 versus AD with CDR 1 (U = 79, 209; p < .001;
r = .21),
and AD with CDR 1 versus AD with CDR 2 (U = 39, 912; p < .001;
r = .25). Figure
Figure
Table
Independent sample t-tests were carried out to compare the mean naming scores between adjacent diagnostic groups matched by age and education (e.g., MCI vs. normal cognition, AD with CDR 0.5 vs. MCI, etc).
In general, the more severely impaired diagnostic group performed worse on the MINT than the next least impaired group, except in the youngest and oldest dementia groups.
MINT scores of cognitively normal participants showed a near-ceiling effect (see Tables
Collapsing across age and education, 32% of the cognitively normal sample obtained a perfect score of 32 points and 81% of the sample scored 29 or above.
Table
In light of the observed ceiling effects, these values can be used to supplement the normative data provided by

Race Effects
To consider if the observed age-by-education interaction differed by race (White, African-American), and whether the MINT may require separate norms for African-Americans, race was added as an additional factor to the regression within the cognitively normal group (given a sufficient sample size of African-American cognitively healthy participants; n = 607).
Individuals in other race categories were excluded: that is Asian: n = 53; Native-Hawaiian/Pacific Islander: n = 3; American Indian/Alaska Native: n = 22; Other: n = 10; Unknown: n = 6.
We tested a three-way interaction between age, education, and race (and included all lower order two-way interactions).
Table
Similar to the previous analysis, there were main effects of age, sex, and education.
The previously robust interaction between age and education (see Table
African-American cognitively normal elders on average had lower MINT scores than cognitively normal Whites (M = 27.8 vs 30.4).
Further, education effects were significantly stronger in the African-American than in the White group, an education-by-race interaction, and race differences on the MINT were larger in the oldest participants, an age-by-race interaction (see Table
The three-way interaction between age, education, and race was not significant (p = 0.51).
When the same analysis was restricted to patients only (MCI and AD), there was a main effect of race such that African-American patients on average had lower MINT scores than Whites (M = 24.1 vs 25.5; B = -1.484;
SE = 0.419; β = -0.073;
p < 0.001; 95% CI = -2.306,
-0.662).
Higher order interactions were not significant (ps ≥ 0.12).
Given the observed main effect of race and significant two-way interactions in cognitively normal participants, Table
Table
Table

Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curves
Figure
MINT performance provided good diagnostic accuracy for classifying probable AD versus cognitively normal participants (AUC = 0.85; SE = 0.01; p < 0.001; 95% CI = 0.84, 0.87).
A cut-off MINT score of less than or equal to 28.5 produced a sensitivity and specificity of 75% and 81%, respectively, while a cut-off score of less than or equal to 29.5 produced sensitivity and specificity of 83% and 70%, respectively.
In contrast, MINT performance did not provide acceptable diagnostic accuracy for classifying MCI versus cognitively normal participants (AUC = 0.68; SE = 0.01; p < 0.001; 95% CI = 0.66, 0.70).

DISCUSSION
Results of this study demonstrate that the MINT can detect group differences in naming ability at different stages of cognitive impairment associated with AD regardless of age and education level.
Within age-and education-matched subgroups, participants with MCI generally scored significantly worse than healthy controls, participants with mild dementia scored worse than those with MCI, and participants with moderate dementia scored worse than those with mild dementia.
Of clinical relevance, MINT scores (collapsed across age and education levels) provided good diagnostic accuracy for distinguishing AD from cognitively normal participants, but not for distinguishing MCI from cognitively normal participants.
Finally, we found robust associations between MINT scores and sex and race, as well as an interaction between age and education in cognitively healthy adults, such that MINT scores were lowest in the oldest and least-educated adults.
Although the effect size of this interaction was statistically small, the finding was robust and clinically meaningful (e.g., in Table
However, additional studies are needed to assess this age-by-education interaction with a more sensitive picture naming test.
MINT scores were near ceiling levels for most cognitively normal participants in our sample (i.e., 81% of participants had a MINT score of 29 and above), particularly in White adults with 13 or more years of education, so it could have underestimated their naming difficulties.
Overall, the MINT has the potential to detect deficits in naming ability in those with MCI or mild AD dementia and to track word-finding difficulty throughout the course of AD, but demographic characteristics and ceiling effects need to be considered.
Lower education was associated with poorer performance on the MINT-those with the lowest level of education (high school or less) had the lowest naming scores, followed by those with some college, and then those with 16 or more years of education.
Notably, education effects were stronger in the African-American group, likely reflecting discordance between years of education and quality of education in ethnic minorities and immigrants.
Older age was also associated with poorer naming ability-those in the oldest-old group (86+) had the lowest MINT scores, followed by those in the next oldest groups (76-85 and 65-75), and then those in the youngest group (<65).
Similar age and education effects have been reported for the BNT
In follow-up analyses including only the White and African-American groups (the next largest race represented in the sample with n = 217 and n = 607 in the patient and control groups, respectively)-and controlling for age, education, and sex-there was a robust main effect of race such that on average African-Americans named fewer pictures than Whites, consistent with some previous studies
These findings suggest that items on naming tests may often be culturally and/or linguistically biased, and reflect differences in quality of education and early life experiences.
In line with this, we also observed a robust age-by-race effect, such that the biggest race differences on the MINT were observed in the oldest cognitively healthy elderly.
The oldest African-Americans may have received the lowest quality of education compared to those educated in the post-segregation era
Consideration of reading abilities rather than education has been shown to attenuate differences in neuropsychological test performance between elderly African-Americans and Whites
A particularly notable finding was the age-by-education interaction effect on MINT scores in the cognitively normal group-individuals with low education level and older age exhibited the lowest naming ability on the MINT.
This finding is consistent with previous reports of an interaction between age and education on the BNT in cognitively normal elderly
The effects of education on cognition might not be linear; once a critical number of years of schooling (a threshold) is reached, an individual may subsequently be better able to continue to accrue vocabulary knowledge throughout a lifetime of experiences.
By contrast, individuals with lower (or poorer quality) years of education may fail to accrue additional knowledge at the same rate because of insufficient basis of knowledge from which to build.
On this view, the interaction effect implies that while higher (post-high school) education levels might have some impact on cognition, education more drastically affects naming ability at the lowest levels (e.g.,
Very low education levels might also limit cognitive reserve, which refers to the ability to maintain normal levels of cognitive performance despite the presence of pathology due to protective factors and compensatory processes
Education is widely regarded as a protective factor and a proxy for cognitive reserve (for reviews see
Because age is a risk factor for AD, individuals with the lowest education level may be in the earliest stages of AD and may eventually progress to MCI or AD dementia.
However, the cognitive reserve hypothesis is speculative and must be confirmed with follow-up longitudinal studies examining these age and education interaction effects in 'robust normal control groups'
Across all groups, MINT scores were higher for males than for females.
This finding is consistent with the report of the preliminary norming study for the UDS neuropsychological test battery
A possible explanation for this difference is the higher number of non-living (n = 24) than living (n = 8) items on the MINT.
A number of studies have demonstrated robust sex-by-category interaction effects in picture naming with males performing better than females with non-living items, and females performing better than males with living items
This interaction is most likely due to sex-related differences in item familiarity.
A similar sex-related interaction was observed across semantic fluency tasks where cognitively normal males retrieved more names of tools than cognitively normal females, whereas the females retrieved more names of fruit than the males

Limitations and Future Directions
This study revealed several psychometric limitations of the 32-item MINT, the most significant being the near-ceiling effect in cognitively normal elderly individuals.
Although the MINT, like the BNT, was not developed to detect subtle naming deficits (e.g., the BNT was developed to assess anomia in aphasia), these limitations reduce the MINT's ability to detect very early decline in naming ability that might be associated with AD.
ROC curve analyses showed that the MINT was reasonably sensitive in discriminating cognitively normal participants from those with AD, but not from those with MCI.
To at least partially address these psychometric limitations, we provided MINT cut-off scores in terms of percentiles (see Tables
The observed ceiling effect on the MINT may have occurred because the 32 items from the original 68-item MINT were selected for their sensitivity based on a fairly small sample (N = 130;
It should be noted, however, that the 32 items were chosen to be matched in difficulty to the BNT items; MINT items that were not included tended to be easier items (as the MINT was designed to assess a wider range of naming abilities in the non-dominant language).
Thus, an alternative selection of items from the full MINT would likely increase rather than reduce ceiling effects.
There are several aspects of the NACC cohort that could have influenced the results.
First, more males than females in the dementia group may have artificially inflated the means for that group in light of findings that males score higher than females on the MINT.
The NACC cohort is also highly educated on average and predominantly English-speaking and Caucasian, thus reducing the generalizability of these findings to other populations.
Despite these psychometric and sample limitations, the current analyses reveal that the MINT detects deficits in naming ability across a range of levels of cognitive impairment, including mildto-moderate stages of dementia.
Given that almost all items were named by cognitively normal individuals (producing ceiling effects on the test), the failure of patients to name more difficult items is likely due to semantic loss commonly seen in AD
Because the MINT was originally developed for use in multiple languages, it would be fruitful to examine the sensitivity of the MINT to AD-related language decline in non-English speaking populations, and to determine the impact of demographic factors on MINT performance in these populations.
The impact of bilingualism on MINT performance should also be examined given the known effects of bilingualism on picture naming performance (e.g.,
Our finding of a significant effect of race suggests that comprehensive normative data including this variable should be considered in future work.
Additional studies are needed to validate the utility of the MINT in participants with lower levels of education with additional measures of quality of education that work better for ethnic minorities (e.g., a test of single word reading;
Finally, longitudinal studies are needed to determine if the MINT effectively tracks the progression of naming deficits through the stages of AD from preclinical disease through frank dementia.
A biomarker-defined diagnosis of AD in cognitively normal individuals (i.e., preclinical AD;
It would also be interesting to examine the impact of co-morbid vascular risk factors (e.g., hypertension, hyperlipidemia, white matter changes on MRI) on MINT performance.
Subcortical white matter changes in individuals with AD, for example, may be related to decline in attention, working memory, retrieval processes, or inefficient processing of visual stimuli
In conclusion, the MINT effectively detects naming impairments in mild-to-moderate AD dementia.
There are, however, significant effects of age, education, sex, and race on MINT performance in cognitively normal elderly and in those with AD.
This suggests that consideration of demographically corrected normative data is essential for accurately determining naming impairment in AD.
Graphs depicting the MINT's ability to detect differences in picture naming ability across level of cognitive impairment plotted separately for (A) age and (B) education.
The black line represents the cognitively normal group, with increasing levels of cognitive impairment represented by lighter shading.
Scatterplots showing that MINT naming scores were lowest in individuals who are oldest and with the lowest level of education in the cognitively normal elderly.
Education level was modeled as a continuous predictor for regression analyses but for visualization purposes was stratified into three levels.
Scatter points for 16+ years of education are depicted in black triangles, 13-15 in dark gray squares, and ≤12 years in light gray diamonds.
Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curves comparing sensitivity and specificity of MINT scores in discriminating between cognitively normal participants from those with AD (in black) and those with MCI (in dark gray).
Table
AD (CDR = .5)
25.5 (4.7) 26.4 (6.0) AD (CDR = 1) 22.2 (6.4) 24.5 (6.7)

Demographic characteristics of participants
Table
Mean MINT score and (standard deviation   MINT cut-off scores associated with number of cognitively normal participants (n = 3,981) falling below < 2%, < 10%, < 15% of the sample, and within normal limits (WNL) grouped by age and education * .
A "-" is placed wherever less than 10 participants contributed to a cell.
Sex: 0 = female; 1 = male.
Race: 0 = White; 1 = African-American.
* Note this interaction was significant in a model without the three-way interaction when including all participants; see Table

Age
Table
Mean MINT score and (standard deviation Table
MINT cut-off scores associated with number of cognitively normal participants falling below or within a given percentile range or within normal limits (WNL), grouped by age and education * and presented separately for (a) Whites (n = 3,280) and (b) African-Americans (n = 607).
A "-" is placed wherever less than 10 participants contributed to a cell.



Fig
Fig. 1.



Fig
Fig. 2.



Fig
Fig. 3.


for age and education; p-values and Cramer's V effect sizes correspond to Pearson's Chi-square tests for categorical variables (sex, handedness, race, and ethnicity)


normal cognition; 1 = MCI; 2 = AD (CDR = 0.5); 3 = AD (CDR = 1); 4 = AD (CDR = 2) * A quadratic term for age produced a better model fit.


fewer than 10% of cognitively normal participants who were between 50 and 64 years old, and with 13-15 years of education had a MINT score of 25 or lower.



a)
, and accompanying n, grouped by age, education and diagnosis and shown separately for Whites (n = 5in these tables should be interpreted with caution given ceiling effects on MINT scores (for review of these issues see
Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 September 24.


fewer than 10% of cognitively normal Whites who were between 50 and 64 years old, and with 13-15 years of education had a MINT score of 28 or lower.
6-10% of cognitively normal African-Americans who were less than 70 years old, and with 16 + years of education had a MINT score of 25 or lower.



Table 2 .
Pearson bivariate correlations between MINT total score and age and education, separately by diagnosis group and race



Table 3 .
Multiple regression results showing the association between MINT scores and diagnostic group, sex, education, and age shown as three separate models for (a) all participants, (b) cognitively normal only, and (c) MCI and AD groups



Table 4 .
Means (and standard deviations) of MINT scores for females and males by diagnosis group


Uttl, 2005)d deviations in this table should be interpreted with caution given ceiling effects on MINT scores (for review of these issues seeUttl, 2005).bThese
cells have < 10 participants contributing to the mean Asterisks denote a significant difference in scores between two adjacent diagnostic groups (i.e,.
comparison with the group to the left).



Table 6 .



Table 7 .
Multiple regression results showing the association between MINT scores and sex, education, age, and race in cognitively normal elders(n = 3,887)