Histological characterization of interneurons in Alzheimer's disease reveals a loss of somatostatin interneurons in the temporal cortex
This is a repository copy of Histological characterization of interneurons in Alzheimer's disease reveals a loss of somatostatin interneurons in the temporal cortex.

Reuse
Items deposited in White Rose Research Online are protected by copyright, with all rights reserved unless indicated otherwise.
They may be downloaded and/or printed for private study, or other acts as permitted by national copyright laws.
The publisher or other rights holders may allow further reproduction and re-use of the full text version.
This is indicated by the licence information on the White Rose Research Online record for the item.

Takedown
If you consider content in White Rose Research Online to be in breach of UK law, please notify us by emailing eprints@whiterose.ac.uk including the URL of the record and the reason for the withdrawal request.

Introduction
Neuronal dysfunction and synaptic loss are key features of Alzheimer's Disease (AD) which correlate with symptom severity
Pyramidal neurons have been the main focus of study in relation to AD pathology
However, interneurons are also essential to the normal functioning of the neuronal network.
Forming around 20% of the total neuronal network
There are three main classes of inhibitory interneuron with calcium-binding proteins and neuropeptides used to distinguish between them.
The different types of interneuron provide GABA, a major inhibitory neurotransmitter, to different subcellular places with the most common class of cortical interneurons, being the calcium-binding protein parvalbumin (PV) expressing interneurons.
These cells comprise of the chandelier cells which innervate the axon initial segment, basket cells that target the soma of excitatory cells, and trans-laminar interneurons
These interneurons are responsible for their fast-spiking activity and precise inhibitory control of pyramidal cell output
Somatostatin (SST) expressing interneurons, the Martinotti and non-Martinotti cells, fire more randomly and gradually to stimulus targeting dendrites of excitatory neurons
SST + cells release GABA that acts on a wide array of GABA receptors (GABAR), alongside fast synaptic GABAAR, the slower more persistent metabotropic GABABRs become activated on pyramidal cells silencing connections between these excitatory cells
Furthermore it has been proposed that the GABA released from SST cells affects the connectivity between excitatory neurons, regardless of whether these excitatory neurons are synaptically connected with SST neurons
The third class of interneurons express the serotonin receptor 5HT3aR as well as expressing vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP) and are distinguishable for synapsing PV + and SST + interneurons
Cognitive symptoms associated with AD are the result of altered neural networks including abnormal oscillatory rhythmic activity and network hypersynchrony that can occur many years prior to clinical symptom onset
Studies have shown the involvement of interneurons in regulating these neural circuits and networks to be altered in AD, suggesting that interneuron dysfunction could play a role in neuronal network failure and cognitive dysfunction in AD
The Tg8CRND8 mouse model of AD exhibits spatial memory deficits and altered anxiety alongside a reduced number of interneurons.
Treatment with α-melanocyte stimulating hormone (α-MSH) improved spatial memory and prevented the loss of SST + interneurons, demonstrating its role in restoring GABAergic inhibition to improve cognition in this model
Similarly, in the APP/PS1 mouse model of AD SST + interneurons decrease with aging compared to control mice, while PV + interneurons were increased suggesting a diverse interneuron population vulnerability that may be related to amyloid beta (Aβ) pathology in AD
Previous work has shown that the enzymes responsible for degrading Aβ are expressed in interneurons
The presence of endothelin-converting enzyme (ECE-2) and neprilysin in interneurons suggests the possibility that Aβ may have a role in the regulation of inhibition, acting as a neuropeptide important for interneuronal function
Additionally, γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA) receptors are altered in AD
An increased GBR1 expression was identified in the CA4 and CA3/2 areas, yet was rapidly reduced in the CA1 region with advanced AD pathology and progression of neurofibrillary tangles (NFT) prior to neuronal cell death
These GABA receptors have been shown to be involved in the inhibitory neurotransmission system that could contribute to neuronal resistance seen in the initial stages of disease pathology.
Thus changes in the balance between inhibitory and excitatory neurotransmission are likely to contribute to AD development.
The learning and memory deficits that correlated with the age-dependent decline in SST + interneurons in the apoE4-KI mouse model of AD were rescued following the restoration of GABA signaling using pentobarbital, a GABAA receptor enhancer
Another mutated amyloid precursor protein (APP) familial mouse model of AD exhibited memory deficits and a reduction in GABA related proteins and GABAergic interneurons as early as 4 months
With APP known to play a role in GABAergic synaptic formations, by administrating diazepam and correcting the APP function an improvement in memory and also reduced Aβ accumulation was seen.
Clearly, the GABAergic deficiency caused memory deficits and contributed to Aβ accumulation in this model
We have investigated changes in two of the main subclasses of inhibitory interneurons, the PV-and SST-expressing interneuron in temporal structures of AD and age-matched control brain using an immunohistochemistry approach.
We hypothesized that inhibitory neurons are lost in areas of the brain typically affected by pathology in AD.

Materials and Methods

Human central nervous system tissue
All formalin fixed paraffin embedded (FFPE) lateral temporal cortex (Brodmann areas 21/22) and hippocampus tissue was obtained from the Sheffield Brain Tissue Bank (SBTB).
The SBTB gave full ethical approval for the use of tissue in this study (ref.
08/MRE00/103+5) as a Research Tissue Bank approved by the Scotland Research Ethics Committee.
A summary of the cohort used in the study is provided in Table

Immunohistochemistry
Immunohistochemistry (IHC) was performed using a standard avidin-biotin complex-horse radish peroxidase (ABC-HRP) method, and visualized with diaminobenzidine (DAB) (Vector Laboratories, UK).
Briefly, deparaffinised 5μm sections were rehydrated and endogenous peroxidase quenched by blocking the sections in 3% H2O2/methanol for 20 minutes at room temperature (RT).
Following antigen retrieval (Table
Sections were incubated in the relevant optimal antibody dilution, washed thoroughly in tris buffered saline (TBS, pH7.5) and incubated in 0.5% biotinylated secondary antibody for 30 minutes at RT.
After thorough washing in TBS the sections were incubated in ABC-HRP for 30 minutes at RT before a final wash in TBS and incubation in the substrate DAB for 5 minutes at RT, sections were dehydrated, cleared in xylene and mounted for image analysis.
Negative controls (omission of the primary antibody and isotype controls) were incubated in each run.
Additional dual labelling was completed where SST stained sections (using a standard ABC-HRP method as earlier) were incubated with the avidin-biotin blocking kit (Vector Laboratories, UK), and incubated overnight at 4°C with anti-PV, followed by the alkaline-phosphatase-conjugated ABC (Vectastain Elite kit, Vector Laboratories, UK), developed with alkaline phosphatase substrate (Vector Laboratories, UK; red) and counterstained with haematoxylin.
Negative controls consisted of sections incubated in the absence of primary antibody.

Quantification of antibody staining and statistical analysis
Immunostained sections were imaged using either a Nikon Eclipse 80i microscope (Nikon UK, Kingston upon Thames) or digitally scanned under a 40x objective lens using a Nanozoomer XR (Hamamatsu, Photonics Ltd., Hertfordshire, UK).
Scanned sections were stored as NanoZoomer Digital Pathology Image (.ndpi) files, viewed and exported using NDP.View 2.
Quantification of PV-specific immunoreactivity within the temporal cortex was performed by capturing non-overlapping bright-field microscope images at x20 magnification in three contiguous belt transects covering the total cortical thickness (Supp Fig 1).
Within the hippocampus, five non-contiguous images along the pyramidal layer were exported from the scanned sections at x20 magnification in the CA1 region, and three images in the subiculum.
Non-overlapping images were exported from the scanned sections at x20 magnification across the thickest region of the entorhinal cortex in two contiguous belt transects (Supp Fig
PV immunopositive cells were manually counted in each region as well as the total percentage PV area immunoreactivity analysed in Analysis^D, (Olympus Biosystems, Watford, UK).
SST + cells were more infrequent than PV, and therefore quantification was performed solely by manual cell counts rather than using computer-aided image analysis.
Within the temporal cortex, SST immunopositive cells were counted in the area of highest expression in six nonoverlapping images exported from the scanned sections at x20 magnification in a contiguous belt.
Within the CA1 and enthorinal cortex the areas of highest expression within the hippocampus, SST immunopositive cells were counted in six random images exported from the scanned sections at x20 magnification in both the CA1 and entorhinal cortex regions.
All statistical analyses were performed using IBM SPSS Statistic v24.
For variation between neuroanatomical regions, Friedman's Two-Way Analysis of Variance was used to compare immunoreactivity in the four brain regions (temporal cortex, hippocampus CA1, subiculum and entorhinal cortex) across the full cohort.
Post hoc differences were assessed by Wilcoxon Signed Rank Test.
Statistical comparisons of quantitative data between the control and AD cases was performed using Mann-Whitney U Tests.

Results

Somatostatin (SST) interneurons were reduced in the temporal cortex of AD patients
SST immunoreactivity was discretely associated with the cytoplasm of neuronal cell bodies and immediate extending dendrites (Figures 1a&b), therefore for quantification total cell counts were used (Table
In addition, immunoreactivity was located predominantly at the grey matter/white matter border (Figures 1c&d).
There was significant neuroanatomical regional variation in the number of SST + interneurons (F=18.96
2df p=<0.001) with an increased number in the temporal cortex compared to CA1 (p=0.001) and entorhinal cortex (p=0.006).
There was a slight increase in the number of SST + cells in the entorhinal cortex compared to CA1 regions (p=0.025)
(Figure
Overall, there was a reduction (of approximately 30%) in the number of SST + interneurons in the temporal cortex of AD patients compared to control cases (Mann-Whitney U test p=0.040),
although this did not achieve statistical significance if corrected for multiple testing using the Bonferroni method (p=0.102).
No significant differences in the number of SST + interneurons were detected between the entorhinal cortex or CA1 regions of the hippocampus of AD patients and control cases (Mann-Whitney U test p=0.382,
p=0.673 respectively (Figure

Parvalbumin (PV) immunoreactivity of neuronal cell bodies was more pronounced in a band like pattern of the outer layers of the cortex
PV immunoreactivity was detected in the cytoplasm of neuronal cell bodies and immediate extending dendrites (Figures 3a&b).
For quantification both the total percentage area of PV immunoreactivity and total cell count were used (Table
Immunoreactivity appeared higher in the more outer cortical layers (I-IV) of the temporal and entorhinal cortex in a band like pattern (Figure
Within the hippocampus the staining pattern varied greatly with PV immunoreactivity of cell bodies in CA1 being more sparsely distributed than in the temporal cortex (Figure
One of the AD cases showed very limited cytoplasmic cell body staining with immunoreactivity restricted to the surface of neurons in a beaded string like manner, suggesting a synaptic bouton labelling pattern (Figure
There was a significant difference in PV immunoreactive area (F= 37.87 3df p=<0.001) and cell count (F= 32.50 3df p=<0.001)
across all four brain regions investigated.
The temporal cortex had the highest total PV immunoreactivity and cell count per mm 2 compared to the other three areas of the hippocampus (CA1, subiculum, entorhinal cortex) (p=<0.001).
Within the hippocampus PV immunoreactivity was significantly higher in the subiculum compared to CA1 (p=<0.001) and entorhinal cortex (p=0.001)
(Figure
There was no significant difference in PV immunoreactivity between the CA1 and entorhinal cortex (p=0.485)
(Figure
For cell count, the temporal cortex had significantly more PV immunopositive neurons per mm 2 compared to the CA1 and entorhinal cortex (p=<0.001
(Figure
In contrast, there was no significant difference in the number of PV positive neurons per mm 2 in the subiculum compared to the temporal cortex (p=0.372),
likely reflecting extensive case to case variation in the immunoreactive profile (Figure
(Figure

Parvalbumin (PV) immunoreactivity was not altered in AD and did not colocalise with somatostatin (SST) immunoreactivity
There were no significant differences in total PV immunoreactive area or cell count per mm 2 between AD and control cases regardless of the brain region investigated (Supp Fig
Additionally no colocalisation of PV and SST immunoreactivity was present (Supp Fig 4).

Discussion
This study suggests a trend to a decrease in SST + interneurons per mm 2 in the temporal cortex of AD cases whilst, in contrast, no significant difference in PV + interneurons per mm 2 was identified in AD cases compared to control subjects, in several brain area investigated.
Overall there are significant differences in the number of PV + and SST + interneurons per mm 2 across neocortical and hippocampal subregions within the temporal lobe, with more of both types of interneuron identified in the temporal cortex compared to hippocampal subfields.
A major role of interneurons is to influence neuronal circuits by modulating the action of excitatory neurons.
SST and PV expressing cells are subsets of GABAergic interneurons
The unique entity of each interneuron is shown by the lack of colocalisation between PV and SST expressing interneuron which is supported by other work identifying the nonoverlapping groups of interneurons
Alterations in the gene expression, neural activity and anatomy of SST + interneurons have been identified in a number of psychiatric and neurological disease including schizophrenia, seizure disorders and epilepsy
In particular SST depletion in the cortex and hippocampus of AD patients has been connected to memory and learning impairment
Similarly, SST interneuron decline has been identified in a number of AD animal models strongly correlating with memory and learning impairments
By restoring GABA receptor signalling with pentobarbitol following GABAergic interneuronal loss, memory and learning deficits were rescued in the apoE4-KI mice
Also, the use of the neuroprotective peptide α-MSH attenuated GABAergic interneuron loss and improved cognition in the TgCRND8 mouse model of AD
Repetitive activity in pyramidal neurons can drive SST + interneurons into providing feedback inhibition
Consequently, a decrease in SST + interneurons in AD temporal cortex as seen in the current study, could act as a protective measure, enabling the continuing excitation of surviving pyramidal neurons to compensate for their progressive loss seen in the disease.
Sub-regions of the temporal cortex have important roles in coordinating hippocampal functions, therefore the reduction in SST + interneurons within the temporal cortex of AD patients could suggest a disruption in the overall cortico-hippocampal network and loss of inhibition downstream causing over excitation of pyramidal neurons in the hippocampus
Ultimately this could lead to associated negative effects such as an increase in oxidative stress, DNA damage and dysregulation of intracellular calcium that could contribute to neuronal death associated with AD
Previous work has shown several hundred somatostatin labelled neurons in layer II/III of the temporal cortex
SST decrease in the brain with increasing age
Remaining SST + neuronal processes in AD are located in close proximity to neuritic plaques in the cingulate, frontal, temporal cortex
An early reduction in SST + interneurons in the olfactory cortex of an AβPP/PS1 double transgenic mouse model of AD
In contrast SST + interneurons rarely colocalised with tau protein
In AD the accumulation of Aβ has been suggested to be caused by the impaired clearance of the protein
It may be speculated that a loss of SST + interneurons in AD, as seen in this study and others, may lead to a loss in Aβ degrading enzymes, including endothelin-converting enzyme ECE-2 and therefore reduced Aβ metabolism and clearance
Through mass spectrometry studies the most pronounced peptide to bind to Aβ was the cyclic neuroendocrine peptide somatostatin-14 (SST-14)
There is conflicting literature as to the significance of PV + interneurons in AD.
Human post mortem brain studies have shown a loss of PV + interneurons in areas known to be affected early in the disease, including the entorhinal cortex and hippocampus
However, in contrast, other human studies showed little variation in PV + interneurons in AD subjects, similar to our current findings, suggesting PV + interneurons are resistant to degeneration in AD
However, despite no changes, PV-expressing synaptic boutons were identified surrounding pyramidal neurons in the hippocampus of some AD patients.
This could suggest that as neurons are lost in the hippocampus, an area involved in early AD pathology, an increasing lack of stimulus onto GABAergic interneurons occurs.
Ultimately this lack of innervation could lead to PV translocating to axonal terminals to maintain calcium homeostasis and synaptic inhibition in the remaining pyramidal neurons, as the dysregulation of intracellular calcium homeostasis due to synaptic impairment has been previously identified as an initiating factor in AD
However, a further detailed quantification of these synaptic boutons is required in a larger sample size to confirm this.
Therefore the overall loss of PV + interneurons may be delayed and not seen until later in the disease as suggested in an AβPP/PS1 double transgenic mouse model of AD
Parvalbumin immunoreactivity in the subiculum was localised to the parvopyramdial clusters in the current study which has previously shown to be areas immunopositive for depositions of amyloid-Bri, an amyloidogenic fragment associated with a stop codon mutation in the BRI gene
However, no difference in parvalbumin immunoreactivity in the parvopyramdial clusters was identified between controls and AD subjects in this study possibly reflecting the small sample size.
Alternatively, neuronal loss in AD and resulting loss of excitable input may cause interneuron dysfunction, rather than degeneration, which could explain the translocation of PV to synaptic boutons
This translocation of PV could cause detrimental changes in the protein's function causing calcium dysregulation and impaired interneuron inhibition, increasing pyramidal neuron excitability and ultimately neuronal loss associated with the disease.
Restoring the function of PV + interneurons has been shown to restore inhibitory synaptic transmission, network activity and cognitive deficits in human amyloid precursor protein (hAPP) transgenic mice
Development of effective therapeutics for treating AD will come about through a better understanding of the mechanisms underlying neuronal dysfunction and loss in the disease.
Our current findings, the first neuropathological study investigating PV and SST interneuron distribution throughout the temporal cortex and hippocampus of human AD patients compared to control subjects suggest interneuron changes in AD may be selective to specific interneuron populations and anatomical location.
However, these conclusions are based on investigations carried out on only a small number of cases and two subclasses of interneuron.
In order to better understand the significance and of interneurons in AD, a much larger study examining more cases and investigating the various interneuron populations across different anatomical regions in the human AD brain is warranted.



Figure 1
Figure 1 Somatostatin immunoreactivity.
Somatostatin immunoreactivity was associated with the cytoplasm of interneuronal cell bodies (a, black arrows) and immediate dendritic processes (b, blue arrows) throughout the temporal cortex and hippocampus.
Immunoreactivity was primarily located at the grey matter / white matter border (c, low magnification, d high magnification).
Scale bar a 100µm, b 100µm, c 500µm, d 100µm.



Figure 2
Figure 2 Quantification of somatostatin immunoreactivity.
There was significantly higher number of somatostatin immunoreactive interneurons per mm 2 in the temporal cortex compared to CA1 and entorhinal cortex across all cases (AD and controls) investigated in this study (a).
There was a reduction in the number of somatostatin interneurons per mm 2 in the temporal cortex of AD patients compared to control cases (b).
No differences were seen in the number of somatostatin interneurons per mm 2 between AD and control cases in the other areas investigated (CA1 and entorhinal cortex) (b).
*P=<0.05,
**P=<0.01
***P=<0.001.



Figure 3
Figure 3 Parvalbumin immunoreactivity.
Temporal and entorhinal cortex showed a regular pattern of parvalbumin positive interneurons with cytoplasmic (black arrow) and dendritic immunoreactivity (blue arrow) (a lower magnification, b higher magnification).
This pattern of staining appeared in a band like pattern concentrating in the outer layers (I-IV) of the cortex (c).
Within the CA1 region the immunoreactivity was more dispersed with cytoplasmic (black arrow) and dendritic immunoreactivity (blue arrow) (d) and immunoreactivity in the subiculum appeared in clusters (e black arrows).
A bead-string like pattern of immunoreactivity was present lining neuronal cell bodies of areas of AD hippocampus (circled) (f).
Scale bar a 250µm, b 100µm, c 500µm, d 100µm, e 500µm, f 50µm.



Figure 4
Figure 4 Quantification of parvalbumin immunoreactivity.
Parvalbumin positive cells were counted and expressed as the total number of positive cells per mm 2 (a).
There overall total percentage parvalbumin immunoreactivity was calculated per total area examined (b).
*P=<0.05,
**P=<0.01
***P=<0.001.



Table 1 .
Age, sex, post mortem delay (PMD) and cause of death of SBTB brain donors.



Table 2 .
Antibody source and specificity Key: RT, room temperature; MW, microwave; TSC, trisodium citrate buffer pH 6.5; EDTA, Ethylenediamine Tetra-acetic Acid pH 8.0.



Table 3 . Quantification of Parvalbumin and Somatostatin staining Key