White matter fiber density abnormalities in cognitively normal adults at risk for late-onset Alzheimer's disease
Tau accumulation affecting white matter tracts is an early neuropathological feature of late-onset Alzheimer's disease (LOAD).
There is a need to ascertain methods for the detection of early LOAD features to help with disease prevention efforts.
The microstructure of these tracts and anatomical brain connectivity can be assessed by analyzing diffusion MRI (dMRI) data.
Considering that family history increases the risk of developing LOAD, we explored the microstructure of white matter through dMRI in 23 cognitively normal adults who are offspring of patients with Late-Onset Alzheimer's Disease (O-LOAD) and 22 control subjects (CS) without family history of AD.
We also evaluated the relation of white matter microstructure metrics with cortical thickness, volumetry, in vivo amyloid deposition (with the help of PiB positron emission tomography -PiB-PET) and regional brain metabolism (as FDG-PET) measures.
Finally we studied the association between cognitive performance and white matter microstructure metrics.
O-LOAD exhibited lower fiber density and fractional anisotropy in the posterior portion of the corpus callosum and right fornix when compared to CS.
Among O-LOAD, reduced fiber density was associated with lower amyloid deposition in the right hippocampus, and greater cortical thickness in the left precuneus, while higher mean diffusivity was related with greater cortical thickness of the right superior temporal gyrus.
Additionally, compromised white matter microstructure was associated with poorer semantic fluency.
In conclusion, white matter microstructure metrics may reveal early differences in O-LOAD by virtue of parental history of the disorder, when compared to CS without a family history of LOAD.
We demonstrate that these differences are associated with lower fiber density in the posterior portion of the corpus callosum and the right fornix.
 Healthy offspring of late-onset AD (O-LOAD) patients show decreased connectivity  Gray matter anomalies are associated to altered white matter integrity among O-LOAD  White matter dysconnectivity involves right fornix and splenium of corpus callosum Journal Pre-proof

Introduction
Alzheimer´s disease (AD) is neuropathologically defined in post mortem brain tissue by aggregation of abnormal β-amyloid and hyperphosphorylated Tau proteins.
However, extracellular β-amyloid accumulation occurs in up to 80% of elderly people with normal cognition
In contrast, another initiatory pathological process more closely associated with the cognitive deterioration that is characteristic of AD, is believed to be intracellular hyperphosphorylated tau accumulation that primarily affects dendrites and axons
This causes disconnection between different brain regions.
In late-onset AD (LOAD), representing approximately 99% of all AD cases, most studies of connectivity using functional
To the extent of our knowledge, however, structural connectivity has not been studied in detail in middle-aged, cognitively normal persons at risk for LOAD by virtue of their family history.
Family history increases the risk of developing LOAD
As published previously, persons who are at risk of developing LOAD because of their family history, which can be in part demonstrated by possession of the apolipoprotein E (APOE) ε4 allele, show altered functional and anatomical connectivities
In particular, we observed in a sample of offspring of LOAD patients (O-LOAD) that functional connectivity was related to subtle cognitive alterations in episodic memory and the capacity to recover from semantic interference effects during learning when compared to healthy control subjects (CS)
This latter capacity also correlated with brain structure, involving brain regions responsible for autonomic, motor, and motivational control in CS, and regions traditionally implicated in AD in O-LOAD
We also identified isocortical thinning in AD-relevant areas including posterior cingulate, precuneus, and areas of the prefrontal and temporoparietal cortex

Journal Pre-proof
Anatomical connectivity can be explored through diffusion MRI (dMRI), which is a noninvasive in vivo brain imaging method that allows study of white matter (WM) microstructure and reconstruction of fiber trajectories.
Classic tensor-derived metrics, such as fractional anisotropy (FA) and mean diffusivity (MD)
However, these voxel-based metrics are not specific enough for evaluating multiple fiber orientations (i.e., "crossing fibers") and do not identify more subtle anomalies
Moreover, crossing fibers are present in approximately 90% of the brain
A novel method called fixel-based analysis (FBA) was developed by
In the present study, we hypothesized that our sample of 23 cognitively normal, middle-aged (40-60 years) O-LOAD have decreased WM microstructure compared to CS (n=22) without a family history of LOAD.
In addition, we tested the hypothesis that FBA could reveal changes of WM integrity in O-LOAD and that such changes would be associated with alterations in gray matter (GM) and clinical cognitive performance
Regarding the latter point, and based upon prior neuropathological studies across the lifespan

Materials and Methods

Participants
Participants were recruited at Fleni Foundation in Buenos Aires, Argentina.

MRI data acquisition
MRI data was acquired using a 3T GE Signa HDxt MRI scanner with an eight-channel head coil.
Diffusion-weighted images (DWI) was performed using the following parameters: 45 axial slices, 256x256 acquisition matrix, and 0.93x0.93x2.50
mm 3 voxel size (TR=12000 ms, TE=88.5 ms), 35 diffusion-weighted images (b=1000 s/mm 2 ) and one volume without diffusion weighting (b 0 ).
In addition, conventional high resolution T1 3D fast SPGR-IR images with 166 slices in the sagittal plane, 1.2 mm slice thickness, TR=7.256 ms, TE=2.988 ms, flip angle 8°, FOV=26 cm were acquired.

Positron Emission Tomography (PET) data acquisition
PET image acquisition was performed on a PET/CT General Electric 690.
First, 370MBq of 11 C-PiB was administered and, after 50 min, dynamic tomographic images 3D mode were taken in 20 minutes.
After 40 min, 18 FDG was administrated and after 30-40 min a new set of dynamic tomographic images in 3D mode were taken during 30 min.
Both radiopharmaceuticals were synthesized at Fleni, complying with the pharmaceutical Good Manufacturing Practice standards, and administered doses are those established by the international radiological protection and safety standards. 11
C-PIB and 18 FDG solutions were used to detect the A42 amyloid at extracelular cortical level and to measure neuronal metabolic activity, respectively.
Each participant must have been fasting for 6 hours, have a blood glucose level under 130 mg/dl and the procedure is conducted in a quiet dim-lit room.

MRI data preprocessing
The preprocessing of DWI consisted of de-noising the data
Subsequently, an intensity normalization across all subjects was
Journal Pre-proof performed by deriving scale factors from the median intensity of selected voxels of WM, GM, and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) in b 0 images.
All of these preprocessing steps were performed using MRtrix3 software package.
In addition, maps of canonical diffusion metrics, such as FA and MD, were computed using the FSL software package.
T1 image preprocessing consisted of co-registering them to corresponding DWI data using the SPM8 toolbox, extracting the skull using the Brain Extraction Tool
Additionally, co-registered T1 images were parcellated according to Desikan-Killiany atlas

Diffusion MRI data processing
On DWI preprocessed data, we performed the Constrained Spherical Deconvolution (CSD) model
All FOD images were reached by using a group average response function, applying the multi-shell multi-tissue CSD algorithm
Subsequently, a FOD template was performed with twenty subjects of each group, and through non-linear registration each subject's FOD image was taken to the template space.
In the next step, we executed on the FOD template a probabilistic tractography algorithm, where each local WM orientation was connected with the next one delineating the fiber pathways, taking into account the uncertainty derived from errors in the followed trajectory and generating a large distribution of possible pathways from each seed point
We applied the probabilistic iFOD2 algorithm in a whole-brain tractography approach generating 20 million streamlines with seed dynamic option to improve the distribution of reconstructed streamlines density
In order to reduce reconstruction biases and to provide a more biologically meaningful structural connection density, these streamlines were filtered to 5 million using the spherical deconvolution informed filtering of tractograms (SIFT)
All processing steps were performed using MRtrix3 package.

Fixel-Based Analysis
WM microstructure was studied mainly using FBA.
According to its definition
Three metrics that describe the architecture of WM are derived from FBA: i) fiber
Journal Pre-proof density (FD), the intra-axonal volume of a fiber bundle; ii) fiber-bundle cross-section, number of voxels the fiber bundle occupies by its intra-axonal volume; and iii) fiber density & cross-section that combines both measurements.
Performing this method, statistical inference is increased using a General Linear Model and by applying non-parametric permutation testing with 5000 permutations, where family-wise error corrected P-values were assigned to each fixel.
All strategies implemented in FBA increase its statistical power and its anatomical interpretation.
In this work, default parameters were used (height increment used in the cfe integration, 0.1; E=2; H=3; c=0.5;
Gaussian kernel with the supplied FWHM used to smooth the fixel value along the fiber tracts, 10mm), and using 5 million streamlines tractogram template.
This analysis was performed using a computing cluster of the Centro de Cómputos de Alto Rendimiento (CeCAR;
We selected streamlines from the tractogram template, that were associated to significant fixels (corrected p<0.05), and a "significant tract" was obtained.
Scripts and commands necessaries for this analysis are part of MRtrix3 package and complete description are published

Assessment of canonical diffusion tensor-derived metrics
As was described in Section 1, usually diffusion tensor-derived metrics are not specific enough to reveal subtle differences when they are applied in a whole-brain approach, especially in samples with similar characteristics as our O-LOAD and CS groups.
We thus decided to use the output of FBA to study FA and MD values only in the area determined by the significant tract.
To compare WM integrity between groups through these canonical metrics, we made a mask of this tract and extracted the values corresponding to voxels associated with both metrics.
Thus, one score was obtained per subject per metric.

Anatomical connectome
An anatomical connectome was performed, which involves only connections belonging to the significant tract and their associated GM areas.

Neuropsychological assessments
The neuropsychological assessments included semantic fluency ("animals" category) and phonetic fluency (words starting with letter P), both of which assess verbal productivity
In addition, the Beck Depression Inventory-II (BDI-II)
Journal Pre-proof and severity of depressive symptoms.
To estimate premorbid intelligence the Word Accentuation
Test Buenos Aires version (WAT-BA) was administered
All tests were administered and scored by a trained neuropsychologist (CA) blind to participant group.
We studied the association between cognitive test scores vs. WM integrity metrics (FD, FA and MD) of the tract of interest performing Spearman's correlation analysis.

Structural T1 MRI and Amyloid PET analysis
Entire cortex analyses were performed to explore cortical thickness and volumetry in O-LOAD and CS groups.
Statistical maps were generated using the command-line group analysis stream in FreeSurfer software.
For subcortical regions, only volumetry measures were calculated.
PET images were processed along with MRI volumetric T1 images.
Once T1 images were processed, an analysis was performed using PETSurfer scripts obtaining the corresponding PET-PiB and PET-FDG intensity maps.
Both analyses have been described in detail (Duarte-Abritta et al.,

2018).
Spearman's correlation analysis was applied to study rank-ordered associations between WM metrics of the significant tract and: i) structural GM (thickness and volumetry) metrics and ii) PET metrics (PiB and FDG), in both cases we used brain regions involved in the anatomical connectome.
This analysis was performed in MATLAB-R2014a.
Results of all statistical analysis were considered significant at p<0.05.

Results
Our sample included 23 O-LOAD and 22 CS with no known family history of LOAD.
As shown in  Journal Pre-proof Differences in derived-tensor metrics between O-LOAD and CS were assessed via 2-sample ttests.
Figure
In addition, regarding the relationship between DTI-based and FBA measures, FA was positively correlated with FD (Spearman's r=0.6906, p=5.3x10 -4 ) while MD was inversely correlated with FD (Spearman's r=-0.7007,
p=4.1x10 -4 ) in CS group only.
In O-LOAD the correlation between FA and FD values approached significance (Spearman's r=0.3972, p=0.06).
Figure
Most of the structures involve posterior neocortex and a series of cortical and subcortical structures participating of limbic circuits, namely, left medial orbitofrontal and middle temporal gyri; right insular cortex, thalamus, and hippocampus; and bilateral superior temporal gyri, precunei and superior parietal gyri (Figure
Regarding the relationship between WM integrity measures and cognitive scores, we obtained that FA in the significant tract was inversely related to performance on the semantic fluency test among O-LOAD (r=-0.4251,
p=0.0432).
Similarly, there was a marginally significant correlation between

Discussion
Journal Pre-proof
Middle aged O-LOAD display decreased anatomical connectivity involving the splenium of the corpus callosum and the right fornix, as assessed with FBA method, which can reveal more detailed information than a voxel-based approach when compared with CS.
Our study highlights two important aspects of applying FBA.
First, we improved statistical power by performing the entire fixel statistical analysis implemented in FBA.
Second the method allowed us to obtain a voxel-associated tract with different fiber-bundle orientations otherwise not possible to assess with more conventional methods such as TBSS
We assessed canonical tensor-derived metrics only in the area of the significant tract to avoid noisy data of whole-brain maps.
O-LOAD show decreased FA and increased MD.
These results are consistent with previous reports, describing areas such as the corpus callosum, cingulum
These abnormalities and decreased FD could be due to a lesser number of axons, less myelinated axons, or disrupted microstructure favoring the free diffusion of water across the membranes of such fibers.
Axon fibers in the splenium of the corpus callosum convey interhemispheric information between neocortical areas including posterior parietal cortices and precunei, whereas the right fornix is the main WM tract originating in the ipsilateral hippocampal archicortex
These regions have been uniformly considered among the earliest affected structures in LOAD, specifically those involving neurofibrillary tangles (amyloid deposition occurs initially in association with the neocortex;
That semantic fluency, a performance measure involving bihemispheric posterior temporal/parietal regions
To our knowledge, this is a first report describing detection of WM structural differences at fixel scale in middle-aged at-risk adults without cognitive symptoms or neuropsychological impairments detectable using common tests of neuropsychological performance.
The average age of our participants (i.e., over one decade younger on average than the expected age at onset of clinical LOAD symptoms) precludes us from knowing if and how the detected WM differences are predictive of LOAD.
However, if confirmed in larger samples followed over several years, these may represent very early biomarkers of the disease.
As reported recently by our group
Journal Pre-proof considered the earliest structural brain imaging biomarker of LOAD
This suggests that anatomical connectivity might reveal intracellular neurofibrillary differences ultimately affecting axons
This has been explored in clinical samples of LOAD patients through FBA
To obtain clues about the possible pathophysiological origins of observed differences, we correlated the magnitude of WM microstructure in O-LOAD and CS, and observed the presence of both regional amyloid deposition and neurodegeneration as assessed by GM volume, cortical thickness or regional cerebral metabolism.
Resulting associations were different for O-LOAD vs CS.
Among the latter, most correlations were observed for the right thalamus and bilateral superior parietal gyri.
Indicators of greater WM abnormalities in the splenium and right fornix were related to decreased amyloid, decreased volume, and increased cerebral metabolism in the right thalamus, along with similar findings in either superior parietal gyrus.
Our CS are comparable to post-mortem studies
By contrast, in O-LOAD, greater compromise of WM integrity (decreased FD) in the aforementioned tracts were associated with lower amyloid deposition in the right hippocampus and greater thickness in the left precuneus.
These findings suggest a differential relationship between GM and WM integrity in both groups.
Among O-LOAD, in contrast, the relationship involves GM structures traditionally associated with LOAD
One interpretation of our results may be that O-LOAD display an accelerated pathophysiological process involving AD-specific structures such as medial temporal lobes (including hippocampi) and precunei
In light of these observations, the age-dependent progression from brainstem to limbic to neocortical involvement seen in neuropathological studies
In contrast, among O-LOAD, we see specific involvement of the right hippocampus and precunei, suggesting that intergroup differences are related to LOAD predisposition instead of "accelerated aging".
This is in line with very early observations of precuneus compromise in infants at risk for AD by virtue of their genetic risk

Journal Pre-proof
In contrast to our prediction, CS displayed a regional relationship between WM abnormalities and amyloid deposition, again in the right thalamus and left superior parietal gyrus.
This may point to a general phenomenon of an amyloid-Tau protein relationship that is not necessarily related to risk of LOAD, but reflects normal aging.
Further, beta-amyloid on PET imaging was inversely related to WM integrity in the studied tracts.
As previously reported
These observations are clearly contrary to a LOAD-related regional phenomenon whereby extracellular amyloid deposition and intercellular phosphorylated Tau accumulation coincide to produce neurodegeneration
Whereas long-term follow up of middle-aged adults would provide the best evidence on how our findings are related to development of LOAD, comparison between O-LOAD and CS comprised of a similar sociodemographic background factors, will likely provide significant insight into how anatomical connectivity constitutes an early biomarker of LOAD.
The present investigation has several limitations.
Our sample was homogeneous regarding ethnicity, geographical area, culture, and years of education, perhaps limiting generalizability of the results.
As per the acquisition protocol, the non-isotropic voxel size could introduce a bias during the tractography process, especially in the largest direction.
Nonetheless, FBA implements techniques that increase statistical inference, and according to our analysis, the significant tract is not oversampled in the largest direction and therefore might not be influenced by this issue.
Hence, the current results have significant implications for understanding the earliest pathogenesis of LOAD and is worthy of further research.


The intergroup comparison of FBA is shown in Figure1.
The tract that displays significant differences in fiber density (FD, the intra-axonal volume of a fiber bundle) at fixel scale involves the splenium of the corpus callosum and the right fornix.
It is shown in three ways.
In panel A), the color bar indicates 40% higher FD in the CS group versus the O-LOAD group.
Panel B) shows the same tract colored by streamline orientations; and panel C) shows it on a sagittal slice of the right hemisphere.
The other two metrics of FBA were not different between O-LOAD and CS groups.



FD
and semantic fluency (r=-0.4097,
p=0.0522).
No significant correlations were found between measures of WM integrity and phonetic fluency, Stroop, and TMT (B-A).
Finally, Figures 4 and 5 display correlation matrices and linear fit by O-LOAD and CS for all significant Spearman's correlations among WM integrity metrics (FA, MD, and FD) of the tract of interest shown in Figure 1, GM measures (cortical thickness and GM volume), and PET measures (PiB and FDG).
Among CS, greater FD was associated with higher amyloid deposition as shown by PET-PiB intensity signal (Figure 4, panel A) and larger volume (Figure 4, panel B) in the right thalamus and bilateral superior parietal gyri.
Amyloid deposition in the right thalamus was also associated with more FA (Figure 5, panel B, left plot) and less MD (Figure 5, panel A, middle plot) in the tract of interest.
The latter was directly related to metabolism in the right thalamus as well (Figure 5, panel A, left plot).
In CS, FA was associated with right superior parietal gyrus volume (Figure 5, panel B, right plot).
Among O-LOAD, greater FD was associated with greater amyloid deposition in the right hippocampus (Figure 4, panel A, right plot) and left precuneus thinning (Figure 4, panel C, right plot).
MD in the tract of interest was related to right superior temporal gyrus thinning in O-LOAD (Figure 5, panel A, right plot).



Figure 1
Figure 1 White matter tract with significant differences in fiber density Panel A) shows streamlines colored by percentage effect decrease in O-LOAD group respect of CS group.
Panel B) depicts the same tract colored according the streamline orientations: left-right in red, anteriorposterior in green, and superior-inferior in blue.
Panel C) shows the tract on a sagittal slice of the right hemisphere.
In all panels the tract is displayed on a population template image.



Figure 2
Figure 2 Significant differences in FA and MD FA and MD calculated in the tract defined in Figure 1, present statistically differences between CS and O-LOAD groups.
* p<0.05.



Figure 3
Figure 3 Gray matter areas involved in connections of the tract This connectome displayed gray matter regions connected through the tract defined in Figure 1.
Each white matter connection is represented by a single link.



Figure 4
Figure 4 Scatter plots of MRI and PET data vs FD Each scatter plot shows the distribution of PIB data (panel A), and gray matter volume (panel B) or thickness (panel C) for specific regions vs. FD of CS (blue empty markers) and O-LOAD (orange empty markers) groups.
When a Spearman's correlation is statistically significant (p<0.05),
its linear fit is added for this group and the empty markers are filled.
Statistically significant p-values and correlation coefficients are reported.



Figure 5
Figure 5 Scatter plots of MRI and PET data vs tensor-derived metrics Each scatter plot displays the data distribution of MRI and PET metrics versus MD (panel A) and FA (panel B) of CS (blue empty markers) and O-LOAD (orange empty markers) group.
When a Spearman's correlation is statistically significant (p<0.05),
its linear fit is added for this group and the empty markers are filled.
Statistically significant p-values and correlation coefficients are reported.



Table 1 ,



Table 1 . Demographic and clinical data
Beck Depression Inventory, second version; TMT B-A: Trail Making Test A and B. T test was used for numeric variables and chi square test for categorical variables.