Integrated DNA methylation and gene expression profiling across multiple brain regions implicate novel genes in Alzheimer’s disease
Background: Late-onset Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a complex age-related neurodegenerative disorder that likely involves epigenetic factors.
To better understand the epigenetic state associated with AD represented as variation in DNA methylation (DNAm), we surveyed 420,852 DNAm sites from neurotypical controls (N=49) and late-onset AD patients (N=24) across four brain regions (hippocampus, entorhinal cortex, dorsolateral prefrontal cortex and cerebellum).
We identified 858 sites with robust differential methylation, collectively annotated to 772 possible genes (FDR<5%, within 10kb).
These sites were overrepresented in AD genetic risk loci (p=0.00655), and nearby genes were enriched for processes related to cell-adhesion, immunity, and calcium homeostasis (FDR<5%).
We analyzed corresponding RNA-seq data to prioritize 130 genes within 10kb of the differentially methylated sites, which were differentially expressed and had expression levels associated with nearby DNAm levels (p<0.05).
This validated gene set includes previously reported (e.g.
ANK1, DUSP22) and novel genes involved in Alzheimer's disease, such as ANKRD30B.
Conclusions: These results highlight DNAm changes in Alzheimer's disease that have gene expression correlates, implicating DNAm as an epigenetic mechanism underlying pathological molecular changes associated with AD.
Furthermore, our framework illustrates the value of integrating epigenetic and transcriptomic data for understanding complex disease.

Introduction
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is an age-related neurodegenerative disease of complex etiology and is characterized by a progressive decline of memory and cognitive faculties.
Although late-onset AD risk has a strong genetic component including the APOE locus
Epigenetic marks such as DNA methylation (DNAm) can capture molecular regulatory mechanisms through which environmental and lifestyle factors may modulate AD risk, including through interaction with underlying genetic risk.
A better understanding of the epigenetic regulation of gene expression in late-onset Alzheimer's disease (LOAD) could facilitate the discovery of more viable preventive and therapeutic strategies for this devastating disease.
While previous studies have identified global DNA methylation alterations in Alzheimer's disease
In a study using post-mortem brain tissue from the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC), 71 genome-wide sites had DNAm levels that robustly associated with AD neuropathology, ultimately implicating seven genes within 50kb with dysregulated expression: CDH23, DIP2A, RHBDF2, RPL13, SERPINF1, SERPINF2, and ANK1
In a parallel study, DNAm of a region near ANK1 strongly correlated with neuropathological measures in three cortical brain regions (entorhinal cortex, superior temporal gyrus, and prefrontal cortex), but not cerebellum, suggesting some epigenetic perturbations in AD occur across multiple cortical regions
Likewise, a 48kb region within the HOXA gene cluster was differentially methylated in AD across multiple cortical regions
Subsequent studies
Thus far, however, these approaches have implicated only a few genes associated with DNAm variation in Alzheimer's disease.
While these previous studies have successfully identified DNAm differences associated with AD, they have been limited in their ability to connect these epigenetic differences to corresponding gene expression changes.
Previous analyses often used targeted qPCR for a small number of transcripts and did not comprehensively survey gene expression changes among all implicated DNAm loci.
Moreover, the relationship between DNAm and gene expression has remained unclear from earlier studies because each data type originated from non-overlapping subjects.
Integrating DNA methylation with an unbiased method for surveying the transcriptome-RNA sequencing (RNA-seq)-may therefore offer deeper insight into
We therefore performed multi-stage analyses incorporating paired DNA methylation and gene expression data.
Given the unique cellular composition and potentially distinct susceptibilities to Alzheimer's disease neuropathology of different brain regions, we chose to study four regions from each brain donor: dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC), entorhinal cortex (ERC), hippocampus (HIPPO) all three previously implicated in AD; and the cerebellar cortex (CRB).
In our first stage, we compared the DNAm landscape of neurotypical controls to late-onset AD, with the Illumina's Human Methylation 450k (HM450k) array.
Then, for genes adjacent to DNAm loci identified from this analysis, we analyzed RNA seq data for differential expression between AD cases and controls, as well as for correlation between DNAm and gene expression levels.
This undertaking represents, to our knowledge, one of the most comprehensive integrations of epigenetic and transcriptomic data for LOAD in postmortem human brain tissue to date.

Results

Clinical characteristics of AD subjects compared to unaffected controls
The dataset used for our epigenome-wide scan of AD consisted of 98 post-mortem brain donors with methylation data generated from four brain regions: entorhinal cortex (ERC), dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC), hippocampus (HIPPO), and cerebellum (CRB) (Table
30 donors had intermediate signs of pathology not meeting our criteria for Alzheimer's disease (AD) and were used in secondary analyses (see Methods).
Therefore, our discovery cohort includes 49 neurotypical controls and 24 AD donors with a neuropathological diagnosis (see Methods) as estimated by standard Braak staging and CERAD scoring.
Compared to controls, AD donors were older (p=2.95×10 -
, ttwo-tailed=7.67) and had reduced overall brain mass (p=9.33×10 -
, ttwo-tailed=5.24, Figure
APOE risk, defined here as the number of ε4 alleles, is a strong genetic factor underlying AD clinical risk
, Fisher's Exact Test).
Alzheimer's disease was not significantly associated with differences in
Results S1, Figure
There was also no significant association between epigenetic age acceleration and AD in any of the brain regions (p>0.05

Result S2, Figures

CpG-site DNAm differences between AD subjects and unaffected controls
To identify differentially methylated sites with "shared effects" across multiple brain regions
where we analyzed all of our samples in conjunction (N=269 total DNAm samples; Table
With this cross-region analysis, we identified 858 DNAm sites differentially methylated between AD and controls (FDR<5%, Table
Collectively, these sites were within 10kb of 1,156 Gencode-annotated genes (v25), had a small median absolute difference in DNAm of 3.98%, and were relatively more methylated in subjects with AD compared to controls (N=491, 57.2%, p=2.30×10 -5 , Figure
This analysis identified CpGs near genes ANK1 and MYO1C, genes that have been previously associated
Among the most significant methylation sites, one near WDR81 and SERPINF2 has been previously reported (within 10kb, p=3.48×10 -11 , cg19803550, 4 th most significant, Table
When we hierarchically clustered adjusted beta values of these 858 significant DMPs for all of our samples (N=269), we found that samples clustered primarily by cerebellar vs. non-cerebellar brain region, then secondly by AD diagnosis (Figure
The post-hoc region-specific statistics were highly correlated across all four brain regions at these sites, confirming our expectation that AD has similar associations with DNA methylation at many of these sites across the different brain regions (Figure
We assessed the robustness of these findings using a series of sensitivity analyses.
We found little effect of estimated neuronal composition on these results, as adjusting for the estimated proportion of neurons resulted in almost all DNAm sites (Sensitivity Model 1, 842/858, 98.1%) remaining FDR significant with highly correlated global t-statistics between both models (r = 0.954, p<2.2×10 -16 , Figure
However, these results were somewhat expected given the lack of association between estimated neuronal composition estimates and diagnosis (p>0.068) in our dataset.
Furthermore, differential DNAm does not appear to be driven by the greater burden of APOE risk in our AD samples: t-statistics were highly correlated with a model adjusting for APOE ε4 dosage (Sensitivity Model 2, r = 0.910, p<2.2×10 -16 , Figure
Moreover, a slightly greater proportion of previously reported DMPs were consistent with the cross-region model than with the region-specific models of AD (Table
These analyses suggest cross-region DMP findings from our discovery model are not confounded by cell-type composition or APOE risk burden differences and previously reported DMPs are reasonably consistent.
Regional DNAm differences between AD subjects and unaffected controls Next, we tested for regional differences in DNAm that could relate to additional regulatory mechanisms
We found four DMRs between AD cases and controls under a cross-region model (at family-wise error rate, FWER<0.05,
Table
The most significant DMR was a hypermethylated region 1,136 base pairs (bp) long that overlapped an exon 57bp downstream from the DUSP22 transcription start site (TSS) and spans 9 probes (FWER=0, Figure
Post-hoc region-specific analyses revealed DUSP22 hypermethylation in ERC (FWER=0.053),
HIPPO (FWER=0.08), and DLPFC (FWER=0.088)
but not in CRB (FWER=0.455).
Another DMR overlaps the TSS of ANKRD30B (FWER=0.027,
511bp, 9 contiguous probes, Figure
The third most significant region was less methylated and overlaps the promoter of JRK (384bp from TSS, FWER= 0.029, 5bp long, 2 contiguous probes, Figure
615bp long, 7 contiguous probes, Figure
These results suggest a more limited role of regional changes in DNAm associated with AD.

Brain region-dependent differential methylation
Given that some brain regions, such as cerebellar cortex, are putatively less susceptible to AD pathology than other brain regions, we next assessed whether Alzheimer's disease is associated with DNAm in a brain region-dependent manner (i.e. an interaction model, brain region by diagnosis).
We found 11,518 DNAm sites with region-dependent AD effects (at FDR<5%, Table
The most significant region-dependent effect is seen for a DNAm site near ANK1, which is more methylated in AD subjects for DLPFC, ERC, and HIPPO but less methylated for CRB (cg11823178, p= 3.41×10 -21 , Figure
Another example of a region-dependent effect can be seen for a CpG near CSNK1G2 (cg01335597, p=3.04×10 -15 ,

Figure 2B
). Region-dependent sites were mostly distinct from the cross-region DMPs identified above, though a subset of 130 sites was significant in both models (Figure
These results demonstrate the power of combining data across multiple brain regions into joint statistical models and help further partition DNAm differences in AD by brain region.

Normal aging vs. AD-associated DNAm changes
Older age is a strong risk factor for Alzheimer's disease
).
We, therefore, sought to disentangle the effects of normal aging on DNAm from the effects of AD on DNAm by assessing the association between DNAm and age in a sample of unaffected controls (N=187) and comparing these age-related associations to AD associations.
Cross-region AD t-statistics were significantly associated with age-related t-statistics, but the absolute correlation was weak (Pearson's r=0.089, Figure
Nevertheless, significant AD-associated DNAm changes were highly enriched (Odds Ratio, OR=17.28,
p<2.2×10 -16 ) for similar agerelated changes in unaffected controls (at p<1×10 -3 and same directionality), further supporting the biological relevance of the most promising DNAm associations with AD with enrichment for similar changes during normal aging.
In contrast, p-values from the region-dependent model were highly correlated with p-values from a region-dependent normal aging model (r=0.752,
p<2.2×10 -16 , Figure
We, therefore, focused further analyses on cross-region differential methylation effects, which appeared to be less susceptible to confounding by age (see Results S4
for additional region-dependent analyses).

Biological relevance of genes near differential DNAm
We next sought to better characterize the genomic and biological correlates of the DNAm changes identified under our cross-region model.
Differentially methylated sites were enriched for CpG shelves and shores (Figure
Then we tested whether genes near differentially methylated sites were enriched in known pathways and ontologies while accounting for the biased distribution of CpGs per gene.
Overall, DMPs were preferentially in close proximity to genes involved in processes related to cell-adhesion, immunity, and calcium binding (at FDR<5%, Table
Further analysis suggests that hyper-methylated DNAm sites are driving these enrichments rather than hypo-methylated sites, which did not appear to be enriched in any particular process (Tables
Thus, the gain of DNA methylation at these cross-region sites implicates genes involved in cell-adhesion, immunity, and calcium binding in Alzheimer's disease.
AD genetic risk loci are enriched for differential methylation Given that AD risk has a strong genetic component, we investigated whether differential methylation was located preferentially within AD risk loci from a large GWAS meta-analysis
While only a small number of differentially methylated sites were present in AD risk loci (5/858, 0.58%), it represents statistically significant enrichment when compared to the background overlap with risk loci (562/419,432, 0.13%; OR=4.37, p=0.00655,
Fisher's Exact Test, Table
This enrichment was fully driven by hypermethylated sites (N=5, OR=7.74, p=0.000588).
When we relaxed our stringency for differential methylation (nominal p<0.01), the enrichment in GWAS loci remained statistically significant (OR=1.90,
p=0.00423).
These results indicate differentially methylated probes overlap putative AD genetic risk loci more than expected, which can hopefully be expanded upon and further refined through larger GWAS efforts in AD.

Replication with an independent cohort
To assess the replicability of these cross-region DNAm differences, we re-analyzed processed, public AD DNAm data from four brain regions, DLPFC, ERC, CRB, and superior temporal gyrus (STG), under a similar model (Ncontrol=94 samples, NAD=239 samples from
We found 28.0% of cross-region differentially methylated sites were consistent in this independent dataset (with p<0.05 and the same direction of effect; 240/858, OR=3.84, p<2.2×10 -16 , Table
Notably, a site near ANKRD30B was more methylated in AD samples than controls (cg23703062, Preplication=0.000355).
These moderate replication rates are similar to those we observed previously (Table

Using gene expression to functionally validate differential methylation
We next sought to more functionally validate differences in DNAm associated with AD, and tested for AD case-control gene expression differences.
Here, we used RNA-seq data generated from a largely overlapping case-control series for the same multiple brain regions: HIPPO, DLPFC, ERC and CRB (Ndonors: 50 controls, 26 AD cases; Nsamples: 196 controls, 92 AD cases) to investigate expressed genes near a differentially methylated site (i.e.
645 DNAm sites corresponding to 772 genes within 10 kb; 218 DNAm sites were not within 10kb of a Gencode v25 annotated gene and were not considered for this analysis).
The majority of genes near these sites were nominally differentially expressed between AD cases and controls in at least one brain region (p<0.05,
52.7% of genes, 407/772, Table
Interestingly ANKRD30B, which was implicated at both spatial resolutions (DMP and DMR), was under-expressed in AD patients compared to controls in ERC (log2 fold change LFC=-1.50,
p=3.71×10 -5 ) and HIPPO (LFC=-1.70,
p=0.00242) but not DLPFC
p=0.665; Figure
Other genes such as WDR81 and MYO1C that were previously
To further assess the functional link between DNAm and gene expression, we directly tested whether DNAm associates with gene expression for a subset of our samples that had both DNAm and RNA-seq data (Ndonors: 49 controls, 24 AD; Nsamples: 182 controls, 82 AD).
We focused on the 407 genes with a nearby cross-region DMP and evidence of possible differential expression.
We found DNAm associated with expression levels of 130 genes in at least one brain region (31.9%, at nominal p<0.05,
Table
This integrated approach refined our list of candidate genes implicated by a nearby differentially methylated site (within 10 kb), improving the biological resolution of our epigenome-wide scan (before: 39.1% of CpGs with multiple genes, after: 8.23% of CpGs with multiple genes; χ 2 =55.069, non-parametric p-value = 1.6×10 -8 , 1×10 9 bootstraps).
Overall, DNA methylation was inversely correlated with gene expression (79/130, 60.8%, p=0.01406; using the strongest CpG-gene association), in line with the promoter-focused design of this microarray platform.
Of note, hypermethylation of a site corresponding to ANKRD30B was associated with reduced gene expression in ERC, HIPPO, and DLPFC but not CRB (Figure
While hypermethylation of a probe near MYO1C (cg14462670) associated with greater MYO1C expression in all four brain regions (Figure
Together, these findings further implicate DNAm as a potential mechanism underlying dysregulated gene expression in Alzheimer's disease.

Discussion
DNA methylation (DNAm) is an epigenetic factor that is disrupted in Alzheimer's disease (AD), and the effects of this epigenetic disruption have already been linked to a few genes.
To validate previously identified genes and potentially identify additional genes, we undertook a cross-brain region analysis of DNA methylation (DNAm) in Alzheimer's disease (AD).
Differential methylation implicated biological processes previously hypothesized to underlie AD pathology-cell-adhesion
By linking DNA methylation data with matching transcriptome data, we were able to prioritize 130 genes that were differentially expressed between cases and controls and for which DNAm associated with expression.
Together these findings further validate several previous, prominent DNAm associations such as those with ANK1
Our study has several limitations.
First and foremost, we cannot distinguish DNAm and gene expression differences that are causal in AD from those that relate to epiphenomena and secondary disease processes, such as neurodegeneration (Discussion S2).
Indeed, the DNAm signature of other neurodegenerative diseases such as Lewy body dementia and Parkinson's disease resembles that of Alzheimer's disease
Nevertheless, some of the DNAm differences reported here likely relate to AD etiology, because a subset of the differences was enriched within known late-onset AD genetic risk loci and correlated with gene expression changes.
Further mechanistic studies to better untangle the timing of the co-occurring DNAm and expression changes will be necessary to more confidently determine which of these DNAm changes are causative versus an epiphenomenon in the brains of patients with Alzheimer's disease.
In a similar vein, these DNAm changes can be regulated by other components of the genome and epigenome.
For example, DNAm differences in AD can reflect underlying genetic risk, as was the case with a differentially methylated region overlapping the PM20D1 promoter
Likewise, DNAm changes may interact with other epigenetic factors that regulate gene expression
Current human brain epigenome datasets now include post-translational histone modifications and higher order chromatin interactions, which have been shown to significantly alter gene expression both, within specific genetic loci and across the genome in human postmortem brain tissue
Recent studies implicate widespread changes in the distribution of histone modifications in AD
While in some cases histone modifications may act independently of DNAm changes to generate AD risk
Intriguingly, whereas a study of H4K16 acetylation identified AD-related differences weakly inversely associated with age-related changes [39], we observed the opposite correlation with DNAm, albeit the association was weak.
The canonical roles of DNA methylation as a transcriptionally repressive epigenetic mark and histone acetylation as an activating one may reconcile these conflicting patterns.
Disruption of multiple epigenetic factors may converge on transcriptional networks
Our study suggests disrupted DNAm plays a role within this complex gene regulatory framework.
We identified 130 genes that had evidence of differential expression between cases and controls and for which expression associated with nearby DNAm that differed in AD.
These differentially expressed genes may involve cell type-specific dysregulation.
For instance, a recent study of cell-sorted cortical tissue found DNAm differences existed in both neurons and glia that associated with AD neuropathology (Braak stage)
Likewise, a study of laser captured brain tissue suggests microglia are responsible for differential expression of the epigenetically dysregulated gene, ANK1
Understanding the transcriptional output of these epigenetic changes in AD across multiple brain regions, which have different susceptibilities to AD neuropathology, will be a challenging, but rewarding endeavor.
Our publicly available dataset contributes unique matched RNA-seq and DNAm data that can be used for development of genomic integration statistical methods.
Studying multiple brain regions is crucial to convert knowledge of epigenetic changes into insight of molecular risk mechanisms, because each region has a distinct cellular composition and regulatory landscape that contributes to neurophysiological function
By studying the epigenome and transcriptome of four brain regions in parallel, three cortical regions susceptible to AD, and cerebellum, a region that is relatively protected, we were able to cast a wide net to capture AD-related differences.
While we focused upon "cross-region" differential methylation-changes concordant across multiple brain regions-we also identified and characterized a large number of region-dependent differentially methylated sites.
Moreover, even if differential methylation is shared across cerebellar and cortical brain regions, the gene expression correlates may not be.
For example, ANKRD30B is hypermethylated in all four brain regions but is not expressed at observable levels in cerebellum.
By studying the unique epigenetic profiles and their transcriptional correlates of multiple brain regions, we may glean deeper insight into the molecular mechanisms underlying differential susceptibility of brain regions to AD neuropathology.
In summary, we used paired DNA methylation and transcriptome data from four brain regions to link DNAm differences in AD to local gene dysregulation.
These results support the role of DNAm as an epigenetic mechanism underlying gene dysregulation and support novel genes involved in AD.
More generally, they illustrate the value of integrating epigenetic and transcriptomic data to study complex disease.

Methods
Postmortem brain tissue dissections DLPFC (Brodmann areas 9 and 46), hippocampal formation, entorhinal cortex at the level of the anterior hippocampus and cerebellar cortex were dissected from frozen postmortem brains using a hand-held visually guided dental drill (Cat #UP500-UG33, Brasseler, Savannah, GA) as previously reported
In addition to demographic matching between Alzheimer's disease control subjects, the subjects included in the control group had no clinical or neurological history, or history of alcohol or substance abuse, or positive toxicology screens for illicit substances.

Alzheimer's neuropathology diagnosis:
All postmortem brains of subjects (controls and Alzheimer's disease) have been sampled for neuropathology and specific Alzheimer's lesions: beta-amyloid plaques, neurofibrillary tangles and tau-positive neurites.
Samples were also genotyped for the apolipoprotein E gene (APOE).
The sampled tissue sections were fixed in 10% buffered formalin and paraffin embedded into blocks for microscopic analysis (10 micron thickness).
Sections included the superior frontal gyrus, middle and superior temporal gyri, inferior parietal cortex, occipital cortex, amygdala, hippocampus and entorhinal cortex, anterior thalamus, midbrain, pons, medulla, and cerebellum (including cerebellar cortex and deep cerebellar nuclei).
Sections were silver-stained using the Hirano method (Yamamoto and Hirano, 1986) and immune-stained using antibodies against ubiquitin, phosphorylated anti-tau (PHF-1) and beta-amyloid protein (6E10).
Microscopic preparations were examined using conventional light microscopy.
Alzheimer's neuropathology ratings include the Braak (Braak H, Braak E, 1991) staging schema evaluating tau neurofibrillary tangle burden, and the CERAD scoring system
An Alzheimer's likelihood diagnosis was then performed based on the published consensus recommendations for postmortem diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease
Processing DNA methylation data Human Methylation 450k (HM450k) arrays were run as specified by the manufacturer upon DNA extracted from each brain region.
After generating array data for 398 postmortem brain samples, resulting idat files were imported, then rigorously preprocessed with minfi
We did not observe batch effects with several different quality control metrics.
After removing lowquality samples (N=5), we normalized the data with stratified quantile normalization
We removed 64,660 probes that met one or more of the following exclusion criteria: (a) poor quality (b) cross-reactive (c) included common genetic variants (d) mapped to a sex chromosome (e) did not map to hg38.
We dropped 13 samples one or more of the following reasons: (i) DNAm predicted sex did not match phenotypic sex (ii) 450k genotype clustered inappropriately (iii) 450k genotype did not match SNP-chip genotype (iv) clustered inappropriately on principal component analysis.
After these conservative quality control steps, 420,852 high-quality probes available for 377 samples remained for further analysis.
We estimated cell-type compositions using deconvolution algorithm
For additional details about DNAm processing see Supplemental Methods (Figures

Brain-region stratified DNAm analyses
We tested for differences between AD cases and controls in predicted neuronal proportion and age acceleration, stratified by brain region, with linear models.
To test the association between DNAm and AD across the epigenome, we stratified samples by brain region, then tested beta values from 420,852 probes for differential methylation between Alzheimer's disease cases and controls using limma
We included age, sex, ancestry, and negative control principal components 1 and 2 as covariates in our model and controlled for multiple testing by using the false-discovery rate (FDR).

Cross-region differential methylation analysis
In our "cross-region" model for AD case-control differences (N=269 samples), we tested beta values from 420,852 probes for differential methylation between Alzheimer's disease cases and controls using limma
Afterward, we tested an interaction model, i.e. an F-test of the estimated AD effect from each brain region, while adjusting for the same covariates as above.
Both of these models incorporated multiple brain regions from each donor, and thus repeated measures, so we used the generalized least squares technique to estimate statistical parameters to appropriately account for the repeated biological measures.
We estimated a consensus correlation with limma's duplicateCorrelation function in which donors are blocks and different brain regions are repeated observations.
Then, we incorporated this consensus correlation while estimating statistics for each DNAm site using the generalized least squares technique via limma's lmFit function.
We performed four sensitivity analyses to assess how robust our results were to potential confounds (see Supplemental Methods for additional details).

Differential methylated region analysis
To assess whether regions of the genome were differentially methylated between Alzheimer's and controls, we used bumphunter with the same models as above
We implemented the bumphunter method with the minfi Bioconductor package's bumphunter function using 1000 bootstrap iterations, a cutoff of 0.05 for defining continuous probes, smoothing done with the locfitByCluster function, and otherwise default parameters
We controlled for multiple testing by using the family-wise error rate (FWER) to determine statistical significance.

Differential expression of DMP genes and association with DNAm
DNA methylation sites were annotated to all Gencode v25 genes within 10kb upstream or downstream (20kb region) using the GenomicRanges Bioconductor package [25].
These genes were then tested for corresponding AD-case control differential gene expression.
Analyses were stratified by brain region and used 196 control and 92 AD RNA-seq samples processed using a standardized pipeline.
We normalized counts for 25,587 Gencode annotated genes that were expressed in at least one brain region with limma's voom function then tested for AD casecontrol differences under an empirical Bayesian framework [42] while adjusting for RNA Integrity Number (RIN), age, sex, race, mitochondrial mapping rate, and gene assignment rate.
We tested then the association between DNAm at each differentially methylated site and log-transformed, normalized gene expression (log2[RPKM+1]) for all Gencode (v25) annotated genes within 10kb with at least partial evidence of differential expression (nominal p<0.05 in at least one brain region).
This analysis used 185 control and 85 AD samples with matching DNA methylation and RNA-seq data.
We implemented this association test between DNAm and gene expression in R using a linear model (lm function) that adjusted for the covariates above and was stratified by brain region.

S3. Region-stratified differential methylation analysis
To assess DNAm differences associated with AD in a brain region-specific manner, we undertook an AD case-control analysis stratified by brain region.
We tested 420,852 probes for differential methylation between unaffected controls (N≤49) and donors with Alzheimer's disease (AD, N≤24).
With this region-specific, case-control analysis, we identified four differentially methylated probes (DMPs, at false discovery rate, FDR<5%): three hypermethylated DMPs in dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) and one in entorhinal cortex (ERC) (Figure
No genome-wide significant DMPs were found in hippocampus (HIPPO) or cerebellum (CRB).
Two of the DLPFC DMPs tagged genes that were previously reported
and SPG7 (cg03169557, p=1.74×10 -7 , Δ=0.082, Figure
The third DMP corresponds to a putatively novel association implicating MARCKS (cg10474881, p=1.35×10 -7 , Δ=0.046, Figure
The ERC DMP replicated a previously identified association with the gene ANK1
Notably, the three previously reported DMPs (MYO1C, SPG7, ANK1) were highly significant (p<1×10 -5 ) in at least one other brain region with directional consistency, whereas the association with MARCKS lacked similarly convergent evidence (Table
p<2.2×10 -16 , Table
These results suggest region-dependent differentially methylated sites are a functionally distinct from the cross-region sites.

Supplemental Discussion

S1. Differentially methylated regions
Our most significant differentially methylated region (DMR) overlapped DUSP22 and this association was significant (FWER<10%) in dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC), hippocampus (HIPPO), and entorhinal cortex (ERC).
Interestingly, a previous study
A DMR overlapping DUSP22 has also been reported in the superior temporal gyrus of AD brains but with the opposite direction of effect (hypomethylation in AD)
These results suggest DUSP22 is hypermethylated in multiple cortical brain regions beyond the hippocampus, such as entorhinal cortex and dorsolateral prefrontal cortex.
Three other DMRs were identified which have not been previously reported in the context of AD, to our knowledge.
One of these novel DMRs overlaps the transcription start site (TSS) of Ankyrin repeat domain 30B (ANKRD30B), a protein-coding gene of unknown function which has been linked to breast cancer
Another DMR overlaps the promoter of JRK and is 384 bp upstream of the TSS; genetic studies of this gene provide mixed evidence for its role in childhood epilepsy {7550318; 11463517; 10510981}.
The fourth DMR is 11 bp downstream from the transcription start site of NAPRT, a gene which plays role in bioenergetics, particularly in synthesizing NAD+, the abundance of which is altered in late-onset AD{29070876}.
Thus, disruption of the genes near the four differentially methylated regions have been previously linked to brain dysfunction, though they do not appear to fall into a single coherent pathway.

S2. Cell-type composition
We also cannot fully disentangle changes in cell-type composition from the differential methylation signals.
Although we did not find differences in the estimated proportion of neurons with the in silico deconvolution algorithm and a sensitivity analysis accounting for these estimates did not change our conclusions as others have seen
This discrepancy may arise due to limitations of the in silico deconvolution or from postmortem brain sampling which may include both healthy and diseased tissue.
Here, cell-type specific approaches to DNAm profiling will be crucial for resolving tissue composition heterogeneity and for unmasking cell-type specific neuropathological differences.

Supplemental Methods

Preprocessing and normalization
idat files from 398 samples were imported with minfi
Principle components (PCs) were computed upon the log-transformed (log2[x+1]) red and green negative control probes (N=1,226).
The first two negative control PCs together captured ~49.1%
of the variance and were used later as covariates to control for technical variation such as plate effects, which is considered a "batch effect" (Figure
Samples with outlying distributions of methylation/unmethylation intensity were removed (N=5, Figure
Notably, we did not observe systemic variability of the data quality associated with disease or brain regions, suggesting "batch effects" were unlikely to confound these biological effects of interest.
We then normalized the data with stratified quantile normalization

Filtering probes
We removed probes which were of low quality, potentially affected by common SNPs, cross-reactive, mapped to sex chromosomes, or mapped ambiguously to hg38.
2,186 probes were dropped because they had a detection P-value greater than 0.05 in over 5% of our samples.
16,864 probes were dropped because they contained a common single nucleotide polymorphism (minor allele frequency, MAF>1%) at either single base extension sites or the target CpG.
We dropped 27,386 probes that Chen et al. reported as cross-reactive
Lastly, we excluded 7,966 probes which we were unable to confidently map to hg38.
After removing these 64,660 probes, 420,852 high-quality probes available for 393 samples remained for further analysis.

Dropping samples
We identified and removed samples where methylation predicted sex did not match phenotypic sex (N=4, Figure
Samples whose methylation genotype did not match their SNP-chip genotype were also dropped (N=7).
We removed three samples that were labeled as cerebellum but clustered with cortical samples in the first principal component of DNAm probe beta values (Figure
After removing these 16 samples, 377 high-confidence samples remained for further analysis.

Cell type composition
To estimate the proportion of NeuN+ cells, we used a modified version of the algorithm described in
FlowSorted.DLPFC.450k:
Illumina HumanMethylation data on sorted frontal cortex cell populations.
R package version 1.14.0;
23426267}.
After predicting the cell-type composition, we tested for AD case-control differences in neuronal proportions using a linear model separately for each brain region while adjusting for age, sex, and MDS 1 (a measure of ancestry).

Age acceleration
Epigenetic age was predicted with Horvath's clock as recommended
We defined epigenetic age acceleration as the residuals from the linear model between chronological age and DNAm age.
Epigenetic age acceleration was calculated separately across all four brain regions, and we then tested for different epigenetic age acceleration between controls and AD samples with a two-tailed t-test.
To assess the replicability of previous studies, we downloaded published results from two landmark epigenome-wide association studies of AD
Here, we defined "replicable" as p<0.05 and the same direction of effect.
Hence, "percent replicated" is defined as:
Conversely, we assessed the replication of significant DMPs discovered through cross-region and region-dependent analyses.
We analyzed processed data from three cortical regions and cerebellum from Lunnon et al. 10 (Ncontrol=94 samples, NAD=239 samples, GSE59685) with a generalized least squares model using the diagnosis provided and including brain region as a covariate.

Enrichment tests
Probes were mapped to Entrez IDs and we tested for gene set enrichment of DMPs in GO and KEGG ontologies using an adaptation of the gometh function from the missMethyl package
Table
11,518 differentially methylated probes (DMPs) under a region-dependent model.
Table
Gene ontology results for 858 cross-region significant probes.
Table
Gene ontology results for cross-region significantly hypomethylated probes.
Table
Gene ontology results for cross-region significantly hypermethylated probes.
Table
Gene ontology results for 11,518 region-dependent probes.
Table
Overlap of differentially methylated probes (DMPs) from cross-region and regiondependent models with AD genetic risk loci.
Table
240 cross-region differentially methylated probes consistent in
and same directionality of effect).
2,908 region-dependent differentially methylated probes consistent in
Differential gene expression results for genes with nearby differential methylation, based upon the cross-region model.
).
Cerebellum has a "slower" rate of epigenetic aging as has been proposed previously

Figure S17. Principal component analysis (PCA).
Three samples were labeled as cerebellum but clustered with cortical brain regions on PC1 (~67% of variance).
These samples were removed prior to further analysis.



FiguresFigure 1A .
Figures



Figure 1B .
Figure 1B.
ANKRD30B differentially methylated probes (DMP) hypermethylation.
Black points represent unaffected control samples and red points represent samples with a diagnosis of symptomatic Alzheimer's disease (AD).
Under the cross-region model, a DNAm site near ANKRD30B was significantly more methylated in AD samples (red) than unaffected controls (black).
Plotted beta values were adjusted for age, sex, ancestry, and estimates of technical variation using a linear model with logit transformation.
ANKRD30B: Ankyrin Repeat Domain 30B



Figure 1E . 1 Figure 2B . 2 Figure 2C .
Figure 1E.
ANKRD30B differentially methylated region (DMR).A series of neighboring probes overlapping the transcription start site (TSS) of ANKRD30B are more methylated in Alzheimer's disease (red) than in unaffected controls (black).
ANKRD30B: Ankyrin Repeat Domain 30B



Figure 3A .
Figure 3A.
ANKRD30B differential expression.
ANKRD30B is less expressed in AD samples compared to controls in cortical brain regions (DLPFC, ERC, and HIPPO), notably little difference between unaffected controls and AD cases is observed in CRB.
ANKRD30B: Ankyrin Repeat Domain 30B



Figure 3C .
Figure 3C.
MYO1C differential expression.
MYO1C is significantly more expressed in AD cases than in unaffected controls within cortical brain regions (CRB p= 0.826; DLPFC p= 0.00836; ERC p=0.0448;
HIPPO p=0.0324).
MYO1C: Myosin IC.



Figure 3D .
Figure 3D.
Greater DNAm at cg23703062 associates with reduced ANKRD30B expression in DLPFC, ERC, and HIPPO.
Hypermethylation of DNAm site cg23703062, annotated to protein-coding gene ANKRD30B, associates with reduced gene expression in DLPFC, ERC, and HIPPO but not in CRB (CRB: p=0.910, β= 0.00755; DLPFC: p=0.0710, β= -0.719; ERC p= 0.0233, β= -1.25; HIPPO p=0.101, β= -0.792).
ANKRD30B: Ankyrin Repeat Domain 30B



Figure S7A .
Figure S7A.
Differentially methylated region overlapping DUSP22.



Figure S7B .
Figure S7B.
Differentially methylated region nearest to JRK.



Figure S7C .
Figure S7C.
Differentially methylated region nearest to NAPRT.



Figure S8 .
Figure S8.
Post-hoc scatter plots of effect sizes from four brain regions for interaction CpGs.



Figure S9A .
Figure S9A.
T-statistics from cross-region AD model versus t-statistics from cross-region aging model.



Figure S9B .
Figure S9B.
T-statistics from region-dependent AD model versus t-statistics from regiondependent aging model.



Figure S10 .
Figure S10.
Hypermethylated CpGs enriched for island shelves.



Figure S11A .
Figure S11A.
DNAm associates with MYO1C expression across all four brain regions.



Figure S11B .
Figure S11B.
DNAm associates with DUSP22 expression only in DLPFC.



Figure S12 .
Figure S12.
Negative control PCs 1 and 2 associate with batch (sample plate).



Figure S13 .
Figure S13.
QC plot.



Figure S14 .
Figure S14.
Distribution of beta values before and after stratified quantile normalization (SQN).



Figure S15 .
Figure S15.
Four potential sex swaps were removed.



Figure S16 .
Figure S16.
Two samples clustered incorrectly based on genotype.
These samples were removed prior to further analysis.



Figure S17 .
Figure S17.
Principal component analysis of processed data.



Figure S2 .
Figure S2.
Estimated proportion of neurons in AD and controls across four brain regions.
Alzheimer's disease was not associated with differences in the estimated proportions of neurons in any brain region assessed: CRB (t-statistic=0.29,
p=0.77,
Ncontrol=43, NAD=24), DLPFC (t-statistic=-0.57,
p=0.57,
Ncontrol=47, NAD=21), HIPPO (t-statistic=-1.34,
p=0.18,
Ncontrol=48, NAD=17), and ERC (t-statistic=-0.91,
p=0.36,
Ncontrol=49, NAD=20; via linear models stratified by brain region and adjusting for age, sex, and ancestry).



Figure S3A .
Figure S3A.
Epigenetic age is highly correlated with chronological age across all four brain regions.
Chronological age and DNAm age are highly associated in DLPFC (Pearson's r = 0.871), ERC (r = 0.886), and HIPPO (r = 0.924, all P<2.2×10-16 ).
Cerebellum has a "slower" rate of epigenetic aging as has been proposed previously



Figure S3B .
Figure S3B.
Epigenetic age acceleration and Alzheimer's disease (AD).
We did not find significant differences in epigenetic age acceleration associated with Alzheimer's disease in any of the four regions we tested (two-tailed t-test): CRB (t = -0.51,
p-value = 0.61, Ncontrol=43, NAD=24), DLPFC (t = 0.11, p-value = 0.92, Ncontrol=47, NAD=21), HIPPO (t = 0.25, p-value = 0.81, Ncontrol=48, NAD=17), and ERC (t = 0.66, p-value = 0.52, Ncontrol=49, NAD=20).



Figure
FigureS4 (A-D).
Four differentially methylated probes (DMPs) from the region-specific analysis.
Adjusted DNAm values (where the estimated effect of covariates are regressed out) are plotted along the y-axis for both diagnostic groups (x-axis) for four significant DMPs (at false discovery rate, FDR<5%).
These four DMPs are annotated to five unique genes (ANK1 and MIR486 for cg05066959).



Figure S6A .
Figure S6A.
Adjusting for cell-type composition increases t-statistics of AD case-control differences.
The solid red line represents the identity line (x=y).



Figure S6B .
Figure S6B.
T-statistics from model adjusting for APOE4 risk burden are highly correlated with the original model.



Figure S7A .
Figure S7A.
DUSP22 differentially methylated region (DMR).



Figure S7B .
Figure S7B.
JRK differentially methylated region (DMR).



Figure S7C .
Figure S7C.
NAPRT differentially methylated region (DMR).



Figure S8 .
Figure S8.
Post-hoc scatter plots of effect sizes from four brain regions for interaction CpGs.



Figure S9A .
Figure S9A.
T-statistics from cross-region AD model versus t-statistics from cross-region aging model.



Figure S9B .
Figure S9B.
Correlation between -log10(Pvalue) from the brain-region by age interaction and -log10(Pvalue) from the brain-region by Alzheimer's disease.



Figure S10 .
Figure S10.
The distribution of CpG genomic density features differed for probes identified as significantly different (FDR<0.05)
between AD samples and controls, relative to background (Xsquared = 79.23,
p<2.2×10-16 ).
Overall, in significantly differentially methylated sites, islands were depleted (p=1.55×10 -1
, Odds Ratio, OR=0.645), shores did not differ significantly (p=0.120),
shelves were enriched (p=1.35×10 -
, OR=1.47), and open sea was enriched (p=1.31×10 -
, OR=1.32).



Figure S11A .
Figure S11A.
DNAm associates with MYO1C expression.
Red colored points indicate samples from donors diagnosed with AD; black colored points indicate samples from controls.



Figure S11B .
Figure S11B.
DNAm of cg11235426 associates with DUSP22 expression only in DLPFC.
Red colored points indicate samples from donors diagnosed with AD; black colored points indicate samples from controls.



Figure S12 .
Figure S12.
The first two principal components of negative control probe values associate with technical batch effects.
Negative control PC1 (41% of variance) associates with sample plate, a technical batch (ANOVA, p<2.2×10 -16 , F-value = 23.92).
Negative control PC2 (8.14% of variance) also associates with sample plate (ANOVA, p=1.09×10 -12 , F-value = 16.75).



Figure S13 .
Figure S13.
Quality control plot.
The median methylation intensity is plotted along the x-axis and the median unmethylation intensity is plotted along the y-axis for all samples (both log2 transformed).
Low quality samples (N=5), as indicated by low values of median meth/unmeth, were removed prior to further analysis (boxed and toward bottom left of plot).



Figure S14 .
Figure S14.
Distribution of beta values before and after stratified quantile normalization (SQN).



Figure S15 .
Figure S15.
Four potential sex swaps were removed.
Four samples (circled and labelled on Figureabove) clustered with male samples on the basis of X and Y chromosome median total methylation values, but had a phenotypically reported sex of female.
These samples were removed prior to further analysis (N=4).



Figure S16 .
Figure S16.
Inappropriately clustering SNP probes on HM450k.
Two samples (Br5080_2-F05 and Br5111_3-F10) clustered incorrectly based on genotype and were removed prior to further analysis.


The gometh function reduces potential spurious enrichment signals arising from the non-uniform distribution of CpGs per gene by accounting for the number of probes mapping to each gene.
The 420,852 probes we tested for differential methylation were used as the background.
When evaluating changes in the distribution of CpG genomic density features (i.e.



Table S12 .
Results for genes for which nearby DNAm associates with gene expression (at nominal significance p<0.05) and the gene is differentially expressed (at nominal significance p<0.05).