Executive Functions in Alzheimer Disease: A Systematic Review
Alzheimer's disease is a severe irreversible syndrome, characterized by a slow and progressive cognitive decline that interferes with the standard instrumental and essential functions of daily life.
Promptly identifying the impairment of particular cognitive functions could be a fundamental condition to limit, through preventive or therapeutic interventions, the functional damages found in this degenerative dementia.
This study aims to analyse, through a systematic review of the studies, the sensitivity of four experimental paradigms (Wisconsin Card Sorting Test, Stroop Task, Go/No-Go Task, and Flanker Task) considered as golden standard instruments for executive functions assessment in elderly subjects affected by Alzheimer dementia.
This review was carried out according to the PRISMA method.
Forty-five studies comparing the executive performance of patients with Alzheimer's dementia (diagnosed according to different classification criteria for dementia) and healthy elderly patients both over the age of sixty, were selected.
For the research, PubMed, PsycINFO, PsycArticles databases were used.
The study highlighted the importance of using standard protocols to evaluate executive dysfunction in Alzheimer's disease.
The Stroop task allows discriminating better between healthy and pathological aging.

INTRODUCTION
The World Health Organization defines dementia as a "loss of intellectual capability of such severity as to interfere with the social or occupational functioning"
It is a complex irreversible and chronic syndrome
The typical symptoms of dementia involve different cognitive domains, such as memory, spatial and temporal orienting, language and learning, comprehension, and communication skills
This problem appears to be increasing in the general population
It is estimated that about 46.8 million people worldwide, in 2015 had dementia; continually growing numbers that are expected to double every 20 years, reaching estimates of 74.7 million people in 2030
The calculation of the annual health costs related to dementias are similar to those of heart diseases, and they are much higher than those referred to cancer.
These data would place dementia among the most expensive diseases in society
Most of these costs are attributable to home care and long-term institutionalization.
The most widespread form of dementia is Alzheimer's Dementia (AD), which is one of the main risk factors for death in the affected individuals (Alzheimer's Association, 2016).The average duration of the disease varies between 4 and 8 years, although some patients may survive up to 20 years after the onset of the AD
Alzheimer dementia is estimated to have increased by 35.4% in 2015, significantly raising the specific costs of this disease
Alzheimer's disease includes a pre-dementia and a dementia phase
Pre-dementia represents the initial period of the disorder, in which the first symptoms associated with episodic memory loss begin (starting with the removal of the most recent memories and experiences), symptoms that however do not interfere with the management of the activities of the daily life
However, in this Mild Cognitive Impairment condition (MCI), not amnesic dysfunctions are also reported
With the progression of the disease and the transition to the actual dementia phase, in addition to a worsening of the memory symptoms (which begin to affect even the most ancient memories and experiences), linguistic and spatial orienting deficits emerge that involves a severe functional difficulty
High levels of anxiety and a general lack of motivation complete the clinical profile of AD
On the other hand, in this first phase the procedural memory is still relatively preserved, but with the aggravation of the disease, there is a complete compromise of the entire memory domain
Likewise, lexical and semantic abilities would seem to be compromised, while phonological and syntax abilities would seem to be relatively conserved.
As the disease progresses, the vocabulary tends to become impoverished and phonemic, and semantic paraphasias begin to appear, with a diminishment of expressive and understanding abilities
In addition to language, the skills of spatial and temporal orienting, cognitive control of behavior, visuomotor integration, and executive functions are strongly compromised
Alzheimer's disease is characterized by a complex neuropsychological profile, associated with the gradual degeneration of the various cortical areas affected by this pathology.
In the AD, the entorhinal cortex and the hippocampus seem to be compromised initially, that is, the structures involved in recording and consolidating information and in episodic memory
Moreover, some studies have shown that patients with Alzheimer's disease showed severe lesions in the hippocampal and parahippocampal regions and the medial temporal lobe
The AD, except the rare forms caused by genetic anomalies, derives from the presence and interaction of different conditions
Late age
Smoking, obesity
Regular physical activity

EXECUTIVE FUNCTIONS IN ALZHEIMER'S DISEASE
Executive functions represent a wide range of active cognitive processes, which allow responding in the appropriate way to environmental stimuli.
This "umbrella term" includes verbal reasoning, problem-solving, planning, the ability to maintain sustained attention, resistance to interference, multitasking, cognitive flexibility, and the ability to cope with novelty
To facilitate research in the field of Executive Functions, several authors
-Inhibition, including inhibitory control, self-control (behavioral inhibition), and interference control (selective attention and cognitive inhibition).
It includes the voluntary inhibition of dominant or automatic responses
It involves the updating and the monitoring of the representations collected in the working memory (involvement of the Dorsolateral Prefrontal Cortex;
It is characterized by the attentional shift between tasks or between different mental operations.
This mechanism is commonly regarded as disengagement from an irrelevant task with subsequent anchorage on a relevant task to pursue a particular objective
Until the last 20 years, deficits in executive functions were rarely considered in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease
Some studies suggested that these were relatively preserved during the pre-clinical phase of the disorder
However, over the last years, this view has changed, and more recent studies have confirmed the presence in the AD of early impairment in a variety of tasks aimed at investigating executive functions
These findings confirm that in the Alzheimer's disease executive functions are impaired from the early stages
In particular, the inhibitory abilities
In patients with the AD, the attentional skills needed to resolve complex tasks would be impaired, such as divided attention, the ability to effectively disengage and shift attention
Moreover, about the visuospatial functions the constructive praxia, visual-perceptive, and visual orienting abilities would seem to be damaged
When these cognitive deficits interfere with the performance of daily life activities, the patient can react to his/her cognitive impairment with mood swings, irritability and apathy.
All these aspects outline the characteristic clinical profile associated with Alzheimer's disease.
Considering the relevance that the AD has on the life of patients affected by this disease, it is essential to understand the specific alterations involving the executive functioning thoroughly.
With this purpose, recently, many researchers have focused on the use of experimental paradigms aimed at analyzing the deficits of executive functions in individuals affected by dementia
These studies highlighted how the various executive functions

COGNITIVE TASKS AND ASSESSMENT OF COGNITIVE FUNCTIONS IN ALZHEIMER'S DISEASE
Different experimental paradigms were used to evaluate executive functions in the AD.
These tasks were more commonly used to evaluate executive performance
Stroop Task
In particular, through the use of incongruent stimuli, it evaluates the management of the conflict and the inhibitory control of automatic responses.
In the standard version of the Stroop Task, the stimuli are words written with colored inks.
There are congruent (the word RED written in red ink) or incongruent (the word RED written in green ink) trials; the participant's goal is to respond by referring to the color of the ink ignoring the meaning of the word.
In this way, two alternative and incompatible responses (color vs. word) are elicited, one of which is more spontaneous than the other (reading of the word vs. ink color denomination).
The Wisconsin Card Sorting Test (WCST)
The WCST consists of four stimulus cards and two sets of 64 response cards.
The cards vary in color, shape and number of elements represented.
The test includes some ambiguous stimuli, and the pairing criteria vary according to a standardized order
The task requires identifying the correct criterion with which to order the response cards to the stimulus cards; for each card placed by the participant, the experimenter provides feedback on the correctness of the performance.
Based on the feedback from the experimenter, the participant can modify his/her behavior by identifying the appropriate strategy.
The Flanker Task
The task requires discriminating the central target stimulus between a series of lateral distractors (flanker).
There are three types of conditions: the congruent trials, in which the target stimulus and the flankers have the same characteristics and required the same response; the incongruent trials, in which the target has different features with respect to the distractors, requiring an opposite response that generates conflict; finally, the neutral condition, in which the distractor is not confused with the targets presented in the task, and it does not cause conflict.
The flanker effect (also called conflict or congruence effect) reveals the difficulty in ignoring the distractors due to the ambiguity of the stimuli used
The Go/No-Go Task assesses sustained attention (vigilance) and impulsivity and allows obtaining information related to motor-type inhibitory control
The task consists in the presentation of a stimulus that requires a response from the participant (Go stimulus), and another stimulus for which the participant must, instead, inhibit any response (No-Go stimulus).
A high percentage of errors indicates a difficulty in behavioral inhibition.
Also, in this case, there are different versions of the task to investigate the inhibitory aspects and the influences of this ability from other variables, such as emotions

AIMS
The central aim of this review is to analyse the sensitivity of four experimental paradigms
Moreover, another objective of this work is to verify how the executive functioning in the AD is compromised concerning the normal operation of healthy elderly, with the aim of understanding how and where the cognitive impairment associated with dementia intervenes in a more evident way.

SYSTEMATIC REVIEW
The systematic review was conducted using the PRISMA method
This review considered all the works that investigated the executive functioning through the use of the cognitive tasks defined in the introduction.
Most of the considered studies refer to the diagnostic criteria of Alzheimer Disease of the National Institute of Neurological and Communications Disorders and Stroke and the Alzheimer's Disease and Related Disorders Association (NINCDS-ADRDA)
However, we considered also the studies that used the diagnosis criteria of DSM

METHOD
The study was the result of systematic research in the PubMed, PsycArticles, and PsycINFO databases.
The following keywords were used for the search: Stroop Task, Wisconsin Card Sorting Test, Go/No-Go Task, Flanker Task, and Alzheimer.
Thespecific scripts are presented in Table
All articles published on the topic up to the date of 1 July 2018 have been taken into account.
Two researchers performed the research independently, and the results were compared.
The disagreements have been resolved with consensus methods.
In case of lack of consensus among the researchers, a supervisor was used.
For the selection of the articles the following inclusion criteria were used: publications on "Peer Review-Journals"; use of the Stroop Task, the Flanker Task, the Wisconsin Card Sorting Test or, the Go/No-Go Task; the presence of a control group of healthy elderly.
The exclusion criteria were the following: (a) studies that did not present all the data useful for a critical analysis of the results; (b) the use of versions of the tasks that considered the emotional components of executive functions; (c) studies with methodological bias (for example with unspecified inclusion/exclusion criteria); (d) studies comparing the AD group with groups affected by other types of dementia or MCI without a healthy elderly group; single cases.
The initial results produced 858 articles.
After the elimination of duplicates and irrelevant papers, by the title and abstract reading, 83 articles were read.
At the end of the revision work, 45 articles were included in the review.
The flowchart presented in Figure
The 45 selected articles have been categorized concerning the single paradigm used.
Studies that used more experimental tasks were discussed in the different paragraphs concerning the results of each specific task.
According to PICOS
These data are presented in the different behavioral task tables.

RESULTS

Stroop Task
The systematic research has allowed the identification of 30 studies (see Table
Within the 30 studies, only five of these did not use the diagnostic criteria of the National Institute of Neurological and Communicative Disorders and the Alzheimer Disease Association
The patients with the AD and their control groups included all participants over 65 years old, who differed from each other for the scores obtained at the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE)
Only in the study of Tse and colleagues
Compared to the Stroop Task analysis, all authors evaluated at least one of the following dependent variables: accuracy of responses, reaction times and interference effect (or Stroop effect).
In most of the studies, the analysis of accuracy showed worse performance in the patients with AD compared to healthy elderly
Furthermore, in all studies that also evaluated reaction times, it was found that patients with Alzheimer's disease are generally slower than healthy elderly people;
In the studies identified by systematic research, several indices were used to detect deficits in the inhibitory control    Naming the ink of the word
through the Stroop Task.
The most commonly used is the Interference Effect Index, generally calculated through the ratio or subtraction of the performance values (on reaction times or Accuracy) between the Neutral condition (Color or Word) and the interference condition (Color-Word).
The results showed a higher interference effect in the patients with AD groups than in the healthy elderly people
The interference effect can also be considered as a measure of inhibition, and patients with AD would exhibit lower inhibitory ability than healthy participants
In addition, some studies have evaluated additional indices and effects: among these, Spieler and colleagues

Wisconsin Card Sorting Test
The systematic research allowed highlighting 14 studies (see Table
For this purpose, different versions of the test were used.
Almost all the studies used the diagnostic criteria NINCDS-ADRDA
Also, in this case, the participants were tested with the MMSE or DRS to verify the level of cognitive decline, except
Concerning the characteristics of the groups, most of the studies matched healthy controls with patients with AD disease about age (considering an average age of over 65) and education.
In the Chiu study (2013), the AD group had lower education than healthy adults.
Finally, the study by
Some of these studies compared the WCST performance of patients with the AD with that of patients with MCI, as well as with the healthy elderly group
To evaluate performance in WCST, all studies used at least two of the following scores: number of completed categories, perseverative errors, total errors, and non-perseverative errors.
The results showed that patients with Alzheimer's disease complete fewer categories
Nevertheless, five studies
Some of these studies
This result could indicate a poor set-shifting capacity in patients affected by Alzheimer's disease that is expressed through a general perseveration of the responses.

Go/No-Go Task
To analyse the motor inhibition in patients with Alzheimer's disease, four studies (see Table
All the studies used the NINCDS-ADRDA diagnostic criteria for diagnosis
All participants (mean age over 65 years in both groups) underwent an assessment of cognitive decline through MMSE
Further, all studies
The accuracy analysis was evaluated in all studies by considering the number of errors in the No-Go trials (false alarms).
Responding to the No-Go stimulus, in fact, is viewed as an error due to impulsivity.
Concerning this result,
The other studies
Reaction times analysis, in the Go trials, was used to evaluate the global processing speed
In particular,
The study by
However, they do not show any difference between controls and patients with Alzheimer's disease.
Moreover,
Overall, the studies that used the Go/No-Go task to assess the motor inhibitory control of patients with Alzheimer's dementia would seem to show a specific heterogeneity in the results.
Two of the four studies analyzed
In contrast, only the study by Rochat and colleagues
Studies  deficit linked to inhibitory control in patients with Alzheimer's disease.

Flanker Task
Four studies
All the studies used for the probable diagnosis of the AD the diagnostic criteria NINCDS-ADRDA
In all studies, both groups (healthy elderly and elderly with Alzheimer's disease) have an average age over 65 years.
For the assessment of the level of cognitive impairment, the scores at MMSE and those of the DRS were taken into consideration.
Although the authors do not report in detail the scores obtained by the different groups, they still attest to higher cognitive impairment in patients with the AD.
Two of the studies
All the authors recorded reaction times and accuracy of responses in the Flanker Task.
The analysis of the reaction times highlighted inconsistent results.
Analyzing accuracy, only the study by
However, both general reaction times and accuracy give a measure of selective attention, and they do not inform about executive function.
Some of the authors
Specifically,
Moreover,

DISCUSSION
This systematic review was aimed to verify the sensitivity of four golden standard executive functions tasks in catching dysfunctions in these domains in the Alzheimer's disease.
Because executive deficits interfere with the performance of daily life activities, by worsening the quality of life of individuals with the AD
It is important to note that the recognition of an impairment in the executive functions in the AD is the result of a route change, in fact until a few years ago it was believed that the executive functions were not affected in the pre-clinical stages of dementia
Today it is known that these cognitive functions are already damaged prematurely
A correct choice of the cognitive tasks to use for the assessment of cognitive impairment is a crucial element to take into account.
Those considered in this review are the most used in the study of executive functions
They specifically evaluate the capacities of the motor (Go/No-Go Task) and cognitive inhibition
The Stroop Task seems to be the paradigm that best discriminates between healthy and pathological aging, and it is the most widely used in the research on the AD
A neuropsychological assessment including this test can assess the executive system.
It could highlight the individual's ability to move the patient's cognitive set, providing a measure of cognitive inhibition and attentional control, and it gives information about the ability to inhibit an overlearned response (i.e., a dominant response, such as the reading) in favor of an unusual stimulus
One aspect to consider about this task is that some authors
The results obtained with the other tests were inconsistent, but it should be noted that few studies have used them.
Concerning the ability of the Wisconsin Card Sorting Test to catch deficits in the cognitive flexibility of Alzheimer's disease, the results are inconsistent.
The most critical aspect related to WCST is the complexity of the task.
For this reason, some authors
Contrary to the standard version, on these modified versions of the WSCT, there are fewer cards, and in some case, the subject was informed about a shift in sorting principles.
Moreover, there were not ambiguous cards, and the sorting criteria changed after six correct responses.
These aspects make the task easier and allow identifying, with higher sensitivity, the cognitive flexibility deficits in the AD
If we considered the modified versions of the test, WCST seems to discriminate between AD patients and healthy subjects
However, even using a simplified version of the WCST, some studies did not find clear differences between healthy elderly and patients with the AD.
Moreover, if we consider the studies that compared the performance of patients with the AD with those of elderly people suffering from other dementia diseases (temporal dementia, vascular dementia, Parkinson's with dementia), there are no differences, suggesting that this task not allow discriminating among different forms of dementia
The results about the Flanker Task would seem to indicate that this paradigm is not able to highlight a difference between healthy and pathological elderly, especially when reaction times are considered
The analysis of accuracy, instead, has a higher discriminating ability to indicate the actual deterioration in selective attention in patients with the AD
However, if we consider the only two studies that analyzed the flanker effect, both found an impaired conflict control in patients with AD compared to healthy people.
The characteristics of the sample represent a weak point of these studies.
Two of the four studies did not perform an exact pairing for age and education between patients with the AD and healthy controls.
Moreover, the number of participants was very reduced (AD group: N = 26 and Control group: N = 28; AD group: N = 15 and Control group: N = 16)
For these reasons, and considering the few studies present, it is not possible to exclude that the Flanker Task is sensitive to catch impairment in selective attention and conflict control in Alzheimer's dementia, especially in light of the results obtained at the Stroop Task, which involves attentional aspects similar to those assessed by the Flanker Task
Also, the results relative to the Go/No-Go task did not indicate whether a deficit in the control of motor inhibition is present or not in patients with AD compared to healthy elderly.
Only one study
The other studies
This difference between the Rochat's study and the other studies could be due to a different version of the Go/No-Go Task, that required to respond to a rare target (a number); this fact involves a harder inhibitory control ability, that could explain the difference between AD patients and elderly healthy Control Group.
However, the comparison between patients with Alzheimer's dementia and patients with different types of dementia showed no difference

LIMITS AND CONCLUSIONS
This review highlighted several limitations in the examination of executive functions in Alzheimer's disease.
In particular, many studies have used a numerically insufficient sample
A further problem is related to the assessment of cognitive decline.
The different studies have used different scales to evaluate the cognitive decline, and in some studies, the average scores obtained by the various groups are not reported
Furthermore, the severity of the decline within the AD groups varies a lot as regards the scores at the MMSE (see Tables
This condition does not allow controlling the influence of these variables on the performance of the tasks used.
Furthermore, some studies not matching groups by age, gender and education, and they have not always controlled other aspects (such as the severity of the AD or comorbidity diseases) that could influence task performance
These dimensions indeed reduce the sensitivity of the instruments in the identification of differences between groups, especially in the case of an analysis of functions that are subject to a physiological decline with age, as also shown by some of the studies considered here that compare elderly control groups with younger control groups
Another critical point of the reviewed studies concerns the use of multiple forms of the same experimental paradigm.
These miscellanea of test does not allow for an explicit comparison between the various researches.
Therefore, it is difficult to arrive at definite conclusions.
This aspect is particularly evident in the studies that have used the WCST.
In this case, simplified versions of the test have shown a higher ability to identify differences associated with the AD
Concerning the Go/No-Go and the Flanker task, the results were weak in light of the few studies found.
Therefore, the systematic use of these tests would be useful, to verify their sensitivity to capture deficits in conflict control and motor inhibition in the AD.
However, regardless of these limitations, at the end of this review emerges an effective executive deficit in the inhibitory control
These results allow us to suggest a plausible identikit of executive functioning in Alzheimer's disease, characterized by an impairment in inhibition and cognitive flexibility.
There are differences in performance in the various tasks, which could reflect, as previously underlying, differences in the levels of deterioration of the various executive functions analyzed during the AD progression.
In the light of the results of this review that showed a more or less marked discriminatory capacity of the examined tasks for the identification of the executive deficits in Alzheimer's disease, it would be advisable to insert these tasks within neuropsychological batteries.
This could allow investigating more entirely and articulately the cognitive functioning of patients affected by the AD.
Overall, this review highlighted the importance of a comprehensive neuropsychological evaluation to allow a clear delineation of the aging profile associated with Alzheimer's disease.
An evaluation of this type could be inserted into pathological aging prevention programs, and it could be useful as a form of monitoring of executive functioning in aging.
Furthermore, it could allow identifying the presence of even slight deficits, such as a Mild Cognitive Impairment, that could predict a degenerative disease like the AD.
MCI and AD have different diagnostic criteria and different levels of cognitive impairment, for these reasons MCI was not considered in this work.
However, it could be useful to conduct a systematic review taking into account the executive performance in MCI specifically.
The results of this review would be to decline it in a metaanalysis that could allow to better understanding the profile of executive functions in the Alzheimer's disease.
Furthermore, it would be advisable to carry out a comparative analysis of the different experimental paradigms used to investigate the individual executive functions.
This comparison could allow to a better understanding of the results obtained in this work, consenting to conclude whether the results are univocal regardless of the task used or if there is an effect of the type of the task that reinforces or weakens the conclusions to which this review has arrived.



FIGURE 1 |
FIGURE 1 | The flowchart of the studies selection.



*
There is a significant difference between groups.
MMSE, Mini Mental State Examination; AD, Alzheimer Disease; CG, Control Group; DRS, Dementia Rating Scale; BDS, Blessed Dementia Scale; NINCDS-ADRDA, National Institute of Neurological and Communicative Disorders and Stroke and the Alzheimer's Disease and Related Disorders Association; RT, Reaction Time; C-W, Naming incongruent ink color on the Stroop Task (Interference task); C, Naming Color Task on the Stroop Task; CG-I, Control Group Interference task; AD-I, Alzheimer Disease Interference task; CG-R, Control Group Reverse task; AD-R, Alzheimer Disease Reverse task; N/A, Data Not Available; MCI, Mild Cognitive Impairment; ACC, Accuracy; FTD, Frontotemporal Dementia; CDR, Clinical Dementia Rating Scale; VaD, Vascular Dementia; SVD, Subcortical Vascular Dementia.



%
Errors: AD>CG aMCI = 22 (76±8) [10M;12F] aMCI = 27 ± 2 Mild AD = 24 (76±8) [9M;15F] Mild AD = 27 ± 2 (Continued) Frontiers in Aging Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org



Participant
hand from starting point; (2) replace the hand or continue the action touching the No-Go stimulus.
Four Data: RT latencies (Go Trial), Reaching time, I error score; II error score.
hand from starting point; (2) replace the hand or continue the action touching the No-Go stimulus.
Four Data: RT latencies (Go Trial), Reaching time, I error score; II error score.
, National Institute on Aging and Alzheimer's Association.TABLE 5 | Some characteristics of the studies that have used the Flanker Task to assess executive dysfunction in patients with Alzheimer's disease.
same word; (2) NR: flankers are neutral word; (3) SC: flankers and target are of the same category; (4



TABLE 1 |
Scripts used in the systematic research.
All Fields] AND "card"[All Fields] AND "sorting"[All Fields] AND "test"[All Fields]) OR "Wisconsin card sorting test"[All Fields]).



TABLE 2 |
Some characteristics of the studies that have used the Stroop Task to assess executive dysfunction in patients with Alzheimer's disease.



TABLE 3 |
Some characteristics of the studies that have used the Wisconsin Card Sorting Test to assess executive dysfunction in patients with Alzheimer's disease.



TABLE 3 |
Continued



TABLE 3 |
Continued


Mental State Examination; AD, Alzheimer Disease Group; WCST, Wisconsin Card Sorting Test; CG, Control Group; DEP, Depression Group; CDR, Clinical Dementia Rating Scale; mWCST, Modified version of the Wisconsin Card Sorting Test; CAMBEX, Cambridge Diagnostic Examination of the Elderly; NINCDS-ADRDA, National Institute of Neurological and Communicative Disorders and Stroke and the Alzheimer's Disease and Related Disorders Association; HD, Huntington's Disease; DRS, Dementia Rating Scale; PDN, Parkinson Disease without Dementia; PDD, Parkinson Disease with Dementia; MCI, Mild Cognitive Impairment; VaD, Vascular Dementia; FTD, Frontotemporal Dementia; KWCST, Keio Version of the Wisconsin Card Sorting Test; aMCI, Amnestic Mild Cognitive Impairment; NIA-AA, National Institute on Aging and Alzheimer's Association.



TABLE 5 |
ContinuedStudies There is a significant differences between groups.
MMSE, Mini-Mental State Examination; AD, Alzheimer Disease Group; CG, Control Group; DRS, Dementia Rating Scale; NINCDS-ADRDA, National Institute of Neurological and Communicative Disorders and Stroke and the Alzheimer's Disease and Related Disorders; Association; SW, Same-word condition on the Flanker Task; NR, Neutral-response condition on the Flanker Task; SC, Same-category condition on the Flanker Task; DR, Different-response condition on the Flanker Task; ACC, Accuracy (number of correct response); N/D, Data not available for this variable; MCI, Mild Cognitive Impairment; RT, Reaction Time.