Copper Imbalance in Alzheimer’s Disease and Its Link with the Amyloid Hypothesis: Towards a Combined Clinical, Chemical, and Genetic Etiology
The cause of Alzheimer's disease (AD) is incompletely defined.
To date, no mono-causal treatment has so far reached its primary clinical endpoints, probably due to the complexity and diverse neuropathology contributing to the neurodegenerative process.
In the present paper, we describe the plausible etiological role of copper (Cu) imbalance in the disease.
Cu imbalance is strongly associated with neurodegeneration in dementia, but a complete biochemical etiology consistent with the clinical, chemical, and genetic data is required to support a causative association, rather than just correlation with disease.
We hypothesize that a Cu imbalance in the aging human brain evolves as a gradual shift from bound metal ion pools, associated with both loss of energy production and antioxidant function, to pools of loosely bound metal ions, involved in gain-of-function oxidative stress, a shift that may be aggravated by chemical aging.
We explain how this may cause mitochondrial deficits, energy depletion of high-energy demanding neurons, and aggravated protein misfolding/oligomerization to produce different clinical consequences shaped by the severity of risk factors, additional comorbidities, and combinations with other types of pathology.
Cu imbalance should be viewed and integrated with concomitant genetic risk factors, aging, metabolic abnormalities, energetic deficits, neuroinflammation, and the relation to tau, prion proteins, ␣-synuclein, TAR DNA binding protein-43 (TDP-43) as well as systemic comorbidity.
Specifically, the Amyloid Hypothesis is strongly intertwined with Cu imbalance because amyloid-␤ protein precursor (A␤PP)/A␤ are probable Cu/Zn binding proteins with a potential role as natural Cu/Zn buffering proteins (loss of function), and via the plausible pathogenic role of Cu-A␤.

INTRODUCTION 37
In Alzheimer's disease (AD) and dementia in gen-38 eral, a change is needed to overcome the current dogmatic view of the disease and achieve a better 40 understanding of its etiology to develop effective deficit of episodic memory; deficits are then extended to all the cognitive domains, and behavioral disorders eventually ensue, thereby deeply impacting on activities of daily living.
The detrimental effects of AD span beyond the diagnosed individual and pose challenges also to caregivers and healthcare providers.
The histopathological hallmarks of AD include neurofibrillary tangles of hyperphosphorylated tau protein common to many diseases, and extracellular insoluble deposits of senile plaques consisting of metal-enriched, oxidized, and various isoforms of A␤.
There is broad consensus that age is the primary risk factor for AD onset, making developed countries with a high life expectancy particularly vulnerable to a dementia outbreak
Although the disease has a multifactorial etiology there are causal genetic risk factors of AD.
A␤ is generated by the proteolytic cleavage of the amyloid-␤ protein precursor (A␤PP), a protein involved in important physiological functions like synapse maturation, neural plasticity, and metal-export activity
Fully penetrant mutations on the APP and on the PSEN1 and PSEN2 genes, which encode for the catalytic subunit of the ␥-secretase enzyme that produces A␤ from A␤PP, strongly contribute to the early-onset, familial form of AD (< 65 years) (see
Genetics also play a role in the late-onset, sporadic forms of dementia.
In that regard, harboring the APOE4 allele, encoding the Apolipoprotein E4 isoform involved in cholesterol and A␤ metabolism, is a common high genetic risk factor in individuals > 65 years
Growing evidence supports the notion that many patients present with neuropathological heterogeneity and that mixed neuropathology is typical of the cognitive decline
Thus, dementia results from person-specific combinations of many molecular determinants that work in synergy to produce different clinical entities, modulated by additional comorbidities including, but not limited to, cardiovascular disorders, Type 2 diabetes, and dyslipidemia.
Accordingly, more effort is required to explore the molecular granularity of dementia subtypes.
For instance, besides the different array of neurotoxic proteins [A␤, tau, prion proteins (PrP), ␣-synuclein, TAR DNA binding protein-43 (TDP-43)], the AD brain is also characterized by bioenergetic
The brain is particularly sensitive to aging; our 184 Hypothesis stems from the assumption that aging pro-185 duces, among other disrupting processes, oxidative 186 stress
We also explore the concept that some AD individuals are particularly susceptible to disturbances in Cu ion balance, a phenomenon that accelerates neuronal aging, increases the cost of neuronal maintenance, exhausts neurons and thereby reduce the energy available for their primary function as 50% of the neuronal energy budget is spent on cognitive processing
The Metal Ion Hypothesis
Here, we sharpen this hypothesis into a specific etiology for Cu.
The primary role played by the metal is in line with the Amyloid Hypothesis, since A␤PP/A␤ are well-established Cu (and Zn) binding proteins (in vitro)
The importance of Cu dysregulation is supported by recent studies showing the different activity played by the diverse species (bound and non-bound to proteins) of peripheral Cu
About 75-95% of total serum Cu binds strongly and inertly to ceruloplasmin, while about 5-10% circulates in a weaker and more labile form, being exchanged among various protein compounds
On this basis, these Cu complexes have been defined as non-ceruloplasmin Cu (non-Cp Cu), a clinical biomarker applied to Wilson's disease (WD), a paradigmatic disorder of Cu toxicosis and accumulation
Non-Cp Cu has been historically defined as 'free' Cu, yet really 'free' Cu does not exist (it is probably at the attomolar levels at best).
This non-Cp Cu pool is likely superimposable with the exchangeable Cu-pool, i.e., the pool that exchanges with added Cu (radioactive tracer or stable isotope) or can be withdrawn with a chelator such as EDTA in minutes/hours time frame
The main constituent of this non-Cp pool is serum albumin
It has a N-terminal Cubinding site with a K d of 0.1 pM
Thus Cu(II)-binding is moderately strong and kinetically labile compared to Cp
The terminology of non-Cp Cu is tissue specific and refers to serum/plasma.
It represents the primary species responsible for Cu transport from blood into the brain, crossing the blood-brain barrier (BBB)
To maintain the link with its historical and clinical application in WD, we will use the term non-Cp Cu referring to serum/plasma and 'labile' Cu for the same biological entity in the brain.

Cu IN PHYSIOLOGY: FOCUS ON THE

BRAIN
Cu is an essential metal necessary for brain development and physiology.
Severe Cu deficiencies are associated with immune, cardiac, bone, and central nervous system conditions, whereas Cu chronic excess is primarily associated with liver damage.
Like Fe, Cu is a transition metal, that can transfer electrons and, as a redox catalyst, is necessary for the activity of many enzymes.
Cells make use of Cu for mitochondria respiration, blood cell line maturation, immune responses, wound healing, myelin sheath formation, and it is an important mediator for neurotransmitter synthesis and synaptic activity modulation
Cu balance is determined by the rates of dietary absorption from food, supplements, drinking water and other beverages, and excretion through bile and stools
Cu absorption, distribution, and homeostasis in the brain are tightly controlled, with the neurovascular unit and the BBB playing an essential role in the process (Fig.
Human Cu trans-     Small intestine absorption (left box).
Cu ingested through the diet is absorbed by small intestine enterocyte.
The integral membrane protein hCTR1 imports Cu.
The metal is then loaded onto Cu-dependent enzymes via several chaperone proteins (not shown).
ATPase7A (ATP7A) pumps Cu out of the enterocyte basolateral membrane.
Cu, bound to albumin, ␣2 macroglobulin, or amino acids, is then transported to the liver through the portal vein.
Liver absorption (middle box).
The liver plays an essential role in Cu storage, metabolism, and distribution.
hCTR1 promotes hepatocytes Cu uptake.
In the liver, ATPase7B (ATP7B), the homologue of enterocyte ATPase7A, incorporates Cu into ceruloplasmin (Cp).
Under physiological conditions 85-95% of total Cu is bound to Cp. Cp-Cu is then released into the bloodstream for systemic distribution.
10-15% of Cu is released in bloodstream as non-Cp Cu.
Brain metabolism (right box).
The intersection between the blood-brain barrier (BBB) and the neurovascular unit (NU) is critical for brain Cu regulation.
In close analogy with the small intestine and the liver, hCTR1 controls Cu absorption into endothelial cells and astrocytes.
Conversely, ATPase7A and ATPase7B regulate metal efflux from endothelial cells to the interstitial fluid or the blood flow, respectively.
Within the astrocytic feet, ATPase7B loads Cu into glycosylphosphatidylinositol-linked ceruloplasmin (GPI-Cp), a process that is instrumental for controlling intracellular Cu concentrations.
The pump is also involved in Cu extrusion from astrocytes for metal distribution to neurons.
ATP7B, respectively.
These human genetic disorders Cu levels are also associated to several complex dis-292 eases, spanning from myocardial infarction, stroke, 293 cardiovascular death

A␤ DYSREGULATION, AND Cu

TARGETING TREATMENTS IN AD
Many findings indicate that Cu dyshomeostasis plays a critical part in AD
The metal has a direct role in amyloid pathology by promoting A␤ aggregation.
On the other hand, Cu sequestration by plaques may render the cation unavailable for key biological functions
This scenario is further complicated by Cu-related loss and gain of function mechanisms.
In line with the Amyloid Hypothesis, ␤-site A␤PPcleaving enzyme (BACE1), the enzyme that catalyzes the rate-limiting step in the amyloidogenic processing of A␤PP, binds strongly to the Cu Chaperone for Superoxide Dismutase (CCS)
CCS is the chaperone that delivers Cu to superoxide dismutase-1 (SOD-1) a Cu-dependent cytosolic scavenging enzyme; therefore, high levels of BACE1, by binding to CCS, can decrease the amount of CCS available for SOD1 activation
A Cu-enriched diet was initially reported to increase the brain metal levels and counteract the decreased SOD-1 activity observed in A␤PP transgenic mice
In the same transgenic animals, Cu treatment lowers brain A␤ production long before the induction of detectable reductions in A␤ plaques, implying that A␤PP functions/assists in Cu export
However, a phase II clinical Fig.
Under healthy conditions, a biological system (black rectangle, e.g., a cell, an organism or organ) needs Cu bound to proteins (target protein, purple) for essential functions.
An uptake and secretion system assures the correct Cu concentration in the system and correct Cu trafficking (plain arrows).
In Wilson's disease, the secretion is reduced.
An accumulation of Cu in the system occurs and Cu ions bind to non-target proteins (hollow green square), where it gains function, e,g., Cu catalyzed production of reactive oxygen species (ROS).
In Menkes disease, Cu deficiency occurs due to impaired Cu-uptake.
No Cu arrives on the target proteins and a loss of essential function is observed.
In AD, Cu uptake and secretion seem to be less affected and keep a certain control over total bulk Cu-content of the system.
But a Cu-imbalance occurs in the system, by moving Cu from target proteins (loss of essential function) to pools of loosely bound Cu ions (gain of toxic function, e.g., ROS production).
The therapeutic approach would be to re-equilibrate by transferring Cu back to the essential Cu-target proteins.
and further confirmed by AD transgenic models employing the same paradigm (review in
The paradigm consists of 9-12 months exposure to 1.3 ppm Cu in drinking water that raises non-Cp Cu in bloodstream
The parallel with preclinical models is particularly evident for a subset of AD patients

U n c o r r e c t e d A u t h o r P r o o f
plaques and learning deficits
Furthermore, ischemic episodes in the brain might trigger mechanisms of exporting Cu from the brain to the blood mediated by COMMD1 as recently depicted in myocardial infarction
However, the main hypothesis explaining Cu imbalance as it emerges from the meta-analysis data (Fig.
AD and WD have diverse etiologies with WD being a monogenic, Cu-dependent disease
Complex diseases, however, such as AD, have a global susceptibility that is influenced by genetic heterogeneity.
The heterogeneity can explain 'portions' of susceptibility.
The evidence that genetic variants identified on ATP7B gene are statistically associated with an increased AD risk

IMPLICATIONS OF NON-CP Cu EXCESS
The Hypothesis posits that an age-driven Cu imbalance resulting in a gradual shift from protein-bound metal ion pools to pools of loosely bound metal ions drives a bloodstream non-Cp Cu excess in AD
Non-Cp Cu is bound with moderate affinity (K d ∼ 0.1 pM) and relatively labile mainly to albumin, but also ␣2-macroglobulin, peptides (45 kDa proteins with unknown identity referred as small Cu carriers), and amino acids and exchanged among them
This Cu can be redox-active, and if expanded (> 1.6 mol/L) becomes toxic, crossing the BBB, as exemplified in WD (Fig.
In AD patients, levels of non-Cp Cu reach values that are commonly found in WD
We can then hypothesize a blood-to-brain inward flux of Cu, fueled by non-Cp Cu that can diffuse
The Cu efflux associated to A␤PP function could in principle contribute to the reduction of A␤ concentrations in the CSF
A␤ buffering for Cu labile excess-binding and precipitating the metal in amyloid plaques-removing it from the CSF
a Apo-ceruloplasmin: The incorrect loading of Cu into nascent hepatic ceruloplasmin because of ATP7B mutations causing a defective ATPase7B protein generates the inactive serum apo-form of ceruloplasmin that is rapidly fragmented.
b D-penicillamine challenge test is a screening test for asymptomatic WD patients (generally in pediatric age); cut-off of 200 g/24 h (5x ULN).
c Kayser-Fleischer rings: Cu deposition in the Descemet's membrane of the cornea pathognomonic of WD. d Paradoxical effect upon D-penicillamine treatment: serious "iatrogenic" deterioration with increase of the neurological symptoms, thought to be caused by a frantic mobilization and redistribution of Cu which results in high Cu level in the brain and in the blood.
AD, Alzheimer's disease; CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; Cu, copper; MCI, mild cognitive impairment; Non-Cp, non-ceruloplasmin; PET, positron emission tomography; ULN, upper limit of normal; WD, Wilson's disease.
in the CSF can be envisaged as an additional process that might restrain the increase in labile Cu if the inward Cu flux in the AD brain would be considered an enduring condition, mirroring WD, resulting in a continuous supply of the Cu brain reservoir.
Of note, Cu dysregulation also affects Fe metabolism via crosstalk with ceruloplasmin as the protein manages both metal ions
In contrast to WD, there is no evidence of a general drop of ceruloplasmin serum levels in AD
However, reduced activity
This phe-  There is also growing evidence that Cu toxicity, among the chemical mechanisms, is used as a weapon by the immune system [99, 100].
Although not fully understood, these roles reinforce and complement the pathways previously described.

OBSERVATIONAL DATA SUPPORTING THE CuAD HYPOTHESIS
The extent of Cu imbalance in AD can be appreciated through meta-analysis of the multiple AD studies performed on Cu in serum/plasma and brain specimens from 1984 till July 2020 (Fig.
The that is toxic and should almost certainly have a biological effect.
Interestingly, these alterations resemble those occurring in WD (Table
Some WD-like Cu-related alterations are present in a subset of AD patients who can be set apart from the general pool of AD subjects by taking into account non-Cp Cu levels that are higher than 1.6 mol/L, the designed cut-off (Table
CuAD patients, when compared to AD  This can be at least partly explained by the ten-651 dency of genome-wide association studies to be less 652 effective in detecting these types of multiple rare vari-

653
ants, yet these are variants plausibly exist as they 654 are required to account for the missing hereditabil-655 ity of complex diseases, as discussed elsewhere for 656 the ATP7B gene

657
We also expect that chemical and biochemical Despite plausible answers to these critical questions, the new Hypothesis is not able to provide a definitive answer for the selective vulnerability that implies an anatomical brain region specificity associated with the syndrome, although we note that the hippocampus is one of the most vulnerable brain regions, particularly fragile to ischemia insults
The same holds for the pattern of progression of the disease and for how and when the clinical manifestations become related to the pathophysiology; these questions remain hypothetical at this point and substantial work is required to explore them.

LINKAGE TO OTHER MAJOR THEORIES
We have argued that metal ion and amyloid dyshomeostasis are manifestations of the same underlying etiology.
As we discussed above, they are, in fact, strongly intertwined because of the key interaction between A␤PP/A␤ and Cu and Zn.
As metal ions need to be tightly controlled, it is not surprising that the delicate A␤PP/A␤ balance is a connecting link between the Amyloid and the Metal Ion Hypotheses.

The Metal Hypothesis

756
As previously reported, A␤ has the ability to bind 757 Cu and in vivo Cu is bound to A␤ in the amy-758 loid-plaques (Fig.
765
The Amyloid Hypothesis 766
The self-assembly of A␤ has been regarded as  and also binds to A␤
Furthermore, Cu can affect 796 ␣-synuclein functioning, the protein is localized at 797 the synapse, and Cu 2+ , via oxidative stress, can con-798 tribute to its oligomerization and fibrillation as well 799 as the formation of Lewy's bodies
The main "zero hypothesis" against our hypothesis would be that the Amyloid Hypothesis is correct and that Cu imbalance is not causative but rather a downstream consequence of a global neurodegenerative cascade.
We note that there are many theories (oxidative stress, tau, amyloid, different metal ions, metabolism, inflammation) and our view is that none of them is entirely wrong or right, but reflect a complex pathology with multifaceted clinical manifestations; we expect the underlying biochemical pathways to overlap and be aggravated by aging.
Cu plays a role in at least a subset of these cases but not necessarily all.
A direct counterargument could be that no Cu transporters are direct genetic risk factors of AD.
We argue that this is not ruling out the hypothesis because ATP7B variants do confer risk in a subset of patients and A␤PP/PS1 variants relate to the processing of a peptide that could be a Cu binding peptide if the hypothesis is right-indeed the work by Multhaup and coworkers suggests that A␤PP functions as a Cu transporter so that would counter the "lack of genetic support argument" as A␤PP variants are a main cause of familial AD
In summary, the accumulated body of evidence supports the idea that metal dysregulation is a crucial player in the neurodegeneration associated with dementia, not just a consequence, although much remains to be done to explore this hypothesis further.
Metal ion imbalances, energy depletion of highenergy demand neurons, oxidative stress, and protein misfolding work in concert to produce disease phenotypes (Fig.
Cu imbalance has a very strong and



Fig. 1 .
Fig. 1.
Examples of structurally established Cu-and Zn-binding sites in A␤PP and A␤.
A) Zn 2+ site in E2 domain of A␤PP (3UMI) and zoom on the Zn 2+ binding site (made of three His residues and one water molecule).
B) Cu-Binding Domain (CuBD) of A␤PP (2FK1) and zoom on the Cu 2+ binding site (made of two His, one Tyr residues, and two water molecules).
C) Zn 2+ binding site in A␤ (made of two His residues, and two carboxylate-containing residues).
D) Cu 2+ binding site in A␤ (made of two His residues, the N-terminal amine and the adjacent CO form the peptide bond).
Green dot: Zn 2+ , purple dot: Cu 2+ (models proposed based on spectroscopic studies as recently reviewed in [102]).



porter 1 (280
hCTR1), Cu-transporting P-type ATPase 7A (ATPase7A), and ATPase7B Cu-transporting P-type (ATPase 7B) regulate brain Cu levels.
The choroid plexus harvests and releases Cu in the cerebrospinal 263 fluid (CSF), the fluid that surrounds the brain (range 264 between 0.5 and 2.5 mol/L).
In rat choroid plexus, 265 Cu is up-taken from the non-Cp Cu(II)-pool in the 266 blood into the brain in its ionic Cu(I) form.
Hence 267 a reduction step from Cu(II) to Cu(I) is needed 268 [40].
hCTR1 transports Cu(I) from the bloodstream 269 to endothelial cells and astrocytes.
On the con-270 trary, ATPase7A and ATPase7B extrude Cu from 271 endothelial cells to the interstitial fluid or the blood-272 stream, respectively.
ATPase7B also contributes to 273 Cu loading into glycosylphosphatidylinositol-linked 274 ceruloplasmin (GPI-Cp), thereby keeping intra-275 cellular Cu concentrations under control [2, 42] Mutations in the genes encoding for proteins 281 involved in the Cu pathway results in several 282 hereditary diseases (



Fig. 2 .
Fig.2.
Mechanisms of Cu absorption and distribution in physiology.
The pictogram illustrates a concise overview of Cu metabolism in humans.
Small intestine absorption (left box).
Cu ingested through the diet is absorbed by small intestine enterocyte.
The integral membrane protein hCTR1 imports Cu.
The metal is then loaded onto Cu-dependent enzymes via several chaperone proteins (not shown).
ATPase7A (ATP7A) pumps Cu out of the enterocyte basolateral membrane.
Cu, bound to albumin, ␣2 macroglobulin, or amino acids, is then transported to the liver through the portal vein.
Liver absorption (middle box).
The liver plays an essential role in Cu storage, metabolism, and distribution.
hCTR1 promotes hepatocytes Cu uptake.
In the liver, ATPase7B (ATP7B), the homologue of enterocyte ATPase7A, incorporates Cu into ceruloplasmin (Cp).
Under physiological conditions 85-95% of total Cu is bound to Cp. Cp-Cu is then released into the bloodstream for systemic distribution.
10-15% of Cu is released in bloodstream as non-Cp Cu.
Brain metabolism (right box).
The intersection between the blood-brain barrier (BBB) and the neurovascular unit (NU) is critical for brain Cu regulation.
In close analogy with the small intestine and the liver, hCTR1 controls Cu absorption into endothelial cells and astrocytes.
Conversely, ATPase7A and ATPase7B regulate metal efflux from endothelial cells to the interstitial fluid or the blood flow, respectively.
Within the astrocytic feet, ATPase7B loads Cu into glycosylphosphatidylinositol-linked ceruloplasmin (GPI-Cp), a process that is instrumental for controlling intracellular Cu concentrations.
The pump is also involved in Cu extrusion from astrocytes for metal distribution to neurons.



286of
Cu transport reveal the importance of main-287 taining an appropriate Cu homeostasis and provide 288 insight into abnormalities in the Cu pathway in AD 289 (Fig. 3).
290 Abnormalities in Cu, ceruloplasmin, and non-Cp291



1 )
nomenon might be explained by loss of functional Cu sites required for iron oxidation, or by oxidationinduced changes such as asparagine deamination of ceruloplasmin occurring with aging
In support of this view, variant alleles in the functional single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) ATP7B rs732774 505 and rs1061472
According to these new findings, a 509 shift from bound to labile Cu may be pathogenic in 510 several ways: 511 By its participation in uncontrolled redox-512 cycling reactions, Cu-A␤ complex promotes 513 oxidative stress: Cu-A␤ has the ability to pro-514 duce reactive oxygen species (ROS) on its own, 515 [86] due to an ill-controlled environment, while 516 Cu in enzymes, such as Cu,Zn SOD, have a 517 tightly controlled coordination sphere and thus 518 participate in ROS detoxification.
Hence, Cu-519 A␤ complex participates in oxidative stress via



Fig. 4 . 2 ) 3 ) 4 ) 5 )
Fig.4.
Meta-analyses of Cu in AD.
The table depicts standardized mean difference (SMD) computed from studies performed in AD patients and healthy controls on Cu brain specimens (g/g; A); Cu serum/plasma levels (mol/L; B); and serum non-Cp Cu (mol/L; C).
SMDs between patients and controls are represented by squares, whose sizes are proportional to the sample size of the relative study.
The whiskers represent the 95% confidence interval (CI).
The diamond represents the pooled estimate based on the random-effects model, with the center representing the point estimate and the width the associated 95% CI.
A) Results indicate that AD subjects had lower levels of Cu in the brain than healthy controls [SMD = -0.77
(95% CI -1.09, -0.44); p < 0.001]; there was substantial heterogeneity among the included studies (I 2 = 58.97%;
p < 0.001).
B) AD subjects had higher levels of Cu in serum than healthy controls [SMD = 0.64 (95% CI 0.30, 0.98); p < 0.001]; there was considerable heterogeneity among the included studies (I 2 = 95.96%;
p < 0.001).
Studies from the Fatebenefratelli research group
C) Results indicate that AD subjects had higher levels of non-Cp Cu than healthy controls (SMD = 0.60 (95% CI 0.36, 0.83; p < 0.001); there was considerable heterogeneity among the included studies (I 2 = 81.5%;
p < 0.001).


meta-analysis showed decreased values of Cu in the brain (pooled total of 182 AD and 166 healthy controls, Fig.4A), coexisting with increased values of non-Cp Cu in the blood (pooled total of 985 AD and 1325 healthy controls, Fig.4C), a phenomenon that can explain the reported increased serum values of total Cu (pooled total of 2,749 AD and 3,394 healthy controls, Fig.4B).
On average, data extrapolated from the literature indicate a decrease of Cu in the brain by about 24% and an increase of Cu in the blood by about 7%, while non-Cp Cu doubles, consistent with an overall Cu imbalance that supports our Hypothesis of a shift away from functional protein-bound Cu to pools of loosely bound metal ions (i.e., non-Cp Cu)



612 individuals, show distinct electroencephalographic 613 (
EEG)-derived cortical brain rhythms, further sup-614 porting the idea of an AD subtype characterized by Cu 615 abnormalities.
Moreover, CuAD individuals display 616 less severe burden of global atrophy, and increased 617 frequency of ATP7B rs732774 and rs1061472 [2].
, we have acquired new experimen-621 tal and theoretical tools to address several of the 622 challenges of the Hypothesis, even though a lot of 623 questions remain open.
624 Addressing current knowledge gaps in metal 625 imbalance: future experiments and validation 626 studies 627 Meta-analysis is a quantitative, formal, epidemio-628 logical study design tool employed to systematically 629 assess the results of previous research and infer 630 conclusions about that body of research.
Future meta-631 analysis studies focused on Zn and Fe in human 632 serum/plasma and brain specimens may expand fur-633 ther the imbalance of these two metals that act in 634 close synergy with Cu, i.e., via ceruloplasmin and 635 MTs [29].
636 Another gap relies in the exact role played by 637 the genes encoding for enzymes/transporters that 638 control Cu balance.
The metal gene scouting of 639 patients exhibiting Cu imbalance, using a sequenc-640 ing hypothesis-driven approach can be a valid tool 641 to disentangle their real prevalence in the disease, 642 weighing for the relative frequencies of more and less 643 pathogenic (and penetrant) variants.
Our Hypothesis 644 posits that variants in ATP7B and other gene per-645 taining to the Cu pathway may infer a percentage 646 of the risk of sporadic AD [85].
Previous genome-647 wide association studies [101], failed to identify a 648 significant association between AD and the above-649 mentioned SNPs in the ATP7B chromosomal region.


650



658
studies focused on the interplay between Cu and A␤ will continue to expand our knowledge of the link 660 between these two molecular AD drivers.
We expect 661 Cu to bind to many peptides with moderate affinity as 662 those reported for A␤ (in the nM range) due to flexible 663 environment provided by peptides.
However, A␤ is 664 a known Cu-binding peptide in amyloid plaques and 665 tends to localize in the synapses where the pathol-666 ogy primarily occur, thereby supporting a possible 667 (although still hypothetical) Cu-A␤ relationship in 668 vivo [29, 102].
Developing Cu-targeting molecules 669 can also document, although indirectly, the relation 670 between A␤ and Cu.
671 Disease progression and biomarkers 672 A key, and still unmet challenge in AD is the 673 identification of biomarkers for early diagnosis or 674 for patient stratification as a personalized medicine 675 approach aimed to stratify individuals for tailoring 676 the right therapeutic strategy for the right person at 677 the right time [103].
Metabolic defects are among the 678 first events in AD, according to current biomarker 679 models [104], with early glucose utilization and 680 positron emission tomography anomalies, followed 681 later by tau dysfunction.
We propose that metal imbal-682 ance may be part of this sequence of events.
However, 683 the temporal dynamics remain largely unexplored.
It 684 is still unclear if metal ion dyshomeostasis precedes 685 amyloid pathology as well as other AD-related abnor-686 malities.
To monitor metal imbalance, we assume a 687 continuous disease progression from a state in which 688 almost all Cu is bound as functional pools to a state 689 in which more Cu becomes "free" and toxic (e.g., 690 non-Cp Cu and labile Cu).
Longitudinal studies eval-691 uating A␤ pathology together with metal biomarkers 692 such as non-Cp Cu, Cu/Cp ratio, Cu/SOD-1, and MTs 693 levels are warranted.
Along this line, alterations of 694 ceruloplasmin levels in the CSF have been shown to 695 predict cognitive decline and brain atrophy in people 696 with underlying A␤ pathology [105].
Furthermore, 697 previous studies reported that non-Cp Cu is a strati-698 fication biomarker [106], and can be employed as a 699 prognostic biomarker for conversion from mild cog-700 nitive impairment (MCI) to symptomatic AD [2].
On 701 this basis non-Cp Cu can serve as an inclusion crite-702 rion for eligibility assessment in early clinical trials 703 testing anti-Cu based therapy.
704 Treatment 705 The ultimate challenge in AD is to treat causally.
706 Mirroring WD, a Zn-based therapy could be used 707 to correct the Cu imbalance: a proof-of-concept phase II clinical in MCI trial using non-Cp Cu > than 1.6 mol/L as an inclusion criterion for eligibility is started in April 2021 (ZINCAiD, EudraCT 2019-000604-15, funded by the Alzheimer's Association).
An additional benefit associated with the administration of Zn is that the metal is a powerful driver for neurotrophic signaling and neuronal plasticity as it promoted the maturation of the brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) from pro-BDNF through the activation of Zn-dependent Matrix metallopeptidases [107, 108].
It has also become clear that it is important to leave the Zn in place and hence in chelation therapy targeting weakly and A␤-bound Cu, selective Cu chelators are required [109, 110].
Other approaches envisage the normalization of brain cell Cu homeostasis through the development of targeted Cu delivery drugs.
High-affinity, cell-permeable Cu chelators have the potential to enter brain cells and interfere with normal metal homeostasis [111].
The major challenge of any such therapeutics is to control and fine-tune the localization of effects like, for instance, avoiding unwanted stripping of Cu from essential proteins or mitochondria or the delivery of Cu to amyloid.



759
genes involved in its buildup and processing, A␤PP, 760 PSEN1/PSEN2 coalesce with other molecular deter-761 minants to favor the disease development.
We 762



767 43 778
an important process in AD etiology and the ori-768 gin of the toxicity has shifted from the amyloid 769 plaques to intermediate-size aggregates via a vari-770 ety of mechanisms [114]: Cu might stabilize such 771 oligomeric species [87, 115].
This might provide such 772 an explanation of the failure of clinical trials aiming 773 at eliminating the peptide since the disappearance of 774 amyloid plaques could drive the equilibrium between 775 deposits and the soluble state towards the oligomeric 776 species regarded as more toxic.
777 Relation to tau, prions, α-synuclein, and TDP-Tau dysfunction severely affects many key aspects 779 of neuronal functioning like axonal transport, mito-780 chondria respiration, synapse integrity and protein 781 turnover [116].
Cu can also contribute to Tau 782 pathology.
In that regard, Cu dysfunction alters tau 783 phosphorylation through several mechanisms and 784 primarily by chronic Cu exposure that accelerates 785 tau phosphorylation by inducing hydrogen peroxide 786 production [117].
787 Cu is also involved in prion-like mechanisms of 788 disease progression.
The PrP is a glycoprotein located 789 at synapses.
PrP Sc is the aggregated form and consid-790 ered the agent of prion disease [118].
PrP can bind 791 up to five Cu(II) atoms, and the Cu(II)-PrP complex 792 facilitates PrP internalization within the cell as well as 793 PrP conversion to PrP Sc .
At glutamatergic synapses, 794 the Cu-PrP complex modulates neurotransmission


795



800
Finally, TDP-43 is a pathological protein asso-801 ciated with sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, 802 frontotemporal lobar degeneration with ubiquitinated inclusions (FLTD-U), and the Limbic-predominant Age-related TDP-43 Encephalopathy, or LATE, a newly discovered form of dementia
The abnormal C-terminal fragments of TDP-43 are ubiquitinated, hyperphosphorylated, and accumulate as cellular inclusions in neurons and glia, thereby helping the production of neurodegenerative processes.
Changes in metal homeostasis of Zn, Cu, and Mn (manganese) have been described in the TDP-43A315T mouse model that exhibits increased metal levels, specifically in the spinal cord
Age driven loss of function is implied in the Hypothesis from improper recruitment of Cu and Zn into the key protein SOD-1, the scavenging enzyme protecting cells from oxidative metabolism byproduct generated by mitochondria and one of the few proteins known to enhance rodent life span
Impaired anti-aging defenses, exemplified by direct loss of SOD-1 function, is an appealing, simple etiology that immediately includes the age risk factor [9, 29].Our hypothesis may also help to find a causative link between disease progression and oxidative stress:In addition to the loss of SOD-1 function, labile Cu can also directly trigger oxidative stress by Fentontype reactions, and thus the proposed shift from functional protein-bound Cu to labile Cu is a twoedged sword against oxidative stress balance, a key feature of aging.
The axonal terminals and secretory granules, as well as the synaptic cleft, is highly enriched with Cu (up to 100 mol/L) upon glutamatergic neurotransmission and is a primary and early target of AD-related pathogenic mechanisms
These processes have been linked to non-Cp Cu excess associated neurophysiological abnormalities
Neurons are among the most energydemanding cells in the body.
Thus, if Cu and Fe are lost from cytochrome C oxidase and SOD-1, mitochondrial energy production can be severely impaired, thereby leaving less energy available for protein turnover, which could explain both the presence of various protein lesions as well as the accumulation of lysosomal proteins in AD and related diseases, but also provide a causal relationship to the ultimate culprit of AD which may be the extremely energy-demanding neuronal execution [127, 128].


appealing explanatory power both in terms of loss of physiological function and gain of pathological function etiologies.
We expect substantial individual variations in clinical presentation and etiology, depending on the pathology that first occurs and confounding risk modifiers, but the already observed strong evidence for Cu imbalance cannot reasonably be assumed to have zero effect on the already vulnerable patient, regardless of the exact contribution



Fig. 5 . 5 ,
Fig. 5. Model of A␤, glutamate, oxidative stress, and ionic dyshomeostasis in AD pathogenesis.
The figure depicts A␤, oxidative stress, excitotoxicity, and Cu +/2+ dyshomeostasis acting synergistically to promote synaptic dysfunction and neuronal loss.
Excessive glutamate builds up in the synaptic cleft (1) leads to prolonged activation of NMDA receptor, aberrant neuronal Ca 2+ accumulation (2), and induces Cu-ATPase7A/B (ATP7A/B) translocation (3) at synapses where vesicular Cu is released.
The released Cu 2+ (in concentrations up to 100 mol/L) may inhibit NMDA receptors, thereby protecting neurons from glutamatergic excitotoxicity (4), or catalyze Fenton-type reaction, thereby promoting reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation (5).
Enhanced ROS production damages proteins, lipids, nucleic acids, and eventually leads to cell death (5).
Ca 2+ overload increases superoxide anion (O 2 • -) production from mitochondria (6), and nitric oxide (NO) generation via Ca 2+ -dependent activation of NO synthase (NOS) (7).
Reactive oxygen and nitrosative (RNS) species, as well as ROS, mobilize Cu from Cu-proteins [such as Atox1, metallothionein 3 (MT3)] increasing intracellular toxic Cu concentrations (8), and promoting mitochondrial dysfunction and the release of pro-apoptotic factors from the organelles (9).
ROSdriven Cu mobilization from Cu-proteins and metal release from mitochondria can further aggravate oxidative stress and initiate Ab oligomerization (10).
Altered trafficking of A␤PP and/or elevated A␤ oligomer secretion can generate intracellular Cu + deficiency, thereby causing oxidative stress by loss of SOD-1 function (11).
A␤, ␣-synuclein, and PrP can modulate neurotransmission as [Cu 2 + ] buffers within the synaptic cleft or amplify the vicious cycle by further promoting ROS generation
Excess Non-Cp Cu in the bloodstream is a source for the buildup of labile Cu 2+ in the interstitial space promoting ATPase7A/B translocation of Cu 2+ into vesicles of the trans-Golgi network and endoplasmic reticulum (ER) (13).
These processes critically occurring at the level of dendritic spines, within the synaptic cleft, and in the neurovascular unit, can be the primum movens of synaptic dysfunction, neuronal deafferentation, and eventually cell death.



Table



Table 1
Hereditary diseases associated to genes encoding for proteins involved in Cu pathway


reinforced



Table 2 A
subset of Alzheimer's disease patients shares biochemical features/clinical traits with Wilson's disease