Environmental Enrichment Effects on the Brain-Derived Neurotrophic Factor Expression in Healthy Condition, Alzheimer’s Disease, and Other Neurodegenerative Disorders
Brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), a protein belonging to the neurotrophin family, is known to be heavily involved in synaptic plasticity processes that support brain development, post-lesion regeneration, and cognitive performances, such as learning and memory.
Evidence indicates that BDNF expression can be epigenetically regulated by environmental stimuli and thus can mediate the experience-dependent brain plasticity.
Environmental enrichment (EE), an experimental paradigm based on the exposure to complex stimulations, constitutes an efficient means to investigate the effects of highlevel experience on behavior, cognitive processes, and neurobiological correlates, as the BDNF expression.
In fact, BDNF exerts a key role in mediating and promoting EE-induced plastic changes and functional improvements in healthy and pathological conditions.
This review is specifically aimed at providing an updated framework of the available evidence on the EE effects on brain and serum BDNF levels, by taking into account both changes in protein expression and regulation of gene expression.
A further purpose of the present review is analyzing the potential of BDNF regulation in coping with neurodegenerative processes characterizing Alzheimer's disease (AD), given BDNF expression alterations are described in AD patients.
Moreover, attention is also paid to EE effects on BDNF expression in other neurodegenerative disease.
To investigate such a topic, evidence provided by experimental studies is considered.
A deeper understanding of environmental ability in modulating BDNF expression in the brain may be fundamental in designing more tuned and effective applications of complex environmental stimulations as managing approaches to AD.

NEUROPLASTICITY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ENRICHMENT
Neuroplasticity is the ability of nervous system to change its structure and function as a result of the experience
Such a brain prerogative is the basis of its ability to successfully adapt to the environment, a fundamental property in both ordinary learning processes and extraordinary phases, such as those linked to brain development and repair
Accordingly, evidence has been provided that individuals with dissimilar life experiences differently cope with brain damage and degeneration.
This concept has been structured in the reserve hypothesis
Such a cerebral reserve is developed at three levels, such as: brain reserve -referred to the structural equipment of an individual, consisting of brain volume, number and morphological features of neurons, glial cells, and synapses, circulatory and neurotransmitter systems, etc.; cognitive reserve -referred to cognitive strategies engaged in performances and tasks; neural reserve -referred to the efficient recruitment of neural circuitries
More recently, another level has been added, namely the brain maintenance, referred to the ability of maintaining the nervous system integrity
Three experiential factors have been identified as the ones that potentiate the nervous system structure and function: the social factor -regarding all the ties that insert an individual in a thick social network (such as familiar status, friendship, etc.)
To investigate the effects of the experience on the nervous system, the three enlisted experiential factors are mimicked in animal studies by using the classical experimental paradigm of environmental enrichment (EE), which is based on advanced social, cognitive, and physical stimulations
Such a protocol is commonly used with rodents, by enhancing laboratory housing condition on several dimensions in order to mimic the three human lifestyle factors that are indicated as reserve-builders.
The rearing in groups of animals more numerous than the regular ones mimics the social factor; the complex and always-changing a very complex structure that encompasses eleven 178 different exons in humans and nine different exons in rodents.
However, in both humans and rodents only the last exon-that is the exon IX-is the coding one at the 3 -end
Anyway, nine of the eleven exons contain nine alternative promoters, in both humans and rodents.
This quite exceptional characteristic of BDNF gene has probably the role to finely regulate its complex expression in both spatial and temporal sense
In fact, the existence of multiple promoters determines tissuespecific expression of BDNF transcripts
In the brain, all exons are expressed, but different degrees of expression are found in different regions and in different developmental stages
Moreover, the multiple promoters support the high and specific responsiveness of BDNF to a large variety of environmental stimuli, on the basis of a number of regulatory elements recruiting proper transcription factors that modulate their activity.
As a consequence, since BDNF promoters mediate differential BDNF isoform expression in diverse brain areas, the environmentinduced changes in their activity are able to modulate cellular and behavioral phenotypes
A fundamental epigenetic mechanism involved in BDNF gene expression regulation is DNA methylation, which is able to modulate gene silencing throughout lifespans by triggering dynamic and reversible processes.
A relevant role in this process has been attributed to the methyl-CpG-binding protein 2 (MeCP2), which is able to act on chromatin structure by recruiting transcriptional repressor complexes in an activity-dependent manner
Moreover, in consequence of environmental stimulations BDNF expression levels are also modulated by histone post-translational modifications, mediated by a number of processes, such as methylation and acetylation
Post-transcriptional regulation of BDNF mRNA levels may be mediated by noncoding RNAs, such as microRNAs.
In fact, the BDNF 3'-untraslated region contains up to twenty binding sites for thirteen different families of microRNAs that can modulate BDNF mRNA expression and protein synthesis
At the translational level, the BDNF protein is firstly synthesized in the endoplasmic reticulum as a precursor protein, the pre-pro-BDNF, that is successively converted in pro-BDNF by the cleavage of its signal
However, it has been advanced that four different pre-pro-BDNF protein isoforms could be synthesized, showing different length of the pre-domain according to the transcribed exon.
The length of the pre-domain may be able to affect the experiences (physical exercise, cognitive training, etc.) are able to modulate BDNF expression, in human studies, evidence is controversial
Taking into account the significance of this topic and the confounding data present in literature, we systematically analyze the effects of environmental stimulations on BDNF expression.
It is important to consider that only in animal studies it is possible to manipulate genetic and environmental factors independently from each other and therefore disentangle the single environmental factors that may influence the direction of the changes in brain BDNF levels.
Thus, it appears just an occasion in which it is worth following the approach "from bedside to bench and back to bedside": the brain and cognitive reserve hypothesis (developed in humans) is modeled in animals to achieve a high-level control of the involved variables; then, evidence obtained in animal models can provide useful indications to be applied in human pathology.
On such a basis, the present review has collected and synthesized the evidence on EE effects on brain and serum BDNF expression in animal models, with a particular focus on the effects reported in healthy subjects and AD models, to investigate if the exposure to EE is systematically accompanied by increased BDNF expression in a brain region-specific manner and/or in serum, and which factors influence the association between exposure to EE and BDNF expression in brain and serum.
To provide a broad overview on this topic, a methodical literature search was conducted in Pub-Med, by screening all titles and abstracts obtained by searching for the combination of the "environmental enrichment" OR "enriched environment" AND "brain-derived neurotrophic factor" OR "BDNF" keywords.
Moreover, full texts and reference lists were screened to identify further potentially relevant articles.
Articles fulfilling the following criteria were included in the present overview: 1) as population of interest, we selected rodents, and in particular healthy subjects and AD models; 2) as intervention of interest, we selected the exposure to multidimensional EE or unidimensional EE when the articles presented relevant cases that provide indications on multidimensional EE components' effects; 3) as control group of interest, we selected animal reared in standard laboratory conditions; 4) as outcomes of interest, we selected brain and serum BDNF gene and BDNF protein levels, regardless of the determination method.
No language limitation was selected.
No publication period limitation was selected.
Records indexed up to June 2021 have been screened.
areas analyzed

382
Similarly, increased BDNF protein
After the exposure to EE, enhanced BDNF mRNA expression has been reported in the hypothalamus
A study investigating the effects of singularly manipulating social or physical variables revealed no changes due to the mono-dimensional stimulation, and increased BDNF protein expression after the combined exposure to social and physical enhanced stimulations
As for the cerebellum, both unchanged
An investigation carried out on the entire hind brain area revealed increased BDNF protein levels
When the basal forebrain area has been analyzed, increased BDNF protein expression has been revealed
As for the amygdala, unchanged BDNF gene
As for the striatum, some studies described no effects of EE on BDNF gene and BDNF protein levels
In raphe nuclei, unchanged BDNF gene levels have been found after exposure to EE
Thus, these brain areas might be less involved in BDNF-mediated EE neuroprotective effects.
As for the effect of the exposure to EE on BDNF protein levels in serum, unchanged

ENVIRONMENTAL ENRICHMENT EFFECTS ON BDNF EXPRESSION IN THE PRESENCE OF ALZHEIMER'S DISEASE (AD)
A small proportion (4 out of 35) of the analyzed studies investigated the effects of EE on BDNF levels in rodent models of AD.
Details on data reported are provided in Table
The characterization reported for the environmental enrichment paradigm specifies the variables manipulated, when variations on the classical paradigm (described in the paper) are involved, and in particular when only one enriching variable is manipulated.
Presence or absence of running wheels in the paradigm is recorded; presence or absence of the explicit reporting of novelty manipulation is also recorded.

U n c o r r e c t e d A u t h o r P r o o f
In the four analyzed studies, three AD trans- noting that in three of the studies included in this review
Prolonged (starting from the age of 10 weeks and maintained for about 15 months) exposure to EE increased hippocampal BDNF mRNA levels in female APP23 mice
Conversely, the mere physical stimulation by free access to a running wheel for the same period did not change BDNF The characterization reported for the environmental enrichment paradigm specifies the variables manipulated, when variations on the classical paradigm (described in the paper) are involved, and in particular when only one enriching variable is manipulated.
Presence or absence of running wheels in the paradigm is recorded; presence or absence of the explicit reporting of novelty manipulation is also recorded.
Anyway, when all the available results are considered as a whole, it turns out that the studies that report a decrease in BDNF levels following the exposure to EE are really scarce in comparison to the ones that report an increase.
Thus, a qualitative suggestion that supports the increasing effect of EE on BDNF expression may be advanced, especially for the hippocampus and, even if in a more cautious manner, for the neocortex, cerebellum, and hypothalamus.

U n c o r r e c t e d A u t h o r P r o o f
Nevertheless, even this idea needs to be definitively As for the rodent species, 14 studies have been carried out in rats and 17 studies have been carried out in mice, but inconsistent results are obtained within each species.
The only specific indication that is possible to obtain is that the decreased levels of BDNF expression in amygdala
As for the age of the animals at the start of the exposure to EE, it is worth noting that the studies in which the exposure started at the birth did not find any change in BDNF expression after 8, 10, 15
As for duration of EE exposure, it is possible to note that the hypothalamic BDNF expression increased after 5 to 42 days of exposure to EE
whereas after longer exposures (49 to 360 days) no changes have been reported
To evaluate if habituation to the enriched environmental conditions played a role in eliciting BDNF level changes, the explicit notifications of novelty manipulation in the EE paradigm were evaluated.
Namely, we recorded when the authors explicitly reported that enriching objects were regularly changed throughout the EE period or when the object arrangement was regularly changed in the cages.
Anyway, this factor did not significantly influence BDNF expression, since increased or unchanged BDNF levels have been found after the exposure to EE with or without novelty manipulation, regardless the brain area considered.
Finally, even by considering a key-component of the EE paradigm, namely the presence or absence of physical activity, and in particular of running wheels
It may be interesting to add that in healthy animals, when both the above cited conditions (novelty manipulation and running wheels presence) are met, the hippocampal BDNF levels were always increased



433
genic models are used, namely APP23, 5xFAD, 434 and APPswe/PS1 E9 transgenic mice.
The amyloid 435 precursor protein (APP23) transgenic mouse model 436 is based on the expression of the human APP751 437 with the Swedish double mutation.
APP23 mice are 438 characterized by augmented A␤ plaque formation, 439 neuronal loss, and progressive age-related cognitive 440 decline [107].
5xFAD model exhibits AD hallmarks 441 of amyloid violent burden and cognitive decline 442 already in the early phases [108].
APPswe/PS1 E9 443 model resembles the initial stages of AD, with A␤ 444 deposit appearing from 4 to 6 months of age, and 445 plaques from 9 months [109].
However, it is worth 446



Faherty et al. [ 118 ]
more directly addressed this issue by investigating BDNF expression in the substantia nigra pars compacta and striatum of MPTP-treated female mice previously exposed to EE or only to physical activity (wheel-running) for about 3 months starting at 2-3 months of age.
However, BDNF mRNA levels of MPTP-treated mice were unchanged in both the analyzed regions.
The only significant result found was an EE-induced decrement in substantia nigra pars compacta BDNF mRNA levels (examined by real-time PCR analysis).
More recently, Campêlo et al. [119] investigated the effects of a prolonged EE (from 2 to 5 months of age) on prefrontal cortex and striatum BDNF levels (examined by immunohistochemistry) in male mice submitted to a progressive model of PD (induced by repeated treatment with a low doses of reserpine).
The only significant result found in analyses on combined lesion and EE influences was a lesion-induced decrement in the striatum, while no significant effects of EE were revealed.
Further studies specifically investigated the effects of exercise (treadmill-running) in different models of PD.
Tajiri et al. [120] investigated striatal BDNF protein levels (by western blot analysis) in adult female rats unilaterally treated with 6-hydroxydopamine (6-OHDA) in the striatum and then exposed to compulsive running 5 days a week for 4 weeks.
BDNF levels decreased in the striatum of the lesioned side, but this effect was reversed by exercise.
A concordant result was found by Tuon et al. [121] in unilaterally treated with 6-OHDA adult male rats after the exposure to compulsive running 4 days a week for 8 weeks.
BDNF levels (examined by western blot analysis) decreased in the striatum of lesioned animals, but this effect was not present in previously exercised animals.
Finally, in a study focused on neuroinflammation, which is implied in the development of PD, Wu et al. [122] exposed 2-month-old male mice to compulsive running 5 days a week for 4 was unaffected by the exercise.
As for the BDNF 625 mRNA levels, they were reduced in all the analyzed 626 brain areas of HD mice, and the reduction was rescued 627 by exercise only in the striatum.
628 DISCUSSION 629 On the whole, the framework offered by the liter-630 ature on healthy animals does not allow to achieve 631 a clear indication about the EE effects on BDNF expression, and the hypothesis that EE may induce an increase in brain and serum BDNF expression is not univocally confirmed in any brain areas.


validated.
Moreover, appears to be very interesting to identify factors able to influence the association between EE and BDNF expression.
By splitting up results on BDNF protein and BDNF gene levels, findings appear rather inconsistent in all investigated areas.
A slightly more informative observation may derive by splitting up the results on the basis of the technique used to determine BDNF expression levels.
In fact, when BDNF expression was determined by means of immunohistochemistry, univocal results in two brain areas are obtained.
Namely, Bardi et al. [97] and Gualtieri et al. [98] indicated the absence of changes in BDNF immunoreactivity in hippocampus after 6 weeks and 8 days of exposure to EE respectively, in both healthy rats and mice.
By using the same technique, Vasquez-Sanroman et al. [104] found increased BDNF expression in the cerebellum in mice exposed to EE for 4, 7, and 11 weeks.
Studies using PCR [99, 102] found unchanged BDNF gene expression in amygdala after the exposure of mice to EE.
Studies using ELISA and western blot in the different brain areas once more provided not univocal findings.
Unfortunately, similarly not univocal frames are obtained even when other factors, as animals' species, age and so on are considered.



U n c o r
r e c t e d A u t h o r P r o o f 49
Conversely, a relevant number of studies based on the exposure of the animals to EE from weaning (about 21 days of age) onward found increased BDNF expression in the hippocampus



Cerebellum 10 ,
807conducted, in order to provide powerful insights on 808 the processes on which neuroprotective actions may 809 be directed.
A specific attention has also to be devoted 810 to the effects of the exposure to complex environ-811 mental stimulations in AD models, to support a more 812 tuned and effective application of such stimulations 813 as neuroprotective and rehabilitative approaches to 814 AD.
The data analyzed in the present review provide 815 open perspectives for the future studies.
Although 816 addressing such a topic in animals poses a number 817 of challenging issues, effective studies carried out 818 with this aim could make a significant translational 819 contribution to the managing of AD. and dementia.
Neurobiol Dis 130, 104481.
900 [20] Petrosini L, De Bartolo P, Foti F, Gelfo F, Cutuli D, Leggio 901 MG, Mandolesi L (2009) On whether the environmen-902 tal enrichment may provide cognitive and brain reserves.
903 Brain Res Rev 61, 221-239.
904 [21] Mandolesi L, Gelfo F, Serra L, Montuori S, Polverino A, 905 Curcio G, Sorrentino G (2017) Environmental factors pro-906 moting neural plasticity: Insights from animal and human 907 studies.
Neural Plast 2017, 7219461.
908 [22] Sampedro-Piquero P, Begega A (2017) Environmental 909 Enrichment as a positive behavioral intervention across 910 the lifespan.
Curr Neuropharmacol 15, 459-470.
911 [23] Dolivo V, Taborsky M (2017) Environmental enrichment 912 of young adult rats (Rattus norvegicus) in different sensory 913 modalities has long-lasting effects on their ability to learn 914 via specific sensory channels.
J Comp Psychol 131, 79-88.
915 [24] Leggio MG, Mandolesi L, Federico F, Spirito F, Ricci B, 916 Gelfo F, Petrosini L (2005) Environmental enrichment 917 promotes improved spatial abilities and enhanced den-918 dritic growth in the rat.
Behav Brain Res 163, 78-90.
919 [25] Mandolesi L, De Bartolo P, Foti F, Gelfo F, Federico F, 920 Leggio MG, Petrosini L (2008) Environmental enrichment 921 provides a cognitive reserve to be spent in the case of brain 922 lesion.
J Alzheimers Dis 15, 11-28.
923 [26] Foti F, Laricchiuta D, Cutuli D, De Bartolo P, Gelfo F, 924 Angelucci F, Petrosini L (2011) Exposure to an enriched 925 environment accelerates recovery from cerebellar lesion.
926 104-119.
927 [27] Hannan AJ (2014) Environmental enrichment and brain 928 repair: Harnessing the therapeutic effects of cognitive 929 stimulation and physical activity to enhance experience-930 dependent plasticity.
Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol 40, Sampedro-Piquero P, Álvarez-Suárez P, Moreno-933 Fernández RD, García-Castro G, Cuesta M, Begega A 934 (2018) Environmental Enrichment results in both brain 935 connectivity efficiency and selective improvement in 936 different behavioral tasks.
Neuroscience 388, 374-383.
937 [29] Gelfo F, De Bartolo P, Giovine A, Petrosini L, Leggio 938 MG (2009) Layer and regional effects of environmental 939 enrichment on the pyramidal neuron morphology of the 940 rat.
Neurobiol Learn Mem 91, 353-365.
941 [30] Gelfo F, Florenzano F, Foti F, Burello L, Petrosini L, De 942 Bartolo P (2016) Lesion-induced and activity-dependent 943 structural plasticity of Purkinje cell dendritic spines in 944 cerebellar vermis and hemisphere.
Brain Struct Funct 221, Freund J, Brandmaier AM, Lewejohann L, Kirste I, 947 Kritzler M, Krüger A, Sachser N, Lindenberger U, 948 Kempermann G (2013) Emergence of individuality in 949 genetically identical mice.
Science 340, 756-759.
950 [32] He C, Tsipis CP, LaManna JC, Xu K (2017) Environmental 951 enrichment induces increased cerebral capillary density 952 and improved cognitive function in mice.
Adv Exp Med 953 Biol 977, 175-181.



Table 1
Studies on the environmental enrichment effects on BDNF levels in healthy animals



Table 1 (
Continued)



Table 1 (
Continued)



Table 1 (
Continued)



Table 2
Studies on the environmental enrichment effects on BDNF levels in Alzheimer's disease animal models