Endocannabinoid system alterations in Alzheimer’s disease: A systematic review of human studies
Studies investigating alterations of the endocannabinoid system (ECS) in Alzheimer's disease (AD) in humans have reported inconsistent findings so far.
We performed a systematic review of studies examining alterations of the ECS specifically within humans with AD or mild cognitive impairment (MCI), including neuroimaging studies, studies of serum and cerebrospinal fluid biomarkers, and postmortem studies.
We attempted to identify reported changes in the expression and activity of: cannabinoid receptors 1 and 2; anandamide (AEA); 2-arachidonoylglycerol (2-AG); monoacylglycerol lipase (MAGL); fatty acid amide hydrolase (FAAH); and transient receptor potential cation channel V1 (TRPV1).
Twenty-two studies were identified for inclusion.
Mixed findings were reported for most aspects of the ECS in AD, making it difficult to identify a particular profile of ECS alterations characterising AD.
The included studies tended to be small, methodologically heterogeneous, and frequently did not control for important potential confounders, such as pathological progression of AD.
Eight studies correlated ECS alterations with neuropsychometric performance measures, though studies infrequently examined behavioural and neuropsychiatric correlates.

Introduction:
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the most common form of dementia, with a global prevalence of Hardy.
2016).
The endocannabinoid system (ECS) is an important regulator of synaptic transmission, synaptic plasticity, cytokine release within the central nervous system (CNS), and may exert neuroprotective effects during neuronal injury
The ECS consists of two primary receptors: cannabinoid 1 receptor (CB1R) and cannabinoid 2 receptor (CB2R).
CB1R is one of the most widespread G protein-coupled receptors within the human CNS, and highly expressed in prefrontal cortex, anterior cingulate cortex, hippocampus and striatum
Contrastingly, CB2R is expressed predominantly within the cellular immune system (namely B-cells, natural killer cells, activated microglia and macrophages)
The endogenous neurotransmitters of the ECS are referred to as endocannabinoids.
The two bestcharacterised endocannabinoids are anandamide (AEA) and 2-arachidonoyl glycerol (2-AG).
2-AG is expressed at approximately 200-fold greater concentrations than AEA within the CNS, and is a full agonist at CB1R and CB2R, whilst AEA acts as a partial agonist at CB1R and CB2R
A number of additional ligands and receptors have been identified as part of the ECS, including transient receptor potential channel ionotropic receptors, and nuclear receptors (Di Marzo.
2018,
Endocannabinoids are synthesised on-demand from lipid membrane components, and exert retrograde inhibition of neurotransmitter release from adjacent neurons via CB1R-mediated signalling.
Degradative enzymes serve an important role in regulating endocannabinoid activity, with AEA predominantly degraded by fatty acid amide hydrolase (FAAH) and 2-AG being predominantly degraded by monoacylglycerol lipase (MAGL)
Various lines of evidence suggest that ECS alterations are associated with AD pathophysiology, and that ECS-targeted pharmacotherapies may have disease-modifying effects.
Transgenic mouse models of AD have demonstrated reduced hippocampal expression of CB1R, suggesting specific involvement of CB1R during disease progression
CB1R mediated-signalling likely plays a role in reducing excitotoxicity-mediated apoptosis in AD, possibly through inhibiting glutamatergic excitoxicity
CB2 agonist treatment appears to moderate microglial recruitment and cytokine release, promote amyloid clearance, and improve cognitive performance in transgenic mouse models of AD
Additionally, combined phytocannabinoids Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol and cannabidiol have been shown to inhibit microglial, astrocytic and amyloid-related neuropathological progression, and improve cognitive performance in a mouse model of AD
Neuropsychiatric symptoms in AD represent an important and difficult-to-treat aspect of the condition
Reviews focusing on ECS alterations in AD have reported a number of inconsistent findings reported by investigators
Additionally, studies examining ECS alterations in AD rarely include those with mild cognitive impairment (MCI)
Those with MCI are an important group to consider, as a proportion will have prodromal AD, which could aid identification of ECS alterations at relatively earlier stages in the AD disease process
We are not aware of any systematic review of ECS alterations in AD that focuses solely on findings from human studies.
Our aim was to identify reports of the ECS alterations in human AD or MCI in the The database search was conducted on 13 th March 2018, as summarised in the PRISMA flow chart (figure

Study characteristics:
22 studies were included, with sample sizes ranging from 4-75 AD cases (456 cases in total), and 2-45 controls (356 controls in total).
Two studies assessed participants over multiple time-points.

Study Quality:
No studies used power calculations to pre-determine sample size.
One study did not use a control group
Risk of selection bias was low with the majority of studies using recognised criteria for AD diagnosis and with adequately described recruitment procedures.
All studies investigating ECS biomarkers used validated techniques, the limitations of which were appropriately discussed, with the exception of one older study
It is notable that AD neuropathological progression was not reported, making meaningful interpretation of this finding difficult, given the previous findings suggesting CB1R expression may vary according to the pathological progression of AD
Other groups have reported no difference in CB1R expression between AD cases and controls, using a range of methods including PET
Only one of these studies stratified cases according to Braak staging, and interpreted results in light of this
It is notable that the PET study
CB1R expression on hippocampal neuron presynaptic terminals did not differ from aged controls, suggesting that intracellular trafficking of CB1R is not altered in AD
CB1R functioning may be altered in AD, with 2 separate groups reporting a reduction in CB1R-mediated G protein-coupling in hippocampal
Only one of these studies stratified cases based on the progression of AD, and identified reduced CB1R G protein-coupling in later stages of the disease (Braak V-VI cases)
CB1R nitration (a marker of perioxynitrite radical formation) is increased in AD relative to controls, and thought to reflect increased microglial involvement in AD disease progression, though the impact of nitration on CB1R functioning is unclear

Cannabinoid 2 Receptor (CB2R):
CB2R expression in AD has been identified within the hippocampus, entorhinal cortex, parahippocampus
One group reported no significant differences in frontal cortex CB2R expression between AD cases and age-matched controls, though AD pathological progression amongst cases was not reported
CB2R nitration is increased in AD compared to controls, though the functional significance of this is unclear
A small ex vivo study (of 4 AD cases) using hippocampal and parahippocampal tissue incubated with the CB2R agonist JWH-015, demonstrated microglial clearance of amyloid plaque occurring via a CB2R-mediated process, and amyloid clearance may be disrupted by coadministration of a CB2R antagonist
CNR2 mRNA expression has been reported to be increased in hippocampal samples in AD in a single postmortem study
However, attempts to measure peripheral CNR2 mRNA expression using peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) (D'Addario et al. 2012) and serum CNR2 RNA content
Surprisingly, the only PET study that examined CB2R availability in AD has reported reduced uptake of CB2R ligand [ 11 C]NE40 in mild AD compared to healthy volunteers, with no correlation between

Arachidonoylethanolamine (AEA):
Reductions in AEA concentration have been reported within the temporal
These studies were of moderate quality, though only one group examined the relationship between reduced cortical AEA content and neuropathological markers of AD progression
AEA and N-arachidonoyl-substituted phosphatidylethanolamine (NAPE, a precursor molecule in AEA synthesis) concentrations negatively-correlated with mid-frontal lobe Aβ-42 content in one post-mortem study (without a corresponding correlation observed with hyperphosphorylated tau, amyloid plaque burden or APOEe4 gene carriership) suggesting a specific relationship between the Aβ-42 fibrils and AEA
Serum AEA concentration appears unaltered in AD
The only group that attempted to detect AEA content within the CSF, were unable to detect AEA in either AD, or healthy controls, using high-performance liquid chromatography tandem mass-spectrometry
Reduced phosphoethanolamine (PE, a synthetic precursor to AEA) in "nanometersized particle" fractions of CSF (a fraction reported to reflect lipid membrane exocytosis within the CNS) has been observed in AD compared to healthy controls.
The group unfortunately did not examine AEA concentrations directly, making it difficult to draw firm conclusions about CSF AEA content in AD

2-Arachidonoylglycerol (2-AG):
At post-mortem, a single study reported that mid-frontal and temporal cortex 2-AG content did not differ between AD and controls
An older, weaker-quality study reported increased diacylglycerol lipase (DAGL -involved in the synthesis of 2-AG) activity within the hippocampus and nucleus basalis of Meynert in AD
This finding is supported by a more recent and methodologically rigorous study showing increased DAGL expression (particularly the DAGLβ isoform) within hippocampal neurons and local microglia as AD pathology progresses
Sites of 2-AG hydrolysis activity may also be altered in AD, with the same group reporting a relative "shift" of hydrolytic activity from neuronal membranes, to the cytosol
The authors also used immunofluorescence histochemistry to demonstrate that ABHD6 (a serine hydrolase responsible for approximately 4% of 2-AG hydrolysis) is downregulated amongst neurons staining for markers of hyperphosphorylated tau, and co-localised with amyloid plaque and microglial markers.
The authors propose that relative increases in 2-AG retrograde signalling may directly lead to synaptic dysfunction in later stages of AD, but notably did not directly examine 2-AG content.
Two studies investigated plasma 2-AG concentration
The smaller study reported no difference in circulating plasma 2-AG concentration
CSF 2-AG concentration has been investigated by one group, which reported no difference between AD and age-matched controls
An association between 2-AG and vascular endothelial change has been reported (with higher 2-AG serum concentration associated with leukoaraiosis and a history of ischaemic heart disease), though the findings have only been reported by a single group, and the statistical methods used precluded further examination of the exact nature of this association

Fatty Acid Amide Hydrolase (FAAH):
In one of the only peripheral biomarker studies included, reduced methylation has been observed at the FAAH gene locus (corresponding to increased FAAH expression) in peripheral blood mononuclear FAAH has been demonstrated to co-localise with beta-amyloid rich plaques and hypertrophic astrocytes, which suggests FAAH expression and activity being dependent on the locational proximity of AD-related neuropathologic change
It should be noted that small tissue samples were obtained amongst controls, which may have underestimated FAAH activity seen in controls
Two more recent, methodologically rigorous studies reported mixed results.
Reduced FAAH activity within neuronal membrane fractions obtained from the frontal cortex of AD cases was identified by one group

Monoacylglycerol Lipase (MAGL):
Increased MAGL activity has been reported within the nucleus basalis of Meynert in a modestly-sized study of AD cases post-mortem (10 cases)
This study was published before the ECS had begun to be characterised, so other aspects of the ECS were not examined, and results were not interpreted with reference to the ECS.
Additionally, AD cases were diagnosed clinically, with no information on diagnostic criteria used, or information on the extent of pathological progression AD amongst cases, limiting the interpretation of results.
A more recent study utilised immunofluorescence staining and Western blotting techniques, and demonstrated an overall positive correlation between MAGL expression and pathological progression of AD in post-mortem hippocampal samples.
Quantitative immunofluorescence analysis revealed a more specific relationship between hyperphosporylated tau and MAGL, where intraneuronal hyperphosphorylated tau is associated with a specific reduction in MAGL expression in hippocampal neurons
Intraneuronal localisation of MAGL has been reported as being unaltered in AD, predominantly being localised at the presynaptic terminal
Indirect evidence for enhanced peripheral MAGL activity has been suggested by the observation of a reduced circulating concentrations of plasma monopalmitin and monostearin in AD (both of which are substrates for MAGL) (González-Domínguez et al. 2016).
Contrastingly, a separate group reported no change in MAGL mRNA expression in PBMCs from AD cases, though this group did not directly examine peripheral MAGL activity in AD (D'Addario et al. 2012).

TRPV1 receptor:
A post-mortem study investigating TRPV1 immunoreactivity failed to demonstrate differences in hippocampal TRPV1 expression or binding density in AD
TRPV1 mRNA expression in PBMCs did not significantly differ between AD patients and controls (D'Addario et al. 2012).

ECS and Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI):
Two of the studies included MCI patients.
One group reported that concentrations of CSF glycerophospholipids involved in AEA synthesis -phosphoethanolamine (PE) and nacylphosphatidylethanolamine (NAPE) -and the synthetic enzyme phospholipase A2, were not significantly altered in MCI compared to healthy controls.
Whilst CSF PLA2 activity was reportedly increased compared to controls, this did not reach statistical significance
Serum oleamide (a substrate of FAAH) has been reported to be reduced in a single study, with a less pronounced decrease in serum oleamide observed in AD (possibly suggesting increased FAAH activity in early AD, normalising as the disease progresses) (González-Domínguez et al. 2016).
No groups have directly examined FAAH activity or expression in MCI, however.

Neuropsychological correlates of ECS alterations in AD:
Few studies employed the same neuropsychological tests to compare individual aspects of the ECS, which impairs the ability to make direct comparisons of findings between studies.
Behavioural aspects of AD were investigated by one group

The Mini Mental
3 Discussion:

Methodological issues:
The included studies were methodologically heterogeneous, with aspects of the ECS rarely examined using same methodology across studies, making meaningful comparison between individual studies difficult.
Many studies did not analyse results in light of clinical or neuropathological progression of AD, which limited the conclusions that could be drawn about ECS change and AD progression
The unexpected finding of CB2R radioligand [ 11 C]NE40 uptake being lower in AD compared to controls
Some groups utilised functional assays to assess CB1R and CB2R activity, such as cannabinoid receptorassociated G-protein activity assays
These methods have the potential to provide a more sophisticated mechanistic understanding of the role of the ECS in AD.
It is now recognised that particular CB1R and CB2R ligands appear to show preferences for some specific secondary-messenger signalling pathways over others, so future similar study designs will need to take this finding into account
Few studies attempted to correlate ECS alterations with neuropsychiatric features, though one group identified a correlation between reduced prefrontal cortex CB1R expression and hypophagia
This is perhaps consistent with findings from small trials using Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol Hippocampal MAGL expression has been reported to increase

Limitations:
The review was not designed to identify publication bias, or the grey literature, and was limited to English-language publications.
This review examined the most well-characterised endocannabinoids, degradative enzymes, and receptors of the ECS.
This review did not focus on precursor or synthetic molecules such as N- Assessing methodologically heterogeneous studies using a single quality assessment does not allow for particularly detailed analysis of the quality of individual studies.
The methodological heterogeneity meant that few of the study findings can be meaningfully compared with each other, and metaanalysis was not possible.
The limited quality of studies included (with the majority rated "moderate" or "weak" in quality) mean that findings should be interpreted with some caution.
Lastly, we cannot exclude the possibility that other relevant studies were conducted since the literature search was conducted.

Conclusions:
To our knowledge, this is the first systematic review to synthesise findings of ECS alterations in AD from all known human studies, published over a span of over 30 years.
The studies are methodologically heterogeneous, and typically of moderate-quality, limiting the interpretations that can be drawn from them.
However, the results support the notion that alterations in CB1R, CB2R, central AEA concentration, MAGL and FAAH activity, occur in AD.
ECS biomarkers are amenable to testing in AD, and may represent promising avenues for novel drug development.
CB1R expression appears reduced in hippocampal and parahippocampal areas as AD progresses, though there are mixed findings overall

Methods and materials:

Literature search:
We reviewed literature on ECS alterations in AD published within the following: PubMed; Embase; MEDLINE; PsycINFO; and ALOIS, from inception to 2018.
The review was registered on the PROSPERO database (CRD42018096249).
(Search terms used can be found in the Supplementary Materials).
References were screened for studies suitable for inclusion.
Ethical approval was not required for the review.

Inclusion and exclusion criteria:
English-language publications reporting people diagnosed with AD or MCI (including post-mortem studies with pathologically-confirmed AD, and studies without controls) were included.
To make the review more specific to changes in late-onset AD, we excluded studies involving people with Down's syndrome, murine studies, in vitro studies performed on non-human tissue, studies which did not analyse AD or MCI cases separately, or those that did not specify the number of patients with AD or MCI included.
Grey-literature publications, conference abstracts and presentations were excluded.

Data Extraction:
Two review (AB and OZ) independently extracted data from studies relating to any of the primary or secondary outcomes of interest.
Data was tabulated using Microsoft Excel.
Disagreements amongst authors were resolved by discussion and involvement of a third author (SR or RH).

Quality Assessment:
Study quality was assessed using an adapted EPHPP Quality Assessment Tool for Quantitative Studies
We anticipated heterogeneous study designs, and the tool was modified to reflect this.
The following sections were omitted: (D)Blinding; (E) Data Collection Methods; (F) Withdrawals and Dropouts; (G) Intervention integrity.
Selection bias was assessed to ensure that cases were representative of AD and MCI patients.
Study design was assessed for the following: sample size, power calculations, whether inclusion/exclusion criteria were clearly defined, and whether sample characteristics (age, sex, post-mortem delay) were reported.
ECS system biomarkers of interest were assessed for whether they had been clearly defined by authors, if the biomarkers were investigated using validated techniques, and limitations of the techniques in relation to AD (if relevant) were discussed within the studies.
For secondary outcomes of interest, we assessed if validated techniques or tools were used.
Statistical analyses were assessed for appropriateness, whether corrections for multiple comparisons were performed, appropriate correction of confounders took place, whether analyses were hypothesis-driven, and if results were explained in light of statistical adjustments.
Scores for individual sections A (selection bias), B (study design), C (ECS biomarker used), D (correlates), E (analysis and confounders) were combined to give ratings of "weak", "medium" and "strong".
An overall score for each study was also assigned in accordance with the following criteria: Strong = 0 Weak ratings; Moderate = 1 Weak rating (cannot be from section A); Weak = ≥2 Weak ratings).
Acknowledgements: None to declare.
Funding: This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors.

Figures:
v


approximately 40 million (Nicholls et al. 2018).
The characteristic neuropathology includes the presence of intraneuronal neurofibrillary tangles, extracellular beta-amyloid(Aβ)-rich neuritic plaques, synaptic dysfunction, and glial cytopathology (Chen et al. 2019, Henstridge et al. 2019, Selkoe and



 2 . 1
CB1R and CB2R expression and functioning  Expression and availability of anandamide (AEA) and 2-arachidonoyl glycerol (2-AG)  Expression and activity of the enzymes fatty acid amide hydrolase (FAAH) and monoacylglycerol lipase (MAGL)  Expression and activity of transient receptor potential vanilloid receptor 1 (TRPV1) Secondary outcomes of interest were:  To identify correlations between ECS alterations and other neuropathological changes in Alzheimer's disease  To identify correlations between ECS alterations and neurocognitive or neuropsychological deficits in Alzheimer's disease 2. Results: Literature search and study selection:



2. 4 . 1
Cannabinoid Receptor 1 (CB1R): CB1R expression in AD remains ambiguous.
Two moderate quality studies reported increased CB1R expression (in the frontal cortex, entorhinal cortex and caudate nucleus) in the earliest stages of AD pathological change (Braak Stage I-II) (Farkas et al. 2012, Manuel et al. 2014).
It has been suggested that this early increase in CB1R expression may reflect compensatory upregulation of CB1R in early AD.
Three post-mortem studies reported reduced expression of CB1R in later stage (Braak stage V-VI) disease (within the prefrontal cortex, entorhinal cortex, CA3 and CA1 hippocampal subfields, caudate nucleus and putamen) compared to either healthy controls, or those with Braak stage I-II disease (Manuel et al 2014, Ramirez et al. 2005, Solas et al. 2013).
However, one group observed increased CB1R expression in prefrontal cortex in Braak Stage V-VI disease compared to controls (though expression was relatively decreased compared to cases at Braak Stages I-IV) (Farkas et al. 2012).


) and frontal cortex (Ramirez et al. 2005, Solas et al. 2013).
CB2R expression positively correlated with Aβ-42 concentration, amyloid plaque burden, levels of hyperphosphorylated tau and neuritic tangles, consistent with the well-documented finding of activated microglia accumulating in the vicinity of plaque and tangle pathology in AD (Halleskog et al. 2011, Ramirez et al. 2005, Solas et al. 2013).



[ 11 C
]NE40 uptake and uptake of amyloid PET ligand [ 11 C]PiB


cells (PBMCs) obtained from AD patients with moderate disease severity (D'Addario et al. 2012).
Reduced serum concentrations of oleamide (a substrate of FAAH) has also been reported (González-Domínguez et al. 2016), providing some indirect evidence for peripherally increased FAAH activity in AD, though the study authors notably did not assess FAAH activity directly.
Functional assays of FAAH activity have demonstrated increased FAAH activity in AD, both centrally (obtained from entorhinal and parahippocampal cortex, and dentate gyrus post-mortem) (Benito et al. 2003) and peripherally, from PBMCs (D'Addario et al. 2012).


State Examination (MMSE) was the most frequently utilised tool for assessing cognition amongst the included studies (Ahmad et al. 2014, Altamura et al. 2015, D'Addario et al. 2012, Jung et al. 2012, Koppel et al. 2009, Lee et al. 2010).
A positive correlation between frontal cortical CB1R immunoreactivity with MMSE and Cambridge Cognition Examination (CAMCOG) test performance prior to death has been reported by a single group (Lee et al. 2010).
This study had the advantage of having assessed participants at multiple time-points prior to death, and having AD diagnoses confirmed at post-mortem (though CB1R expression was not interpreted in light of AD neuropathologic progression).
No similar correlation between frontal cortex CB1R immunoreactivity and MMSE or CAMCOG performance were identified at earlier time-points, and CB1R immunoreactivity within the hippocampus, caudate nucleus or anterior cingulate cortex at postmortem did not correlate with other either the MMSE or CAMCOG scores (Lee et al. 2010).
Mid-frontal or temporal lobe 2-AG or AEA content at post-mortem also failed to correlate with MMSE performance (which was undertaken 10 months prior to death, on average) (Jung et al. 2012).
Reduced methylation at the FAAH gene locus (associated with increased FAAH expression) in PBMCs has been associated with poorer cognitive performance (scoring <10 on the MMSE), suggesting that epigenetic changes of ECS biomarkers may be detectable in the later stages of AD (D'Addario et al. 2012).
This finding is yet to be replicated, and the significance of epigenetic changes at the FAAH gene on cognition in AD remains unclear.
Other studies have reported no correlation with CB1R PET ligand [ 18 F]MK-9740 binding (Ahmad et al. 2014), or CSF and plasma 2-AG content (Koppel et al. 2009) and MMSE scores in AD.
Other memory tests utilised included the Rey Auditory Verbal Learning Test (RAVLT), with a single group identifying an association increased 2-AG plasma concentration and improved taskperformance (Altamura et al. 2015).
No correlation has been identified between RAVLT performance and uptake of PET radioligands [ 18 F]MK-9740 (for CB1R) (Ahmad et al. 2014) and [ 11 C]NE40 (for CB2R) in AD (Ahmad et al. 2016).
Task performance on the Boston Naming Test (BNT) has been associatedwith temporal lobe AEA content at post-mortem in AD (though mid-frontal AEA content did not correlate with task performance).
It should be noted that the control group in this particular study were tested a mean of 45 months prior to death, compared to 10 months prior to death in the AD group (though the groups were age-matched, suggesting the differences were not necessarily due to ageing)
Uptake of CB2R PET radioligand [ 11 C]NE40 did not correlate with BNT performance
It is notable that uptake of the CB2R PET ligand [ 11 C]NE40 did not correlate with any cognitive test performances, which may suggest a floor-effect, where PET using CB2R radioligands may lack the sufficient resolution to detect potentially very small changes in CB2R availability in AD relative to controls (Ahmad et al. 2016).
A single study utilised the Kendrick Digit Copy Test (KDCT), reporting that task performance correlated with and midfrontal AEA content at post-mortem in AD, compared to controls (Jung et al. 2012).
Tests of executive function and fluid intelligence were utilised by some studies.
Three groups utilised trail-making tests A and B, though no correlations were reported between task performance and plasma 2-AG, plasma AEA , CSF 2-AG concentration (Koppel et al 2009), temporal and midfrontal cortical 2-AG or AEA content at post-mortem (Jung et al 2012), or regional uptake of CB2R PET radioligand [ 11 C]NE40 (Ahmad et al. 2016).
One group utilised Raven's Coloured Progressive Matrices Task, and reported no correlation between plasma 2-AG and task performance (Altamura et al. 2015).



3 . 2
al. 2013, González-Domínguez et al. 2016, Grünblatt et al. 2007, Lee et al. 2010, Pascual et al. 2014,Solas et al. 2013, Tolon et al. 2009, Westlake et al. 1994).Post-mortem studies varied in terms of neuropathologic criteria used for AD diagnosis, anatomical site sampled, tissue preparation, and post-mortem interval.
One study included patients with coexisting neurodegenerative conditions in the AD patient group, which may have confounded their results
8 studies did not state proportions of "probable" or "definite" AD diagnoses (D'Addario et al. 2012, González-Domínguez et al. 2016, Grünblatt et al. 2009, Koppel et al. 2009, Manuel et al. 2014, Pascual et al. 2014, Ramirez et al. 2005, Tolon et al. 2009).
Interpolating ECS alterations underlying performance in neuropsychological test scores in life from post-mortem findings, remains open to a number of potential biases -particularly as the mean time-interval between test and post-mortem was as long as 10 months in some studies (Jung et al. 2012).
Control groups were not always age-matched (Ahmad et al. 2016, Benito et al. 2003, Farkas et al. 2012, Farooqui et al. 1988, Westlake et al. 1994), which is important as ECS functioning undergoes agerelated change (Takkinen et al. 2018).
Additionally, few studies specifically reported on gender or ethnicity of participants.
No studies undertook power calculations, and the design of the majority of studies was rated as "weak", accordingly.
Only 5 studies had sample sizes of ≥30 AD cases (Altamura et al. 2015, D'Addario et al. 2012, González-Domínguez et al. 2016, Jung et al. 2012, Manuel et al. 2014).
Adequate powering remains a debated area in PET and post-mortem studies, and there is a lack of consensus regarding minimum sample sizes required for these methods (Doot et al. 2012, Meurs 2016).
A number of studies carried out extensive subgroup analyses within AD case cohorts, and while 13 studies included correction for multiple comparisons, the possibility of type I error remains (Manuel et al. 2014, Mulder et al. 2011, Westlake et al. 1994).No studies that included MCI cases specified clinical subtype (eg: amnestic-type), or utilised amyloid PET imaging for more informed case ascertainment
Recommendations for future research:ECS tone and functioning varies according to age, gender and ethnic group, and controlling for these factors as far as possible will help reduce potential bias in future studies
Screening for the presence of inflammatory conditions and anti-inflammatory medication is advisable, as both appear to influence the functioning of the ECS and the endovanilloid system in vitro
Cannabis exposure may transiently reduce CB1R availability, so a standardized assessment of participants' cannabis exposure should also be undertaken
A correlation between prefrontal cortex CB1R expression and cognitive function in AD has been suggested
The literature regarding the role of CB1R in cognition is complex, however, with CB1R agonism having been demonstrated to impair a variety of hippocampal-dependent memory processes
Prefrontal CB1R activity likely confers a different effect on cognitive performance to hippocampal CB1R activity, with prefrontal CB1R agonism being associated with increases in noradrenergic signalling, which may confer effects on non-memory related cognitive function, such as attention



(
THC) analogues that have demonstrated improvements in anorexia and circadian rhythm disturbance associated with in dementia (Volicer et al. 1997, Walther et al. 2011, Woodward et al. 2014).
Whether other specific neuropsychiatric features of AD such as agitation, apathy or psychosis are characterised by particular ECS alterations remains uncertain.
ECS alterations in psychosis have been the focus of intense research, and there is evidence for some commonalities underlying the neurobiology of both psychosis in schizophrenia, and psychosis in Alzheimer's disease (Reeves et al. 2012).
Recently identified ECS-relevant biomarkers for psychosis include increased CSF AEA content (Minichino et al. 2019), and an intronic variant CNR2 which may moderate propensity to psychotic experiences.
(Legge et al. 2019) Koppel et al. had attempted toassess CSF AEA content in AD, but were unable to detect this using high-performance liquid chromatography tandem-mass spectrometry
A separate group has managed to detect and quantify CSF AEA content in participants with dementia (their sample consisting of both AD and vascular subtypes), indicating that it is possible to detect CSF AEA content within this population.
TRPV1 agonism has been implicated in reducing striatal hyperdopaminergia, suggestive of a novel therapeutic target for psychotic symptoms (Almeida et al.2014,


) Interactions between beta amyloid-42, 2-AG and MAGL appears to contribute to hippocampal dysfunction in AD, with aberrant 2-AG-associated depolarisationinduced suppression of inhibition being hypothesised to compound beta amyloid-42-related synaptic dysfunction (Mulder et al. 2011, van der Stelt et al. 2006).
More research is required to elucidate the relationship with 2-AG and MAGL in hippocampal dysfunction in AD at a cellular and electrophysiological levels.
Novel PET radioligands, such as [ 11 C]SAR127303, may offer a promising tool to explore changes in MAGL in AD in vivo (Yamasaki et al. 2018).
The importance of glial involvement in AD pathology has been increasingly recognised, and ECS-glial interaction occurring in AD requires further characterisation (Hansen et al. 2018, Henstridge et al. 2019).
In vitro and in vivo evidence suggests CB2R-mediated mechanisms attenuate microglial activation and release of proinflammatory cytokine tumour necrosis factor(TNF)-α associated with Aβ fibril exposure (López et al. 2018, Ramirez et al. 2005).
Peripheral expression and activity of FAAH may be increased in AD, though the underlying mechanism responsible remains unclear (Benito et al. 2003, D'Addario et al. 2012).
Enhanced FAAH activity may contribute to a proinflammatory state, arising from increased downstream production of arachidonic acid and eicosanoid products following the breakdown of AEA(D'Addario et al. 2012).
Similarly, rodent models have shown FAAH inhibition (and TRPV1 antagonism) have demonstrated reduced concentrations of proinflammatory cytokine interleukin-6 within the rodent hippocampus (Henry et al. 2017).
The FAAH PET radioligand [ 11 C]CURB (Boileau et al. 2016) may help identify region-specific changes in CNS FAAH availability in AD, and help quantify the effects of FAAH-directed pharmacotherapies in vivo.
Though previous trials of FAAH inhibitors in humans have been beset by failure (Di Marzo et al. 2018), compounds such as the dual FAAH-inhibitor and TRPV1 antagonist Narachidonyl serotonin, or combined FAAH-and acetylcholinesterase-inhibitors, represent intriguing avenues for novel drug development in AD treatments (Montanari et al. 2016, Micale et al. 2009).
Improved cognition in AD appears to be associated with both reduced FAAH gene expression (D'Addario et al. 2012), and increased AEA content in the midfrontal and temporal cortex, which suggests a potential therapeutic benefit of FAAH inhibition in AD (Jung et al. 2012).
However, there is also evidence that cognitive impairment in AD may be exacerbated by FAAH inhibition, as a potential consequence of persistent AEA activity at hippocampal CB1R (Basavarajappa et al. 2014, Goonawardena et al. 2011).
Late-life anxiety is an increasingly-recognised risk factor for the development of AD (Santabárbara et al. 2020).
Given the indirect evidence of FAAH activity being increased in both MCI and AD (González-Domínguez et al. 2016), and the apparent anxiolytic effects of FAAH-inhibition (Bedse et al. 2018, , Mayo et al. 2020), it is tempting to speculate on the role AEA and FAAH may play in contributing to anxiety states associated with MCI and AD.
Studies investigating ECS alterations in MCI should attempt to differentiate between MCI clinical subtypes, as the amnestic-and amnestic-dysexecutive subtypes appear more predictive of prodromal AD (Vos et al. 2013, Jung et al. 2020).
Biomarker-assisted MCI case ascertainment (including amyloidretention status on PET, CSF Aβ42/tau content, novel CSF biomarkers such as neurofilament light, and APOE ε4 carriership) would allow for more reliable identification of those where MCI is likely to be a manifestation of prodromal AD (Csukly et al. 2016, Okello et al. 2009, Zetterberg et al. 2016).


Arachidonoyl-phosphatidylethanolamine and DAG, and focussed solely on TRPV1 as opposed to other receptors in the TRP family (De Petrocellis et al. 2017, Di Marzo 2018, Wood et al. 2015).


al. 2012, Manuel et al. 2014, Mulder et al. 2011, Ramirez et al. 2005, Solas et al. 2013, Westlake et al. 1994).
CB2R expression appears increased in hippocampal and parahippocampal regions as microglial involvement becomes more prominent in the disease process (Benito et al. 2003, Ramirez et al. 2005, Halleskog et al. 2012).
Frontal and temporal cortical AEA concentrations may decrease in AD, with limited evidence to link this with cognitive performance in life (Jung et al. 2012).
Sites of cellular hydrolysis of 2-AG may be altered in AD, with mixed evidence on whether 2-AG availability changes in AD (Mulder et al. 2011, Jung et al. 2012, Altamura et al. 2015).
There is evidence suggesting MAGL expression increases with progression of AD in hippocampal neurons (Farooqui et al. 1988, Mulder et al. 2011).
FAAH expression and activity may be increased in AD, and may be able to be detected peripherally (D'Addario et al. 2012, González-Domínguez et al. 2016).
Currently, there is no evidence for TRPV1 alterations in AD.
A number of studies examined the relations between ECS alterations and cognitive performance, though very few studies examined the relationship between ECS alterations and behavioural or psychiatric symptomatology in AD (Ahmad et al. 2014, Altamura et al. 2015, D'Addario et al. 2012, Jung et al. 2012, Koppel et al. 2009, Lee et al. 2010).



Legend:
Aβ = beta-amyloid, AD= Alzheimer's disease, CERAD = Consortium to establish a registry for Alzheimer's disease, MCI = mild cognitive impairment, NINCDS-ADRDA = National Institute of Neurological and Communicative Disorders and Stroke and the Alzheimer's disease and related disorders association, PET = positron emission tomography, PiB = Pittsburgh B


Legend: ↓ = Decreased (p<0.05),
↑ = Increased (p<0.05),
+ve = positive, -ve = negative, 2-AG = 2-arachidonoylglycerol, AEA = arachidonoylethanolamine, AD = Alzheimer's disease, APOE e4 = apoliporotein gene e4 allele, AT8+ = positive staining with monoclonal antibody for phosphorylated tau, AVLT = Auditory verbal learning test, BA10 = Brodmann Area 10, BNT = Boston Naming Test, CAMCOG = Cambridge Cognition Examination, CA = Cornu Ammonis (hippocampal subfields), CB1R = cannabinoid 1 receptor, CB2R = cannabinoid 2 receptor, CNR2 = cannabinoid 2 receptor gene, DAG = diacylglycerol, DAGL = diacylglycerol lipase, DNA = deoxyribonucleic acid, FAAH = fatty acid amide hydrolase, GPC = glycerophosphocholine, GPi = globus pallidus interna, GTPɤS = guanosine 5'-O-[gamma-thio]triphosphate, Iba1+ = positive monoclonal antibody staining with Iba-1 protein (a marker of activated microglia), KDCT = Kendrick Digit Copy Test, LOAD = late-onset Alzheimer's disease, LCMS = liquid chromatography mass spectrometry, LPC = lysophosphatidylcholine, MAGL = monoacylglycerol lipase, MCI = mild cognitive impairment, MMSE = Folstein's mini mental state examination, mRNA = messenger ribonucleic acid, NFT = neurofibrillary tangles, OEA = oleoylethanolamide, PAF = platelet activating factor, PBMC = peripheral blood mononuclear cells, PC = phosphatidylcholine, PCR = polymerase chain reaction, PE = 1-radyl-2-acyl-sn-glycerophosphoethanolamine, PEA = palmitoylethanolamine, PET = positron emission tomography, PiB = Pittsburgh compond B, PLA2 = phospholipase A2, RT-PCR = reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction, TNFalpha = tumour necrosis factor alpha TRPV1 = transient receptor potential cation channel family V member 1, VOI = volume of interest


).
Studies including MCI patients used recognised MCI diagnostic criteria, but did not report MCI clinical subtypes (Fonteh et al. 2013, González-Domínguez et al. 2016).
12 studies reported 100% of AD cases had either clinically probable or definite diagnoses (Ahmad et al. 2014, Ahmad et al. 2016, Altamura et al. 2015, Benito et al. 2003, Farooqui et al. 1988, Fonteh et al. 2013, Grünblatt et al. 2007, Jung et al. 2012, Lee et al. 2010, Mulder et al. 2011, Solas et al. 2013, Westlake



table 2 . [Further details on scoring is in the supplementary materials]
). 13 studies adjusted for multiple comparisons (Ahmad et al. 2016, D'Addario et al. 2012, Fonteh et al. 2013, González-Domínguez et al. 2016, Grünblatt et al. 2007, Grünblatt et al. 2009, Halleskog et al. 2011, Manuel et al. 2014, Mulder et al. 2011, Pascual et al. 2014, Ramirez et al. 2005, Tolon et al. 2009, Ahmad et al. 2014, Ahmad et al. 2016, D'Addario et al. 2012, Pascual et al. 2014, Mulder et al. 2011, Ramirez et al. 2005, Solas et al. 2013).
Correlational analyses tended to be exploratory in nature, though 8 studies used clear hypothesis-driven statistical analyses (Ahmad et al. 2014, Ahmad et al. 2016, D'Addario et al. 2012, González-Domínguez et al. 2016, Koppel et al. 2009, Manuel et al. 2014, Mulder et al. 2011, Ramirez et al. 2005).
A summary of study quality ratings is found in



Table 1 : Study Characteristics



Table 2 : Study Quality Ratings
CB2R expression in Braak VI stage AD (n=7) compared to stage II-IV cases, and age-m In Braak VI cases (n=7), Iba-1+ cells co-expressed CB2R, and were closely associated wit Positive association observed between beta-catenin and CB2R protein expression in Bra AG degradation in frontal cortex in AD (p<0.05).
↑ 2AG degr controls(p<0.05).
↑MAGL expression in Braak VI stage (though not stage III/IV disease) CB1R expression on presynaptic terminals remains unaltered in AD.
CB1R +ve neurons s MAGL+ve and IBA1+ve microglia accumulate around senile plaques.
Increased density o VI.
AT8+ve (marker of hyperphosphorylated tau) pyramidal cells retain MAGL expression b CB1R density↑ in Braak Stage 1-2 disease AD (n=3, p<0.05), and ↑ overall in AD group Jung et al (2012) 38 AD cases, 17 controls LC MS (tandem MS) ↓ AEA availability in midfrontal and temporal cortices (p<0.05) in AD. 2AG in midfronta Midfrontal cortical AEA concentration negatively correlated with insoluble beta amyloid Midfrontal cortex AEA did not correlate with amyloid plaque load, Aβ40 isoform concen Midfrontal AEA concentration positively correlated with KDCT performance (p=0.004) a cortex AEA concentration was positively correlated with BNT performance (n=18, r=0.52 Solas et al (2013) 15 AD cases, 16 controls Western blot, optical denistometry ↓ CB1R expression on Western blot of BA10 homogenates in AD (p<0.001 and <0.05 re Strong correlation between CB2R expression and Aβ42 levels and senile plaque score (r Hypophagia scores on the Present Behavioural Examination correlated with CB1R expre Pascual et al (2014) 9 AD cases, 9 controls Western blotting, AEA hydrolysis assay Frontal cortex neuronal membrane-associated AEA hydrolysis in AD decreased significa Incubation with URB597 (FAAH inhibitor) decreased AEA hydrolysis to a lesser extent in stimulated hydrolysis of AEA by 11% in control sample tissue, but no changes in hydroly WIN55,212-2 (Mixed CB1/CB2 agonist) inhibited hydrolysis by 34% in control human tis with AD (p<0.001).
No correlation between WIN55,212-2 and [35S]GTPɤS binding densities.
↑CB1R-media stage compared to controls (p<0.05).
↓CB1R-mediated Gi/o protein activity within the lateral nucleus of the amygdala in sta ↑ CB1R density in caudate/putamen in stage I-II AD compared to controls (p<0.05).
↑CB1R binding density in Braak stages III-IV relative to controls (in layer VI of frontal co (p<0.05).
↓ CB1R binding density in stage V-VI disease compared to III-IV disease in the entorhin subfield (p<0.05).
↓CB1R density in V-VI stage AD in the caudate/putamen compared with stage I-II AD (p ↓CB1R binding density in dentate gyrus granular cells in V-VI stage compared to I-II sta ↓CB1-mediated activation of Gi/o proteins in the CA1 subfield in stage V-VI AD compar ↓CB1R-mediated G-protein coupling observed in stage V-VI disease compared with I-II gyrus (p<0.05).
↓CB1R-mediated Gi/o activity in the pyramidal layer of the subiculum in stage V-VI sta



Table 3 :
Results