Evidence and Therapeutic Perspectives in the Relationship between the Oral Microbiome and Alzheimer’s Disease: A Systematic Review
This review aims to clarify the nature of the link between Alzheimer's disease and the oral microbiome on an epidemiological and pathophysiological level, as well as to highlight new therapeutic perspectives that contribute to the management of this disease.
We performed a systematic review, following the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews checklist, from January 2000 to July 2021.
The terms "plaque," "saliva," and "mouth" were associated with the search term "oral diseases" and used in combination with the Boolean operator "AND"/"OR".
We included experimental or clinical studies and excluded conferences, abstracts, reviews, and editorials.
A total of 27 articles were selected.
Evidence for the impact of the oral microbiome on the pathophysiological and immunoinflammatory mechanisms of Alzheimer's disease is accumulating.
The impact of the oral microbiome on the development of AD opens the door to complementary therapies such as phototherapy and/or the use of prebiotic compounds and probiotic strains for global or targeted modulation of the oral microbiome in order to have a favourable influence on the evolution of this pathology in the future.

Introduction
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is progressive and neurodegenerative in the elderly (>65 years old), in which the main symptom is a decline in cognitive ability, severe enough to interfere with daily living activities.
Approximately 47 million people worldwide have AD-related dementia, and this number has doubled almost every 20 years.
It is expected to reach 131.5 million by 2050
AD is characterized by protein conformation
When misfolded, soluble neuronal proteins reach altered conformations, due to genetic mutations (Apolipoprotein ε4 gene (APO ε4) is the most important risk factor in sporadic AD), external factors like aging and aggregates, lead to abnormal neuronal function and neuronal loss
To date, AD causes are still poorly understood and, although many treatments have been tested in clinical trials, none can cure or stop its progression.
However, it was established that even before the first symptoms appear, neurons are affected by two types of lesions: amyloid plaques located between neurons and neurofibrillary degeneration, which is located inside neurons
Amyloid plaques are formed by the abnormal accumulation of a protein called "β-amyloid" between nerve cells in the grey matter of the cerebral cortex, with a dysfunction of the connections between neurons
Neurofibrillary degeneration corresponds to an abnormal accumulation of filaments inside the neuron; the protein responsible for this dysfunction is called "Tau protein"
Both lesions are clusters of proteins that form during the normal aging process.
Yet, in Alzheimer's type disease, these proteins accumulate in much larger quantities
AD is considered a multifactorial disease, with its onset thought to result from the interaction between genetic background and various risk factors
Age is the main proven risk factor, with a prevalence that doubles every 5 years from the age of 65 years (2% after 65, 15% after 80 years)
Other risk factors are now well-established, such as low level of education, cardiovascular risk factors (untreated hypertension, stroke, hypercholesterolemia, diabetes, overweight status, obesity, and periodontal disease); women; environmental factors (tobacco, alcohol, pollution, certain drugs); and sleep disorders.
Chronic inflammation of the body is linked to shrinkage of brain areas in AD; mood disorders like chronic stress or depression are also correlated.
An unbalanced diet, lack of physical and stimulating mental activity may also be associated with an increased risk of AD
Recently, many studies show epidemiological correlations between AD and periodontitis.
There are also pathophysiological arguments for a causal relationship between AD and periodontal disease (PD)
Periodontitis is a peripheral infectious/inflammatory condition, one of the major risk factors in tooth loss
Periodontitis is associated with increased serum levels of C-reactive protein (CRP) and pro-inflammatory cytokines (e.g., tumor necrosis factor-α), as well as decreased anti-inflammatory markers (e.g., interleukin-10)
Many researchers hypothesised that the association between AD and periodontitis may be due to increased systemic inflammation accompanying the growth of periodontal pathogens
The latter would mediate the development of AD through their role in the development of vascular disease
Although the link between gut dysbiosis and neurological disorders remains speculative, anatomical evidence is leading to a better understanding of a bidirectional link between the gut and brain, as is the case in AD
This bidirectional relationship is thought to exist between the oral microbiota and many systemic diseases, including AD.
This review aims to clarify the nature of the link between Alzheimer's disease and the oral microbiome at the epidemiological and pathophysiological levels, as well as to highlight new therapeutic perspectives to contribute to the management of this disease.

Materials and Methods
We performed a systematic review following the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews (PRISMA) checklist
Authors defined research questions, objectives, search strategies, and inclusion/exclusion criteria through previous discussions.

Search Strategy
Understanding the interactions of microorganisms with the host and with each other, as well as their impact on health, was improved by the development of high-throughput sequencing techniques for genetic material since 2000
The research was carried out from January 2000 to July 2021 to clarify the relationship between AD and the oral microbiome.
So as not to restrict the search only to oral pathologies, terms identifying the main oral ecological niches "Dental plaque," "Saliva," and Mouth" were associated with the search term "Mouth diseases" and used in combination with the Boolean operator "AND"/"OR" as per the following equation:
(((("Mouth"[Mesh]) OR "Mouth Diseases"[Mesh]) OR "Dental Plaque"[Mesh]) OR "Saliva"[Mesh]) AND "Alzheimer Disease"

Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria
We included experimental or clinical studies (longitudinal, cross-sectional, or randomised) that explored the association between the oral microbiome and AD symptoms, and/or explored the association between the oral microbiome and AD from an immunoinflammatory perspective.
We excluded conferences, abstracts, reviews, and editorials.

Data Extraction
Two independent operators (F.D. and Y.M.) manually checked the references of eligible studies on the subject, according to inclusion/exclusion criteria.
An analysis of titles and abstracts by F.D. and Y.M. was performed to identify potentially relevant articles based on inclusion criteria.
When the information in the abstracts was deemed insufficient, a review of the complete study decided on its relevance.
A discussion between the two reviewers took place to reach a consensus with discrepancies in the selection decision process.

Results

Study Selection
After retrieving the studies from the database, we identified the studies that met eligibility criteria.
Of the 227 studies initially identified, 24 were selected.
A complementary detection resulted in the selection of three additional articles.
A total of 27 articles were included in the analysis (Figure

Study Characteristics
Since the beginning of 2000, the number of publications about the relationship between the oral microbiome and AD has been steadily increasing, with 44% of publications from 2019 to 2021 (Figure
These concern experimental in vitro studies (n = 1) or murine models (n = 6) and human clinical studies (n = 20).
The case-control study design is most often used for human studies (n = 12) (Figure
With the exception of retrospective cohort studies, sample sizes were limited in both animal (N = 30 to 140) and human (N = 20 to 354) studies.
While they were conducted worldwide, they were concentrated in the United States (9 studies from 2002 to 2021) and in Europe (8 studies from 2010 to 2021) see Figure
Each study meeting the inclusion criteria was analysed in terms of authors, date of publication, study design, objectives, factors assessed, results and limitations (Table

Clinical Oral Perturbations and Alzheimer's Disease
In 2020, Kantarci et al. showed that PD increases bone loss in AD model mice (5xFAD) and wild-type control mice (WT).
While they found no significant difference in alveolar bone loss after induction of experimental PD between 5xFAD and WT mice, they noted that alveolar bone loss is higher in 5xFAD than in WT at baseline
Periodontal damages were also identified in several case-control studies in humans.
Thus, De Oliveira Araújo et al. found a significant association between periodontitis and AD, controlling for age, sex, income, and education
In accordance with this result, periodontal infections, the presence of deep periodontal pockets, and generalised marginal alveolar bone loss are markers of periodontal deterioration, that appear to be significantly associated with AD patients
Similarly, in 2015, the cross-sectional study by Kamer et al. found a significant association between a loss of clinical attachment and increased amyloid load in vulnerable brain areas of AD patients, after adjustment for confounding factors (age, ApoE, and smoking)
Several retrospective cohort studies, assessing the association between incident AD risk and PD, moderate these results.
For example, in a cohort followed for 26 years (N = 6650), the association between risk of AD and periodontal pocket depth appeared marginal in men and older individuals
The study by
p = 0.042)
Conversely, in a cohort of 27,963 patients over 50 years, followed for 16 years, Chen et al. showed a significantly higher risk of developing AD in patients with 10 years of exposure to CP vs. those with no exposure

Oral Dysbiosis and Alzheimer's Disease
Liu et al. showed that the salivary microbiome has significantly lower diversity in patients with AD than in healthy patients
Maurer et al. also identified a higher bacterial load of Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans, Porphyromonas gingivalis, and Fusobacterium nucleatum in dental plaque compared to controls
Rivière et al. demonstrated that brain colonisation by treponemes (T.
amylovorum, T. denticola, T. maltophilum, T. medium, T. pectinovorum, T. socranskii, T. vincentii) was more frequent in AD patients than controls
In 2018, Ilievski et al. detected the presence of P. gingivalis and gingipaïn in the hippocampus of mice
While the study by Liu et al. concluded that no oral bacteria are associated with the severity of AD
gingivalis, Tannerella forsythia, A. actinomycetemcomitans, T. denticola, Campylobacter rectus, Actinomyces naeslundii) represents a risk factor in developing AD
According to the study by Beydoun et al., the incidence and mortality of AD could be related to a combination of periodontal bacteria.
The incidence of AD is related to a composite of C. rectus and P. gingivalis, such that the risk of mortality from AD was enhanced by a composite of P. gingivalis, Prevotella intermedia, Prevotella nigrescens, F. nucleatum, C. rectus, Streptococcus intermedius, Capnocytophaga ochracea and Prevotella melaninogenica

Pathophysiological Evidence between the Microbiome and Alzheimer's Disease
According to the study of Dominy et al., on mice, the presence of P. gingivalis and gingipaïn in the brain plays a central role in the pathogenesis of AD
In vitro, Yamada et al. demonstrated that exposure to phosphoglycerol dihydroceramide produced by P. gingivalis (PGDHC) increased Aβ peptide secretion in a dose-dependent manner in the Chinese hamster ovary-7WD10 cells, stably expressing wild-type human amyloid precursor protein (APP) and induced specific phosphorylation of Tau protein in a dose-dependent manner in human neuroblastoma cells
In rats, Zhang et al. showed a significant elevation of Aβ1-40 peptide levels in the cerebral cortex of AD rats with periodontitis compared to AD rats without it
Similarly, Díaz-Zúñiga et al. observed a significant increase in Aβ1-42 levels and Tau hyperphosphorylation in the hippocampus of rats orally infected by K1 or K2 P. gingivalis, associated with PD
In mice, Kantarci et al. noted a significant elevation of the mean level of insoluble Aβ42 peptide in the prefrontal cortex of AD mice with periodontitis, compared to AD mice without it
Phosphorylation of Tau protein was detected by
Studies of cognitive decline in murine models show no significant differences in learning and memory tests (Y maze, nest building, or the Morris Water Maze test) that may be associated with periodontitis or acute or continuous exposure to P. gingivalis-derived lipopolysaccharides (Pg-LPS)
According to Ide et al., there was also no significant relationship between serum levels of antibodies to P. gingivalis and rates of cognitive decline, based on the Mini Mental State Examination (MMSE) in AD patients
However, in 2020, Leblhuber et al. found a significant association between the salivary presence of P. gingivalis and lower MMSE in AD patients

Oral Microbiota and Immuno-Inflammation in Alzheimer Disease
While neuroimmune interactions are essential to brain function
In vitro, Yamada et al. showed that exposure of human neuroblastoma cells to PGDHC or Pg-LPS increased expression of the senescence-associated secretory phenotype involving β-galactosidase, cathepsin B, cysteine, and pro-inflammatory cytokines TNF-α and IL-6
In the hippocampus of rats infected with P. gingivalis encapsulated serotypes K1 and K2, Díaz-Zúñiga et al. observed a significant increase in pro-inflammatory cytokine (IL-1β, IL-6, TNF-α, IFN-γ) not found in rats infected with non-encapsulated bacterial strains
Similarly, oral application of P. gingivalis 3 times a week for 22 weeks showed a significant increase in the expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines (IL-1β, IL-6 and TNF-α) in the hippocampus of infected mice compared to controls
In AD model rats with induced periodontitis, compared to controls, TNF-α levels were significantly higher in the hippocampus, IL-1 levels were higher in the cerebral cortex, and IL6 levels were higher both in the hippocampus and cerebral cortex
The inflammatory activation index (TNFa to IL-10 ratio) shows higher and unresolved inflammation in the brains of AD mice before and after induction of periodontitis, than in non-AD mice; this is associated with a reduction in microglial markers in the vicinity of Aβ plaques, vs. those without induced periodontitis
Consistent with the study by Kamer et al., which showed a higher expression of antibodies against periodontal bacteria (A.
actinomycetemcomitans, T. forsythia, and P. gingivalis) and TNF-α in the serum of AD patients than controls
Over a six-month follow-up in patients with mild to moderate AD, anti-P.
gingivalis antibody levels were associated with a fall in serum IL10 levels and an increase in serum TNFα
In short-term post-mortem AD brain tissue (12h),
Similarly, Laugish et al. (
actinomycetemcomitans, T. denticola, T. forsythia, P. gingivalis) can play a significant role in the local immune response
In AD patients, a significant reduction in the concentration of sensitive biomarkers of immune activation is associated with different oral bacteria; thus, the presence of T. denticola and T. forsythia in saliva reduced the serum concentrations of neopterin and kynurenine, respectively

Alzheimer's Disease Risk Factor and Therapeutic Perspectives in Relation to the Oral Microbiome
The influence of genetics on the onset and development of AD, as well as on susceptibility to pathogens is well-understood
In 2019, Liu et al. study found a significant decrease in Actinobacillus and Actinomyces levels and an abundance of Abiotrophia and Desulfomicrobium in patients carrying the APOE ε4 gene
In P. gingivalis-infected mice, the expression of APP and BACE1 genes, involved in the development of AD, was significantly increased vs. the control group.
Conversely, the expression of ADAM10, which plays an essential role in reducing the generation of amyloid-β (Aβ) peptides, was significantly reduced
The Mendelian randomization study of
According to Kamer et al., no significant difference in cytokine levels could be found as per the presence of the APOE ε4 gene in AD patients
Several studies suggest that antimicrobial therapy is effective for AD
In the study by Dominy et al., oral administration of gingipain inhibitors to mice, essential for the survival of P. gingivalis, reduced the load of P. gingivalis and cytokines (TNFα), as well as the production of Aβ peptide 1-42 in the brain.
An increased number of neurons in the hippocampus of P. gingivalis-infected mice, treated with these inhibitors, reflects a reduction in the neurotoxicity of this bacterium
A bidirectional Mendelian randomization study N = 4924 /7301
Examination of the potential causal relationship between AD and chronic periodontitis bidirectionally in the population of European ancestry.
Single-nucleotide polymorphisms associated with periodontitis and AD.
No evidence for a bidirectional genetic relationship between AD and periodontitis from analysis of Genome-Wide Association Studies data.
* Mendelian randomisation does not assess the impact of the duration of periodontal disease on the risk of developing AD, The genetic tool used to define PD may not be suitable for detecting the causal link between PD and AD.

Discussion

Oral Microbiome and Alzheimer's Disease
The bidirectional relationship between the gut microbiome and AD is increasingly well-understood, leading to the definition of the gut-brain axis
The detection of peptides in the gut and brain helped to lay the foundation for the concept of the gut-brain axis in the sixties and seventies
Similar studies argue for a relationship between the oral microbiome and AD.
Thus, the particular dysbiotic signature in Alzheimer's patients involving periodontal bacteria (A.
actinomycetemcomitans, P. gingivalis, T. denticola, F. nucleatum) suggests a modulation of oral bacterial flora by the central nervous system as observed for intestinal flora
This finding must be moderated, due to additional factors affecting the oral microbiome of AD patients.
Poor oral hygiene from reduced cognition and dexterity, age-related xerostomia, and medication can contribute to oral dysbiosis in these patients
The presence of P. gingivalis in the brain, as well as an increase in Aβ peptide secretion, induced by associated compounds (gingipain, phosphoglycerol dihydroceramide), can be related to the antimicrobial activity of Aβ peptide, as demonstrated by Soscia et al. against several Gram-negative and Gram-positive bacteria (Esherichia coli, Streptococcus pneumonia, Streptococcus salivarius) as well as Candida albicans
Long-term colonization by pathogenic bacteria and failure to clear the Aβ peptides, which was produced in response, can lead to excessive accumulation followed by brain tissue destruction through the formation of amyloid plaques and hyperphosphorylation of the tau protein
These observations can be related to the survey results by Beydoun et al.
In this context, while the evidence for the impact of the microbiome on cognitive performance seems well established

Possible Mechanisms of the Relationship between the Oral Microbiome and Alzheimer's Disease
Neuroinflammation is an important process in the neurodegeneration associated with AD.
It exacerbates key features of the disease, including the deposition of Aβ peptides and hyperphosphorylation of tau.
It places this process in a vicious cycle of inflammation and cellular destruction
Thus, the presence in the brain of lipopolysaccharides from T. denticola, T. forsythia, and P. gingivalis that can be associated with increased expression of major proinflammatory cytokines (IL-1β, IL-6, TNFα, and IFNγ) and decreased antiinflammatory cytokines (IL-10) suggests an involvement of the oral microbiota in the occurrence and progression of AD.
Furthermore, these periodontal pathogens seem to modulate the immune response in AD patients.
This modulation may be related to an alteration of microglial activity associated with an increased risk of AD
However, localized transient inflammation is the normal immunological response of our immune system to cell/tissue damage, and is very important for tissue regeneration and repair
Inflammation is a violent cell self-destructive way of clearing damaged cells.
By destroying the infected tissues, the pathogens are cleared as well, and thus almost all microbial infections are self-limiting
If at the same time the debris of the destroyed cells can be effectively cleaned away by our immune system
While several mechanisms involving nervous, endocrine, and immune signals were advanced in the context of the gut-brain axis
Nevertheless, Rivière et al. proposed the hypothesis that oral bacteria may infect the brain via branches of the trigeminal nerve
The possibility of oral bacteria accessing the bloodstream
It can be assumed that their interactions with the blood-brain barrier may also alter its integrity, allowing metabolic products produced by the microbiome, such as short-chain fatty acids, to cross the BBB and then affect brain function, such as the proposed in the gut-brain axis
Although alterations in the BBB have been found both in AD patients and in animal models, their role in the disease process remains unclear
The reciprocal modulation of the expression of some genes involved in AD and the modulation of oral microbiota has been identified
It provides the basis for the hypothesis of a plausible common genetic cause for oral dysbiosis and AD.
However, according to Sun et al.
The oral microbiome and associated dysbiosis appear to be only one environmental risk factor for the expression of genes associated with AD, as is the case for diseases such as diabetes or cardiovascular disease, etc.

Inflammation, Overnutrition and Lipotoxicity
Although the virulence of the microorganism determines the damages made by the microorganisms to the host cells before they are cleared by host immunity, this microbial virulence alone does not account for the virulence of disease
Most of the virulence of an infectious or chronic non-infectious disease is the result of the overactive inflammation response of our immune system
The driving force for such an inflammatory transition is overnutrition.
This is because, when there is overnutrition, the debris of the destroyed cells cannot be effectively cleaned, then this debris will become the nutrition source for bacteria proliferation.
This debris can also be turned into lipid intermediates, and induce lipotoxicity.
The human immune system also has a pivotal role in nutrition acquisition from the pathogen or the commensal microbiota like bacteria and the damaged tissues
But if there is overnutrition, lipotoxicity as a result of overnutrition will prevent the tissue healing process from happening.
Moreover, in the state of over-nutrition, the nutrition generated from the degradation of microbial-infected tissues will make this overnutrition situation worse, lipotoxicity and tissue damage will form a vicious positive feedback loop (as lipotoxicity is also a strong stimulus for cell dysfunction and cell death), which are escalated by the inflammation response, shifting inflammation from local to systemic, creating collateral damage to all other organs including the central nervous system, and may cause AD.
So overnutrition could be a more possible linking factor between microbiota (oral or gastrointestinal) and AD.

Oral Microbiota Modulation and Alzheimer's Disease Therapy
Treatments for AD are currently symptomatic, but research is targeting its pathological features, including Aβ peptides and tau protein
In this context, the probable impact of the oral microbiome on the development of AD opens the door to a complementary therapeutic approach.
Only the study by
However, phototherapy, as well as prebiotic compounds and probiotic strains for a global/targeted modulation of the oral microbiome, represent areas of research for the prevention and treatment of AD.
Indeed, the results of these potential new methods seem to demonstrate the effectiveness in the modification of the ecosystem of dental plaque by reducing the importance of the periodontal bacteria, which appear to be associated with AD (P.
gingivalis, F. nucleatum, C. rectus, and others)
Blue light is painless, fast, without drug toxicity or effect on taste, and is selective in effect.
Its use could help to reduce oral dysbiosis linked to PD
Probiotic strains affecting the periodontogenic flora through various galenic forms, such as milk drinks, yoghurts, and mouthwash could facilitate oral hygiene measures in AD patients
Modulation of several pathological events in AD such as reduction in amyloid-β aggregation and inflammation, regulation of mitochondrial dynamics and increased availability of neuronal energy seem to be associated with different metabolic pathways (e.g., Wnt signalling, 5'-adenosine monophosphate-activated protein kinase)
As Gram-negative bacteria-associated LPS and microbiome-generated amyloids potentially contribute to the regulation of these signalling pathways

Limitations and Perspectives
While the relationship between the oral microbiome and mental disorders is a topic of growing interest, some limitations in the studies in this review must be noted.
Thus, in the context of the evaluation of brain colonization by oral bacteria, some authors point to a risk of tissue contamination by the oral microbiota post-mortem
Moreover, despite the microbiome changes over the life course
The promotion of longitudinal studies is essential to understand the role of the oral microbiome in the incidence and progression of AD.
The decline in cognitive function in AD patients is linked to behavioural changes that affect oral health.
The progressive decline in patients' ability and interest in both performing brushing and complementary oral care leads to the rapid development of oral pathology and dysbiosis
In addition to difficulties in dental self-care, access to professional dental care procedures is complicated by a progressive cognitive decline in AD patients
Faced with the challenge of an aging population and the increase in the weight of associated AD
In addition, with genetic tools and molecular analyses available to identify individual bacteria and their metabolic products, it is possible to locate and track these bacteria in different host tissues to understand which cells they may affect and which metabolic signaling pathways they may activate and thus better understand how AD may be influenced by the oral microbiome.
Due to the complexity of the etiopathology of AD and the interrelation between the factors responsible for the symptoms of the disease, a new therapeutic approach combining different targets is essential to develop new, more effective and personalized interventions and strategies for patients with this disease

Conclusions
Several studies show a statistical link between AD and oral microbiota.
Although the robustness of this link must be confirmed due to numerous confounding factors, evidence is accumulating towards the impact of the oral microbiome in pathophysiological and immuno-inflammatory mechanisms of this disease.
The impact of the oral microbiome on the development of AD opens up complementary therapies, such as phototherapy, prebiotic compounds, and probiotic strains for a global or targeted modulation of the oral microbiome, with a favourable influence on the evolution of this pathology.



Figure 1 .
Figure 1.
Flow chart of the study selection.



Figure 2 .
Figure 2. Study characteristics: years of publication (a), design, (b), research laboratory country (c).



Table 1 .
Analysis of selected articles.



Table 1 .
Cont.



Table 1 .
Cont.



Table 1 .
Cont.



Table 1 .
Cont.



Table 1 .
Cont.



Table 1 .
Cont.



Table 1 .
Cont.



Table 1 .
Cont.



Table 1 .
Cont.