The Pleiotropic Roles of Autophagy in Alzheimer's Disease: From Pathophysiology to Therapy
Autophagy is a lysosomal degradation pathway and the main clearance route of many toxic protein aggregates.
The molecular pathology of Alzheimer's disease (AD) manifests in the form of protein aggregatesextracellular Amyloid-β (Aβ) depositions and intracellular tau neurofibrillary tangles (NFT).
Perturbations at different steps of autophagy pathway observed in cellular and animal models of AD might contribute to Aβ and tau accumulation.
Increased levels of autophagosomes detected in patients' brains suggest an alteration of autophagy in human disease.
Autophagy is also involved in the fine-tuning inflammation, which rises in the first stage of AD and possibly drives its pathogenesis.
Mounting evidence of a causal link between impaired autophagy and AD pathology uncovers an exciting opportunity for the development of autophagy-based therapeutics.

Autophagy
Macroautophagy (hereafter referred to as autophagy) is an evolutionarily conserved pathway where portions of cytoplasm are sequestered in double-membraned autophagosomes and delivered to lysosomes for degradation.
Autophagy allows recycling of nutrients to provide energy during starvation, but in complex multicellular organisms it is also involved in other aspects of cellular stress response.
Indeed, by degrading aggregate-prone proteins and damaged organelles, autophagy acts as a quality control machinery maintaining cellular homeostasis
Furthermore, autophagy negatively regulates several key components of the immune response, playing a crucial role in counteracting inflammation
Autophagy is particularly important in safeguarding the health of brain cells, and its impairment results in the neuronal accumulation of toxic proteins and excessive neuroinflammationhallmarks of many neurodegenerative diseases
While disrupted autophagy may not be the primary cause of neurodegeneration, a growing body of evidence indicates that defects at different stages of this pathway may contribute to disease progression and pathology, suggesting that boosting autophagy might be a valuable strategy for therapeutics.
Autophagy is a multi-step process that starts with the formation of a cup-shaped, doublemembraned structure called a phagophore.
Upon activation by ULK1/2, the VPS34/Beclin1 complex translocates on the nascent phagophore to produce PI3P, which enables the sequential recruitment of WIPI2 and the ATG12-ATG5-ATG16L1 complex.
The latter is an E3-like ligase protein complex required for the conjugation of Atg8/LC3 on the developing autophagosome.
In addition to enabling expansion and closure of the phagophore, LC3 facilitates the engulfment of cargo in autophagic vesicles by directly interacting with autophagy receptors, such as p62/SQSTM1.
Upon closure, autophagosomes travel towards the lysosome clustered at the microtubule organizing centre via dynein motors, where SNAREs mediate autophagosome-lysosome fusion, promoting degradation of the autophagic cargo (Figure
Autophagy is triggered by various stressors-signalling pathways.
The most common are low energy production-mediated AMPK activation and nutrient starvation-mediated mTORC1 inhibition.
TFEB, a transcription factor controlled by mTORC1, coordinates both autophagosome biogenesis and lysosomal proteolysis, acting as a central regulator of the autophagy flux
In this review we will consider how proteins linked to AD affect autophagy and how autophagy disruption impacts the accumulation of the pathological Aβ and tau aggregates.
Finally, we will discuss the most recent developments in autophagy-related therapeutics.

Alzheimer's disease
AD is a debilitating neurodegenerative condition clinically characterized by progressive dementia and cognitive impairment.
Central pathologic events in AD are: (i) the abnormal cleavage of APP, resulting in the accumulation of Aβ plaques in the extra-cellular space and (ii) the hyperphosphorylation of microtubule-associated protein tau, leading to the formation of intracellular neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs).
Converging evidence indicates that the deposition of Aβ is a likely initial pathological event in AD and is responsible for the spread of tau pathology.
Clinically, the amount of tau NFTs correlates with the cognitive dysfunction of AD to a greater extent than Aβ plaque load does.
Chronic neuroinflammationrecently identified as a third core feature of ADhas emerged as a potential bridge between these two events
Although most patients present with "sporadic" late onset disease (~80 years), a small number of cases (<1%) have inherited mutations in genes that affect processing of Aβ (APP, PSEN1 & PSEN2) and develop the disease much earlier (~45 years)
The discovery of monogenic forms of AD has led to the development of faithful cellular and animal models of these Mendelian diseases, allowing a better investigation of the biological mechanisms underlying this condition, including autophagy.

Autophagy and Alzheimer's disease
Perturbations at different stages of autophagy might compromise the homeostasis of toxic aggregate-prone proteins (Aβ and tau) and exacerbate neuroinflammation, thus contributing to AD pathogenesis.
Supporting a relationship between autophagy and AD, genetic mutations relevant to the autophagy-lysosomal pathway have been identified as disease risk factors for late-onset AD
The accumulation of immature autophagic vacuoles (AVs) observed in dystrophic neurites of AD patients' brains is compatible with autophagy impairment
Further studies in vivo and in vitro demonstrated that both autophagy induction and autophagosome clearance may be altered in AD.

Autophagy and Aβ
The amyloidogenic form of Aβ is generated from APP via sequential proteolytic cleavages performed by β-and γ-secretases.
In AD, the production of Aβ exceeds its clearance, leading to Aβ accumulation and the formation of neurotoxic aggregates
The latter might be caused, at least partially, by a progressive impairment of autophagy.
Defects in autophagosome formation have been reported in AD patients' brains and might be explained by reduced levels of BECLIN 1 and NBRF2, key regulators of autophagosome biogenesis.
Genetic depletion of these factors in AD mouse models suppresses autophagy-mediated degradation of Aβ aggregates and accelerates cognitive impairment
Accumulation of autophagosomes within patient dystrophic neurites suggests defective axonal retrograde transport.
Studies in relevant mouse models demonstrate that interactions of Aβ oligomers with dynein motor protein hinders dynein recruitment to SNAPIN-loaded autophagosomes, thus impairing their trafficking towards lysosomes and reducing degradation of autophagy cargo
Accordingly, dynein or SNAPIN overexpression in AD mice improved axonal transport, autophagosome maturation and Aβ clearance
Alzheimer's disease-related mutations in PSEN1 and PSEN2 not only cause pathogenic Aβ cleavage but also impact the autophagy flux.
PSEN1 maintains lysosomal acidification by targeting the v-ATPase V0a1 subunit to lysosomes, while PSEN2 controls RAB7 recruitment to autophagosomes by modulating ER Ca 2+ homeostasis.
Consequently, mutations in PSEN1 and PSEN2 impair lysosomal proteolysis and hinder autophagosome-lysosome fusion
Environmental and genetic disease modifiers also contribute to AD by interfering with autophagy-lysosomal pathway.
For instance, elevated intracellular cholesterol levels in neurons exert a dual effect on autophagy and mitophagy.
On the one hand, this stimulates auto/mitophagosome formation by exacerbating Aβ-induced mitochondrial oxidative stress, but, on the other hand, it alters the distribution of SNAREs and prompts the cytosolic aggregation of the mitophagy adaptor OPTN, ultimately preventing cargo recognition and vesicle fusion necessary for the completion of auto/mitophagy
Finally, components of the autophagic machinery display a protective role in AD via non-canonical pathways that employ some components of the autophagy machinery.
Murine studies show that LC3associated phagocytosis (LAP) and endocytosis (LANDO) are required for the recycling of Aβ receptors by microglia and defects in these processes contribute to Aβ accumulation, resulting in pervasive neurodegeneration, consistent with the human disease

Autophagy and tau
Tau is involved in microtubule assembly and stability, and it is modulated by several posttranslational modifications.
Among these, phosphorylation plays a central role in the formation of NFT, since hyperphosphorylation decreases tau association with microtubules, leading to protein misfolding and oligomerization.
Tau is also secreted, and its aggregates can spread from cell to cell to seed new aggregates in healthy cells
Tau hyperacetylation by p300/CBP promotes its accumulation and causes cognitive deficits in transgenic mice
p300 also mediates the acetylation of RAPTOR, a component of mTORC1, which inhibits autophagy
Hyperactivity of p300/CBP inhibits autophagy in tauopathy brains and promotes tau secretion in neurons.
Enhancing autophagic flux prevents p300-mediated tau secretion, and inhibition of p300/CBP can reduce the spread of aggregated tau
Pathological transformations of tau may also affect its interaction with the autophagic machinery.
While normal and soluble forms of tau are targeted by the cargo receptor OPTN, the degradation of insoluble species via selective autophagy appears to be assisted by p62/SQSTM1.
Interestingly, overexpression of p62/SQSTM1 reduces pathological tau and spreading in tauopathy mouse models
Furthermore, SSH1-mediated dephosphorylation of p62/SQSTM1 phospho-Ser403a post-translational modification that enhances its activity and is decreased in ADimpairs its affinity for ubiquitinated substrates and tau clearance.
Knockdown of SSH1 decreases phospho-tau in PS19 mice brains
Pathogenic tau may also amplify its toxic effects by inhibiting autophagy.
Tau accumulation upregulates ANP32A, a component of histone acetyl transferase INHAT complex that masks histone acetylation.
This inhibits the expression of IST1, which facilitates the assembly of the ESCRT-III complex required for autophagosome maturation
Moreover, WT tau seeds are more efficiently targeted by autophagy than the P301L mutant counterparts in neurons.
This may in part result from the degree of inhibition of HDAC6, involved in autophagosomelysosome fusion, by the different seeds

Autophagy and Inflammation
Microglia, the resident immune cells of the central nervous system, play a main role in regulating brain inflammation and have recently gained attention as key regulators of neurodegenerative processes.
Coincidentally, autophagy is recognised as an essential modulator of inflammation.
An example of the autophagic regulation of inflammation is the degradation of the NLRP3 inflammasome, an intracellular complex responsible for the maturation of inflammatory cytokines IL-1β and IL-18
Beclin 1 insufficiency leads to an upregulation of NLRP3 in microglia, accompanied by elevated inflammatory cytokine expression
Conversely, overexpression of TFEB promotes lysosomal function and decreases inflammatory protein expression in microglia from murine AD models
These data suggest that the NLRP3 inflammasome is autophagy-regulated and that autophagy deficiency directly causes inflammation.
The autophagic machinery crosses paths with another key modulator of inflammation.
RIPK1 regulates TNF-induced cell death, balancing between apoptosis and necroptosis, i.e., between non-inflammatory and highly inflammatory cell death
ULK1 phosphorylates RIPK1, thereby reducing TNF-induced cell death.
Accordingly, ULK1 knockdown enhances TNF-induced necroptosis, providing further evidence of the antiinflammatory role of autophagy
Further cellular studies suggest that RIPK1 is a negative regulator of mTORC1, as its ablation enhances mTORC1 activity and lysosomal dysfunction
In contrast, inhibition of RIPK1 in an AD mouse model reduced amyloid burden, the levels of inflammatory cytokines, and promoted microglial degradation of Aβ in vitro
Lastly, inflammatory cytokines can also impact autophagy.
IFN-γ administration promotes microglial clearance of Aβ in a mouse model of AD.
IFN-γ upregulates ATG5 and ATG7 expression, while simultaneously downregulating mTOR activity, indicating that the Aβ clearance might be autophagy-dependent

Autophagy-based therapeutic strategies for AD
Mounting evidence of a causal link between impaired autophagy and defective clearance of Aβ and tau has uncovered an exciting opportunity to develop autophagy-targeted therapy for the treatment of AD.
As genetic manipulation inducing autophagy has been reviewed elsewhere
Small molecule enhancers of autophagy can be classified as mTOR-dependent or mTORindependent.
Classical allosteric mTOR inhibitors, including rapamycin and rapalogs, efficiently induce neuronal autophagic clearance of tau and Aβ and improve the cognitive function of several AD mouse models
Similarly, treatment with ATP-competitive mTOR kinase inhibitors (OSI-027, AZD2014 and AZD8055) have been shown to persistently reduce tau levels in iPSC-derived neurons from other tauopathies
The development of compounds targeting upstream regulators of mTOR is another approach that can be employed.
Alborixin (an ionophore antibiotic) and Nitazoxanide (an anti-parasitic drug) downregulate mTOR signalling via regulation of PTEN/PI3K/AKT pathway, in the absence of toxicity.
This results in increased autophagy-mediated clearance of Aβ in both neuronal and glial cells and improved learning and memory impairments of APP/PS1 transgenic mice
Likewise, a tauopathy-homing nanoassembly containing PEGylated ceria nanoparticles modulates the mTOR-TFEB axis through AKT signalling.
Treatment with this nanomaterial elicits autophagy-dependent tau proteolysis and ameliorates cognitive dysfunction in an AD rat model
Finally, inhibition of p300-mediated acetylation by SMDC37892 also led to a beneficial effect on tau turnover in human iPSC-derived excitatory neurons potentially due to mTORC1 inhibition caused by decreased raptor acetylation [20],
While mTOR inhibition has shown promising effects, it may be important to consider the possibility raised by some studies suggesting that this strategy (and autophagy stimulation, in general) may only be beneficial if initiated early in the disease course
The second category of compounds comprises mTOR-independent autophagy inducers.
Berberine, an isoquinoline alkaloid, stimulates autophagy-mediated tau clearance in 3×Tg AD mice by enhancing the level of BECLIN 1/VPS34 and promoting the maturation of lysosomal proteases CATHEPSIN D
Also, the small molecules ICCB-19 and Apt-1 enhance the autophagic turnover of tau by activating BECLIN 1/VPS34 complex.
Binding of these drugs to the adaptor protein TRADD displace its interaction with TRAF2, cIAP1 or cIAP2, thus releasing these factors and allowing K63-linked ubiquitination of BECLIN 1. Treatment with Apt-1 restored tau proteostasis also in the PS19 mouse model
Similarly, the L-type Ca 2+ channel antagonist felodipine diminished the neuronal levels of insoluble tau and ameliorates the morphologic abnormalities in zebrafish models of tauopathies
TFEB is phosphorylated and inhibited by mTORC1, hence, the majority of the TFEB activators are mTOR inhibitors.
Interestingly, the curcumin analog C1 directly binds to and activates TFEB nuclear translocation without altering its phosphorylated state and acts independently of mTOR activity.
This efficiently promotes autophagy flux and reduced APP, Aβ and tau aggregates in pre-pathological and symptomatic AD mouse models [46],
Similarly, drugs activating PPARα (Wy14643 and gemfibrozil), another transcription factor involved in the regulation of autophagy, decrease Aβ deposition and attenuate the cognitive deficits in APP/PS1ΔE9 mice
Because of their wide expression in the brain and their role in modulating autophagy by sensing extracellular metabolites, G-protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) emerge as druggable targets in neurodegeneration.
Chemical inhibition of H3R (thioperamide) or 5-HT2AR (desloratadine) promotes autophagy by CREB-mediated upregulation of TFEB/ATG7/LAMP1 (in neurons) and SIRT1 (in microglia), respectively, and significantly reduces Aβ levels in APP/PS1 mouse model
Interestingly, allosteric inhibition of mGluR5 by CTEP, restarted autophagy and rescued Aβ pathology in male APPswe/PS1ΔE9 mice, but not in their female counterparts.
This was due to the fact that the aberrant association of mGluR5 with Aβ and PrP C , which leads to the inactivation of GSK3β-ZBTB16 autophagy pathway, occurs only in male mouse brain
In the context of genderspecific pathogenic events, the identification of the Erβ role in promoting autophagy flux by direct interaction with ATG7 might explain why low estrogen levels during menopause correlate with an acceleration of AD onset
Such insights will drive the future development of sex-tailored therapeutics.

Concluding Remarks
Pharmacological induction of autophagy reduces the levels of toxic aggregate-prone proteins and improves the clinical signs of the disease in multiple AD-animal models.
However, most of the models used so far are based on the genetic forms of AD, hence, they do not phenocopy the complex pathophysiology of most patients affected by the "sporadic" disease.
A future challenge will be to develop models incorporating non-genetic factors and the common comorbidities associated with AD and exploring the role of autophagy in this multifactorial context
Upstream signalling (mTOR, TFEB, AMPK) regulating autophagy have been exploited as druggable targets for improving the clearance of pathogenic aggregates.
However, these factors act as central signalling hubs for many other vital functions in the cells, therefore, chronic pharmacological alteration of their activities may results in undesirable side effects.
Considering that autophagy-based therapies are more efficient when administered in early stage of the disease and for long periods, the identification of more specific modulators with better safety profile may be desirable
Finally, recent publications shed light on the canonical and non-canonical functions of autophagy proteins in modulating the activity of microglia, which play a prominent role in the prodromal phase of the disease
Enhancing autophagy in microglia counteracts inflammation and increases their phagocytic activity, which, in turn, prolongs the survival of neurons and delays disease progression.
The introduction of measures targeting microglial autophagy may also hold promise for the future management of the disease.

Figure Legend
Figure
Autophagy in the pathogenesis of AD. mTOR inhibition and AMPK activation are the most common signalling pathways inducing autophagy.
Both events lead to the activation of ULK1 complex (ULK1, ATG13, FIP200, ATG101), which, in turn, translocates to the preautophagosomal membrane where it starts the nucleation of the phagophore with the recruitment of Class III PI3K complex (BECLIN 1, VPS34, VPS15, ATG14L) and the production of PI3P.
The latter interacts with WIPI2, which subsequently recruits ATG5-ATG12-ATG16 complex (E3-like ligase).
The coordinated action of this complex along with ATG7 (E1-like ligase) and ATG3 (E2-like ligase) allows the conjugation of LC3, previously cleaved by ATG4, to phosphatidylethanolamine (PE) lipids on the developing autophagosome.
During the expansion, cytoplasmic materials (protein aggregates and damaged mitochondria) are engulfed in the phagophore through the interaction with specific adaptors (e.g.
SQSTM1 and OPTN) directly binding to LC3-II.
Upon closure, the newly formed autophagosome travels along microtubules, via dynein motor protein, to reach the lysosome.
Autophagosomelysosome fusion is aided by SNAREs and leads to the formation of the autolysosome.
Proper acidification of lysosomes, mediated by v-ATPase, is necessary to activate the lysosomal hydrolases and stimulate proteolysis of the cytoplasmic materials.
The white boxes describe the molecular events, which hinder the progression of the autophagy flux during the pathogenesis of AD.


Melatonin, Metformin and Crocetin increase both neuronal and microglial autophagy via activation of AMPK.
Treatment with these compounds promote Aβ and tau clearance and ameliorate cognitive decline in several tauopathies and APP/PS1 transgenic mouse models [41], [42], [43].
Sert, a serotonin selective reuptake inhibitor, modulates AMPK-mTOR-RPS6KB1 signalling by altering the VDAC1-mediated mitochondrial transport of ATP [44].


20. Son SM, Park SJ, Stamatakou E, Vicinanza M, Menzies FM, Rubinsztein DC: Leucine regulates autophagy via acetylation of the mTORC1 component raptor.
Nat Commun 2020, 11:3148.
21.
Chen X, Li Y, Wang C, Tang Y, Mok S-A, Tsai RM, Rojas JC, Karydas A, Miller BL, Boxer AL, et al.: Promoting tau secretion and propagation by hyperactive p300/CBP via autophagy-lysosomal pathway in tauopathy.
Mol Neurodegener 2020, 15:2.
22. Xu Y, Zhang S, Zheng H: The cargo receptor SQSTM1 ameliorates neurofibrillary tangle pathology and spreading through selective targeting of pathological MAPT (microtubule associated protein tau).
Autophagy 2019, 15:583-598.
*The authors show that SQSTM1 is involved in targeted clearance of pathological tau, and increased expression of this cargo receptor ameliorates tau pathology.
23.
Fang C, Woo J-AA, Liu T, Zhao X, Cazzaro S, Yan Y, Matlack J, Kee T, LePochat P, Kang DE: SSH1 impedes SQSTM1/p62 flux and MAPT/Tau clearance independent of CFL (cofilin) activation.
Autophagy 2020, doi:10.1080/15548627.2020.1816663.
24.
Feng Q, Luo Y, Zhang X-N, Yang X-F, Hong X-Y, Sun D-S, Li X-C, Hu Y, Li X-G, Zhang J-F, et al.: MAPT/Tau accumulation represses autophagy flux by disrupting IST1regulated ESCRT-III complex formation: a vicious cycle in Alzheimer neurodegeneration.
Autophagy 2020, 16:641-658.
25.
Tseng J-H, Ajit A, Tabassum Z, Patel N, Tian X, Chen Y, Prevatte AW, Ling K, Rigo F, Meeker RB, et al.: Tau seeds are subject to aberrant modifications resulting in distinct signatures.
Cell Rep 2021, 35:109037.
26.
Houtman J, Freitag K, Gimber N, Schmoranzer J, Heppner FL, Jendrach M: Beclin1driven autophagy modulates the inflammatory response of microglia via NLRP 3. EMBO J 2019, 38.
*First study suggesting that NLRP3 is degraded through autophagy in primary murine microglia.
41.
Luengo E, Buendia I, Fernández-Mendívil C, Trigo-Alonso P, Negredo P, Michalska P, Hernández-García B, Sánchez-Ramos C, Bernal JA, Ikezu T, et al.: Pharmacological doses of melatonin impede cognitive decline in tau-related Alzheimer models, once tauopathy is initiated, by restoring the autophagic flux.
J Pineal Res 2019, 67:e12578.
42.
Wani A, Al Rihani SB, Sharma A, Weadick B, Govindarajan R, Khan SU, Sharma PR, Dogra A, Nandi U, Reddy CN, et al.: Crocetin promotes clearance of amyloid-β by inducing autophagy via the STK11/LKB1-mediated AMPK pathway.
Autophagy 2021, doi:10.1080/15548627.2021.1872187.
43.
Chen Y, Zhao S, Fan Z, Li Z, Zhu Y, Shen T, Li K, Yan Y, Tian J, Liu Z, et al.: Metformin attenuates plaque-associated tau pathology and reduces amyloid-β burden in APP/PS1 mice.
Alzheimers Res Ther 2021, 13:40.
44.
Hwang H-Y, Shim JS, Kim D, Kwon HJ: Antidepressant drug sertraline modulates AMPK-MTOR signaling-mediated autophagy via targeting mitochondrial VDAC1 protein.
Autophagy 2020, doi:10.1080/15548627.2020.1841953.
45.
Siddiqi FH, Menzies FM, Lopez A, Stamatakou E, Karabiyik C, Ureshino R, Ricketts T, Jimenez-Sanchez M, Esteban MA, Lai L, et al.: Felodipine induces autophagy in mouse brains with pharmacokinetics amenable to repurposing.
Nat Commun 2019, 10:1817.
**In this paper, we shows that felodipine induces autophagy-dependent clearance of aggregate-prone proteins causing neurodegenerative diseases at plasma concentrations similar to those seen in human patients.
46.
Song J-X, Malampati S, Zeng Y, Durairajan SSK, Yang C-B, Tong BC-K, Iyaswamy A, Shang W-B, Sreenivasmurthy SG, Zhu Z, et al.: A small molecule transcription factor EB activator ameliorates beta-amyloid precursor protein and Tau pathology in Alzheimer's disease models.
Aging Cell 2020, 19:e13069.



Table 1 .
Molecules tested for amelioration of AD pathology through modulation of autophagy.
See text for details.