Dietary interventions and cognition of Alzheimer’s disease patients: a systematic review of randomized controlled trial
Dementia is characterized by a decline in memory, language, problem-solving and in other cognitive domains that affect a person's ability to perform everyday activities and social functioning.
It is consistently agreed that cognitive impairment is an important risk factor for developing functional disabilities in patients with dementia.
Functional status can be conceptualized as the ability to perform self-care, self-maintenance and physical activity.
A person with dementia usually requires help with more complex tasks, such as managing bills and finances, or simply maintaining a household.
Good functional performance is fundamental for elderly people to maintain independency and avoid institutionalization.
The purpose of this review is to describe functional changes in demented patients, evaluating the variability in subgroups of dementias.
Key words: activities of daily living (
D ementia constitutes a multifactorial process
As the disease progresses, people living with dementia experience, in addition to impaired cognitive functions, gradual dysfunction and loss of individual autonomies.
Besides decline in memory and/or other cognitive domains, the criteria for diagnosis of dementia require loss of functional reserve and pejoration in functional status.
When older people show functional loss, they experience a variety of negative outcomes, such as higher rates of use of hospital services, institutionalization, and increased risk of death.
The progression of healthy aging to dementia must be considered a continuum, both in terms of the slow manifestation of the impairment of cognitive functions, as well as functional limitation.
Originally, mild cognitive impairment (MCI) was considered a condition in which someone has minor cognitive decline, not severe enough to interfere significantly with daily life and

Dietary interventions and cognition of Alzheimer's disease patients INTRODUCTION
It is estimated that by 2030 there will be 82 million people in the world with dementia.
Most of these cases occur in middle-and low-income countries that currently hold 66% of all people with the disease.
In Brazil, the epidemiological data on AD are still restricted to the most developed regions of the country, where the prevalence of dementia in the elderly ranges from 7.1 to 12.9%, being AD the responsible for 55.1-59.8% of cases.
ategorized as a progressive neurodegenerative disorder, AD has as its main physical and anatomopathological marker the abnormal accumulation of β-amyloid peptide (Aβ) in senile plaques (SP) and hyperphos-phorylated tau protein (TP) in neurofibrillary tangles (NFT), resulting in diffuse cerebral atrophy in areas of the hippocampus and frontal, parietal and temporal cortex.
7]
Risk factors for AD include advanced age, presence of Apoliprotein E4 allele genes, family history of AD and brain injury.
Increasing evidence also suggests that lifestyle-related modifiable risk factors such as inadequate diet, physical and intellectual inactivity, diabetes, obesity, depression, smoking, and low education have an important role in AD due to their relationship with mechanisms involving inflammation, oxidative stress, and mitochondrial dysfunction.
o date, the therapeutic resources available for AD are limited to symptom management and cannot prevent cognitive decline and disease progression.
Thus, there is a growing interest in strategies that can intervene in their pathophysiological mechanisms, targeting modifiable risk factors for the disease.
1]
Prospective cohort studies with the Mediterranean Diet (MeDi), Dietary Approach to Stop Hypertension (DASH), and Mediterranean-DASH Diet Intervention for Neurodegenerative Delay (MIND) in healthy subjects demonstrated a lower incidence of AD,
In two other studies, both MeDi and folate and vitamin B6 consumption were inversely associated with disease incidence.
n the field of intervention, folate, B6 vitamin and other nutrients and dietary components have been studied for their neuroprotective properties and potential positive effect on cognition.
Positive results in cognitive performance have been found in experimental studies and clinical trials using omega-3 fatty acids,
However, several questions are still present regarding the reproducibility of the results found in animal models and the effectiveness of such interventions in individuals with AD in the various stages of the disease.
Therefore, considering the potential relationship between diet, cognition and AD, the present systematic review aimed to evaluate the existing evidence in controlled randomized controlled trials for the use of specific dietary interventions in the management of cognitive decline in AD patients.

METHODS
It was a systematic review of randomized controlled trials conducted according to the protocol proposed by the Cochrane Collaboration

Literature search strategy
The search for randomized controlled trials (RCT) was conducted in the PubMed, Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials, and Scopus databases, in September 2016, using a combination of the Medical Subject Heading (MeSH) terms related to the factor under study (dietary interventions in Patients with AD), outcome (cognitive performance), and design (randomized controlled trials) (Table
Additionally, manual searches were performed in the reference list of studies relevant to this review.

Selection of eligible studies
The studies identified in the search in the three databases were stored in the reference organizer program Endnote Web, after deleting duplicates.
Two reviewers (AKJ and SHCM) independently assessed the titles and abstracts and the discrepancies were resolved by a third reviewer (FMS).
After the selection of potentially eligible articles, a reviewer (SHCM) read the full texts for confirmation of inclusion in this systematic review and collected the data from a standardized form.
The following criteria were considered eligible for the two stages of study selection:
• A randomized clinical trial design.
• Including participants with a prior diagnosis of AD. • Having assessed cognition as primary or secondary endpoint.
• Having had interventions such as diet or food or specific supplement.
Studies that included participants with different types of dementia and did not present stratified results for AD were excluded, as were those whose presented open-label phase results from an included study and whose full text could not be accessed.
Only studies whose manuscript were published in English were selected.

Data extraction and methodological quality assessment of eligible studies
The data extracted from the articles were: • Authorship.
To evaluate the methodological quality, the criteria proposed by Cochrane were evaluated from the six domains: randomization method, allocation concealment, blinding scheme (participants, professionals, and outcome assessors), intention-to-treat analysis (ITT), follow-up losses and selection of outcomes.

RESULTS
From the search in the three databases, 5,000 articles were identified, after duplicate exclusion.
Additionally, nine articles considered relevant to the study were included.
Thirty-two studies met the eligibility criteria and were included in this review.
The study flowchart is presented in Figure

General characteristics of studies
The overall characteristics of the selected studies are presented in Table
The majority were conducted in the United States (41.0%) and in European countries (34.0%).
The sample size ranged from 12 to 613 individuals per test with a follow-up period of 25 weeks in men, ranging from three weeks to thirty months.
The mean age of participants ranged from 66.1 to 84.8 years and in seven studies (22%), more than half of the sample consisted of men.
Of the 32 RCT included, one (3%) had a cross-over design,
e blinding scheme, 26 (81%) trials were double-blind,
In one study,
The intervention period in the studies ranged from three weeks to three and a half years.
For the assessment of cognitive performance, different instruments were used, being the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE), Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale-Cognitive Subscale (ADAS-cog), and Clinical Dementia Rating Scale -Sum of Boxes (CDR-SOB) the most frequent tests adopted.

Effect of dietary interventions on the cognition of patients with Alzheimer's disease
The effect of different dietary interventions on the cognition of AD patients evaluated by the studies is presented in Table
Dietary interventions were grouped as oral nutritional formulations, fatty acids (alone or in combination with other nutrients), micronutrients (alone or in combination with other nutrients), ginseng, phytochemicals, coconut oil, probiotics, and inositol.
Details of the effects of each intervention are detailed below.

Oral nutritional formulations
Eight parallel RCT
Sample sizes ranged from 37 to 528 subjects, most of whom had mild cognitive decline (MMSE>15 at baseline).
Supplements tested included either liquid or semi-solid formulations, offered one to three times a day.
There was heterogeneity among the studies regarding the macro and micronutrient composition of the supplements, trial design, intervention duration (21 days to 24 months), and cognitive outcomes evaluated.
Three RCT tested the same supplement.
In these, the use of omega-3, phospholipids, choline, uridine monophosphate, vitamin E, vitamin C, selenium, vitamin B12, vitamin B6, and folic acid enriched formula resulted in a lower decline in the Wechsler Memory Scale -revised immediate recall
None of them, however, found statistically significant effects on the cognitive outcomes evaluated.
The randomization method used to allocate participants was described in six studies (Table
Of the eight RCT, two were opened
2]
]
even of the trials reported follow-up losses,
Among those with losses,

Fatty acids
Four parallel RCT
The duration of interventions varied between 4 weeks and 18 months and the trials were heterogeneous in relation to the sample size (39-582 participants per trial), dose used, presence of vitamin E and α-lipoic acid (ALA), composition and fatty acid content (isolated docosahexaenoic acid (DHA), DHA+eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) and mixture of α-linolenic acid with linoleic acid).
In all four studies, fatty acid supplementation resulted in significant improvement in part of the cognitive parameters analyzed.
Twelve-month supplementation with 5,800 mg per day of omega-3 associated with vitamin E in patients with mild AD was effective in promoting a lower rate of cognitive decline on MMSE, but only in the first six months of treatment.
Smaller decline on MMSE was also observed with the use of omega-3 associated with ALA in mild AD (3,000 mg of omega-3+600 mg of ALA per day)
n pat ient s w i th advance d A D (ba s eline MMSE=7.8+3.8), the use of 2 mL per day of a formulation containing a mixture of α-linolenic and linoleic in a ratio of 1:4.5 combined with α-tocopherol resulted in more reports by caregivers of improvement in the patients' general condition.
egarding methodological quality, one of the trials used a block randomization method based on an interactive voice response system with stratification by center,
The groups studied were comparable at baseline in only one
Three trials
Of these, 36 performed the ITT and one did not report the type of analysis performed.
Regarding the evaluated outcomes, only one study

Micronutrients
Ten parallel RCT evaluated micronutrient supplementation alone or in combination compared to placebo
There was heterogeneity in relation to blinding (nine double-blind and one-blind), sample size (12-613 participants per trial), duration of intervention (16 weeks to 4 years), assessed cognitive outcomes and nutrients used (α-tocopherol alone,
h result differs from the pilot RCT performed with the same formulation, where no significant differences were found between groups in DRS-2 and CLOX-1.
Both the intervention and control groups showed an increase in the ADAS-cog score and a reduction in MMSE performance in relation to the baseline.
These results were statistically significant. In the comparison between groups
the increase in ADAS-cog was smaller in the supplemented group, indicating lower cognitive decline.
There was no difference between the groups regarding MMSE performance.
Comparing intervention and control groups, supplement use did not alter cognitive performance in the MMSE, CLOX-1, and Blessed Dementia Scale.
However, patients that at the end of the intervention did not obtain a reduction on serum oxidized glutathione levels, considered "unresponsive" to treatment with vitamin E, had a significant decline in MMSE when compared to "responsive" ones.
Paradoxically, in the same group, there was a decline in levels of F2-isoprostane relative to baseline, a biomarker of oxidative damage.
Of the five other studies, two compared α-tocopherol supplementation with pharmacological treatment (Selegiline
In none of these trials, however, the results found were significant for the cognitive parameters evaluated.
The randomization method used to allocate participants was described in eight of the ten studies.
Of these, five
The studied groups were comparable at baseline in seven
ials showed follow-up losses greater than 10% for the most part of the studies.
0]

Ginseng
Two open parallel trials evaluated ginseng supplementation in individuals with AD.
In both trials, ginseng supplementation resulted in significant improvement in the cognitive outcomes evaluated.
Patients with moderate to severe AD (MMSE<20 and CDR score>1) treated with 4.5 g/d of Sun Ginseng (SG-135) showed significant improvement in the ADAScog and MMSE after 12 and 24 weeks of supplementation.
Similar results were found with the use of 4.5 and 9.0 g/d of Korean white ginseng in a sample of patients with mild to moderate AD.
Compared to control, both doses resulted in improvement in the MMSE and ADAScog scores after 12 weeks of supplementation and such effect was eliminated 12 weeks after discontinuation of treatment.
he groups studied were comparable at baseline in both RCT.
A follow-up loss of 15% was reported by one of the trials, which performed an ITT analysis.
In the other trial, information about follow-up losses and data analysis method were not reported.
In both trials, the results of all predetermined outcomes were presented.

Phytochemicals
Five parallel double-blind RCT
Of the five trials, two evaluated the effect of turmeric at different doses and concentrations of curcuminoids,
In none of the trials, however, the results found were significant for the cognitive parameters evaluated.
Heterogeneity among studies was observed in relation to sample size (34-119 subjects per trial), degree of cognitive decline (mild to severe), duration of the intervention (6 to 13 months), and cognitive outcomes (ADAS-cog, CDR-SOB, MMSE, and Severe Cognitive Impairment Rating Scale -SCIRS).
The randomization method used to allocate participants was described in three of the five studies.
Of these, two
The groups studied were comparable at baseline in four RCT.
1]
52]
As for the outcomes evaluated, four of the five studies

Coconut oil
A parallel, double-blind, placebo-controlled RCT
Using the block randomization method, 58 subjects were randomized to receive coconut oil or placebo.
The characteristics of the groups were similar at baseline.
After 6 months of intervention, no change was observed in the cognitive performance assessed by MMSE and CLOX-1.
Regarding the methodological quality, the study showed a 45% loss of follow-up, which was higher in the intervention group due to side effects such as diarrhea and abdominal discomfort.
Data analysis was performed per protocol and the results of all pre-established outcomes were not presented.

Probiotics
A parallel, double-blind, placebo-controlled RCT
Using a computer program to generate a random list, participants were randomly allocated to receive milk with probiotics (L.
Acidophilus, L. Casei.
B. Bifidum, and L. Fermentum) or placebo.
After 12 weeks of intervention, the probiotic supplemented group had a significant improvement in MMSE performance.
Regarding methodological quality, the groups were different at baseline in relation to some metabolic parameters (triglyceride levels, high density lipoprotein -HDL, and very low density lipoprotein -VLDL), but had similar cognitive characteristics.
The follow-up loss was 10% and data were analyzed by ITT.
The blinding of participants and researchers was maintained until the analysis conclusion and all the pre-established outcomes were reported.

Inositol
The effect of inositol supplementation was evaluated on a double-blind, placebo-controlled crossover RCT.
welve women with mild to severe AD were randomly allocated to receive inositol or dextrose (placebo).
After 4 weeks of treatment, supplementation resulted in a significant improvement in the orientation and language domains assessed by the Cognitive Subscale of Cambridge Mental Disorder of the Elderly Examination (CAMCOG).
Regarding the methodological quality, the randomization method used was not reported in the study, there was a loss of 8% follow-up and data analysis was performed per protocol.

DISCUSSION
This systematic review aimed to evaluate the effect of different dietary interventions on the management of cognitive decline in AD patients.
Our study indicates the effects of improving or delaying cognitive decline with the use of specialized nutritional formulas, fatty acid supplements, ginseng, inositol probiotics.
However, it is noteworthy that such results were mostly obtained in patients with mild AD, limited to only one part of the cognitive outcomes evaluated and resulted from the use of associated and not isolated nutrients in most trials, which suggests that the observed effects may (or may not) be due to the association of rather than a single target nutrient.
Regarding specialized oral nutritional formulations, in the prodromal phase and in the early stages of the disease, Fortasyn Connect (Souvenaid ® ), an oral supplement that includes a combination of EPA, DHA, phospholipids, uridine monophosphate, choline, selenium, and vitamins B6, B12, B9, C, and E, showed good results in the patients' cognitive performance.
Suggested mechanisms for the effects of Fortasyn Connect include increased bioavailability of precursors and co-factors required for neuronal formation, maintenance and function, increased acetylcholine levels and cholinergic receptors with consequent stimulation of synaptogenesis and reduction of Aβ production and neurotoxicity.
However, despite the promising therapeutic effect of prodromal AD, the effects of supplementation with Fortsasyn Connect are still divergent in patients with mild to moderate disease, and further studies are needed to elucidate differences in the outcomes and to confirm the existence of therapeutic benefits on cognition.
The neuroprotective action of omega-3 fatty acids, especially DHA, has been demonstrated in several in vitro experiments and in animal models of AD, reinforcing the idea that supplementation of these nutrients could help reduce neuroinflammation and cognitive decline.
n mouse models of AD, DHA treatment resulted in reduced brain levels of Aβ, particularly β-Amyloid 42 (Aβ-42), the main component of amyloid plaques that contributes to irreversible neuronal death and rapid disease progression.
Other mechanisms involved in the action of DHA include anti-inflammatory, antioxidant, and anti-apoptotic effects.
euroinflammation, chronic activation of glial cells and increased production of reactive oxygen species are involved in the pathogenesis and progression of AD.
In in vitro studies and in patients with AD, DHA administration was able to induce microglial phagocytosis of Aβ-42, decrease IL-1beta, IL-6 production and the activation of proinflammatory transcription of the nuclear factor Kappa B (NFκB).
In animal models of AD, treatment with DHA has also been shown to increase levels of antioxidant enzymes catalase and glutathione peroxidase, as well as to reduce oxidative damage to the cerebral cortex and hippocampal cells.
xidative stress-induced by Aβ deposition is primarily responsible for TP hyperphosphorylation, which is associated with neuronal damage and induction of an apoptotic cascade.
In addition to the antioxidant effects already mentioned, DHA performance includes the regulation of the apoptotic cascade induced by Aβ at the level of lipid peroxides, conferring neuroprotection to neuronal cells.
However, the effects of DHA on cognitive function and AD progression are absent in individuals who possess the APOE ε4 allele, which is associated with lower DHA uptake in the brain.
n the three studies that evaluated the use of omega-3 in AD,
Adverse effects were also reported in the studies, including changes in the International Normalized Ratio (INR) in subjects taking warfarin
mprovement in several cognitive domains was also observed in a study of patients with advanced stages of the disease who were supplemented with a mixture of α-Linolenic fatty acids and Linoleic acid.
However, some methodological flaws of the study should be considered, including the use of an invalidated instrument for cognitive assessment and the absence of statistical treatment adjusting for confounding factors.
Thus, other studies with greater methodological rigor are necessary to confirm the efficacy in the cognitive improvement of patients with AD.
Among micronutrient supplements, only supplementation with formula containing folic acid, vitamin B12, α-tocopherol, S-adenosyl methionine, N-acetyl cysteine, and acetyl-L-carnitine showed positive results in the cognitive performance of AD patients.
In in vitro experiments and in animal models of AD, the administration of such components has been associated with reduced oxidative stress and decreased Aβ production and TP phosphorylation.
However, such results should be interpreted with caution due to limitations and methodological flaws of the study.
Ginsenoside administration in AD animal models has been shown to be associated with a neuroprotective effect and better memory performance.
In the two studies in this review that evaluated Ginseng supplementation,
However, limitations in the methodological quality of the trials do not allow us to draw a conclusion about the benefits found.
Therefore, further studies with better methodological quality are necessary to evaluate the use of Ginseng supplementation in individuals with AD.
In individuals with advanced AD, supplementation for three months of a probiotic milk containing Lactobacillus acidophilus, Lactobacillus casei, Bifidobacteriumbifidum, and Lactobacillus fermentum resulted in improved performance in MMSE, but the mechanisms for this finding still need clarification.
Thus, further studies are needed to confirm this therapeutic potential and to elucidate the mechanism by which probiotics interfere with the neurodegenerative process of AD.
The use of inositol resulted in improved performance of AD patients in orientation and language cognitive domains.
However, this effect should be interpreted with caution once it was only a small trial and the sample was heterogeneous in relation to educational level, time of diagnosis and phase of dementia, factors that are known to influence cognitive performance.
Therefore, further studies are needed to confirm a possible benefit with inositol supplementation.
Other interventions included the use of B-complex vitamins, Copper Orate, α-tocopherol, carotenoids, turmeric, soy isoflavones, resveratrol, and coconut oil, but there was no evidence of benefit in cognition in the studies.
The limitations of this review should be considered and include the limitation of articles in English and the impossibility of performing a meta-analysis due to methodological differences and the limited extent of available literature.
The strengths of this paper should also be highlighted and include the search in three databases, reading of titles and abstracts by two researchers and unlimited search for the date of publication of the articles.
The present systematic review points out that the effect of most dietary interventions on cognition in AD patients is inconclusive due to limited scientific evidence due to the poor methodological quality of the primary studies and the reduced number of studies.
However, several nutrients associated and isolated DHA derived from algae show potential to improve cognitive function in AD, especially in its early stages.
Thus, in a challenging scenario with a significant increase in the number of diagnoses of AD, better quality studies are urgently needed to confirm the therapeutic potential of the diet so that a dietary recommendation in AD that contributes to the quality of life of patients and relatives can be established.
Authors' contributions.
SCM, AKJ and FMS: methodology, supervision, writing -review & editing.


Descriptions of search terms used (((((diet[Title/Abstract]) OR Dietary therapy[Title/Abstract]) OR Food habits[Title/Abstract]) OR Food formulations[Title/Abstract]) OR Food formulations[Title/Abstract]))) AND ((((Randomized Controlled Trials as Topic/) OR randomized controlled trial/) OR Random Allocation/) OR Double Blind Method/) OR Single Blind Method/) OR clinical trial/) OR clinical trial, phase i.pt) OR clinical trial, phase ii.pt) OR clinical trial, phase iii.pt)
OR clinical trial, phase iv.pt) OR controlled clinical trial.pt)
OR randomized controlled trial.
pt) OR multicenter study.pt)
OR clinical trial.pt)
OR exp Clinical Trials as topic/))))) AND Alzheimer disease[Title/Abstract]



From:Figure 1 .
Figure 1.
Prisma flow diagram.



Table 1 .
Pubmed search strategy.



Table 2 .
Characteristics and results of randomized clinical trials evaluating dietary interventions in Alzheimer's disease.
There was no significant difference between the groups in the MMSE and CLOX-1 scores.
Differences in scores relative to the baseline were not computed in both tests.



Table 2 .
Continuation.



Table 2 .
Continuation.



Table 2 .
Continuation.



Table 2 .
Continuation.



Table 2 .
Continuation.



Table 2 .
Continuation



Table 2 .
Continuation



Table 2 .
ContinuationContinue...



Table 3 .
Methodological characteristics of included studies.



Table 3 .
Continuation.



Table 3 .
Continuation.