Genetic networks in Parkinson's and Alzheimer's disease
Parkinson's disease (PD) and Alzheimer's disease (AD) are the most common neurodegenerative diseases and there is increasing evidence that they share common physiological and pathological links.
Here we have conducted the largest network analysis of PD and AD based on their gene expressions in blood to date.
We identified modules that were not preserved between disease and healthy control (HC) networks, and important hub genes and transcription factors (TFs) in these modules.
We highlighted that the PD module not preserved in HCs was associated with insulin resistance, and HDAC6 was identified as a hub gene in this module which may have the role of influencing tau phosphorylation and autophagic flux in neurodegenerative disease.
The AD module associated with regulation of lipolysis in adipocytes and neuroactive ligand-receptor interaction was not preserved in healthy and mild cognitive impairment networks and the key hubs TRPC5 and BRAP identified as potential targets for therapeutic treatments of AD.
Our study demonstrated that PD and AD share common disrupted genetics and identified novel pathways, hub genes and TFs that may be new areas for mechanistic study and important targets in both diseases.

INTRODUCTION
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the most common neurodegenerative disease (ND) and dementia, accounting for 60-80% of dementia cases.
AD is characterized pathologically by accumulation of extracellular amyloid-β1 (Aβ) and deposits of intracellular tau neurofibrillary tangles
In the US, the number of people living with AD is projected to increase from 5.5 million in 2018 to 13.8 million by 2050
Gradual progressive memory loss is the most common clinical symptom of AD, which eventually affects other cognitive functions such as communication and movement.
There are currently many promising advances in the understanding of AD, including discovery of novel biomarkers
Parkinson's disease (PD) is the second most prevalent ND affecting approximately 145,000 people in the UK
In the US, the number of PD cases are predicted to increase from 680,000 to 1,238,000 by 2030
The accumulation of α-synuclein in neurons in the form of Lewy bodies is the main neuropathologic hallmark of PD
Primarily, PD affects the motor systems of the central nervous system (CNS) as a result of the death of dopamine generating cells in the midbrain substantia nigra (SN)
There is growing evidence that AD and PD share many common characteristics
Around 80% of PD patients will develop dementia, with an average time of onset 10 years from PD diagnosis
We have recently shown that PD and AD share significant common differentially expressed genes (DEGs), disturbed pathways including the sirtuin signaling pathway, and identified REST as an important upstream regulator in both diseases
AD and PD are both age-related diseases that have hallmarks of protein aggregation.
In fact over 60% of AD cases are accompanied by the formation of Lewy bodies and αsynuclein is found as a non-amyloid component within AD amyloid plaques
In addition, there are certain AGING genetic variants that increase the risk of both AD and PD, for example the strong risk factor for AD, APOE4, has been shown to be related to cognitive decline in PD
Gene co-expression relationships contain a wealth of information that univariate methods like differential expression analysis cannot detect
Weighted gene co-expression network analysis (WGCNA) is a popular tool used in systems biology to construct coexpression gene networks which can detect gene modules as well as identify key genes and hubs within these modules
WGCNA has been used to find strong evidence for mitochondrial dysfunction and chronic low grade innate immune response in AD
In addition, Chatterjee et al.
To date there have been no studies investigating PD and AD using gene expression network simultaneously to reveal potential shared biological process and pathology.
In this study we analyzed gene co-expression networks based on PD and AD blood microarray data and identified common genetic networks between both diseases.
See our analysis workflow illustrated in Figure
Compared to brain tissues, blood tissue is easier to access from patients with ND, and publicly available AD and PD blood datasets have a large enough sample size to construct reliable and robust networks.
Our network analysis expands on standard WGCNA and hub detection approach which can robustly find key processes and genes that are associated with both PD and AD.

RESULTS

Gene co-expression network construction
After quality control, we obtained 19176 genes in the PD dataset which included 204 PD and 230 healthy control (HC) samples, meanwhile 13661 genes were Figure
Workflow of our analysis.
Filtered and normalized microarray data were separated into five datasets: AD disease (ADAD), healthy control (ADHC) and MCI (ADMCI) data from the AD dataset, and the PD disease (PDPD) and healthy control (PDHC) data from the PD dataset.
On each dataset gene co-expression networks analysis was performed using the WGCNA R package
An additional k-means correction step to reduce number of misplaced genes
The pathways associated with non-preserved modules were then found using the Enrichr web tool
The SCAN (single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) and Copy number ANnotation) database) database
AGING obtained in the AD dataset which included 245 AD, 142 mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and 182 HC samples.
We applied WGCNA
In this method, highly correlated nodes are placed into a single module or cluster which are thought to be regulated by similar transcription factors (TFs) and represent certain biological processes.
These networks were constructed for the AD disease (ADAD), healthy control (ADHC) and MCI (ADMCI) data from the AD dataset, and the PD disease (PDPD) and healthy control (PDHC) data from the PD dataset separately.
We discovered 27, 54, 29, 32 and 58 modules in PDPD, PDHC, ADAD, ADMCI, ADHC networks respectively.

PD blood and brain DEG overlap
We identified 360 DEGs in the PD blood dataset (nominal Pvalue < 0.01, see Supplementary Table
An overlap of 21 genes were found including LRRN3, BASP1 and TPM3.
However, a Fisher Exact test was not significant for the overlap showing that this was likely by chance (OR = 1.08, 95% CI 0.65~1.72,
Pvalue = 0.72, Fisher Exact test).
Figure
A soft thresholding power that achieved a scale-free topology of R 2 of 0.85 was chosen to define approximate scale-free topology.
We found that the (A) ADHC data achieved approximate scale-free topology at a soft thresholding power of 6 and the (B) ADMCI and (C) ADAD data at a soft thresholding power of 4. The (D) PDHC data reached approximate scale-free topology at a soft thresholding power of 10 and (E) PDPD data at a soft thresholding power of 13.

AGING

Identification of non-preserved modules
In our network analysis, if the relationships and correlation structure between nodes composing each module were not replicated, then they were considered non-preserved.
In the case of healthy and disease networks, non-preserved modules suggested the expression pattern and regulation of the genes in these modules vary between disease and healthy conditions.
On the other hand, modules preserved between disease and healthy networks represented processes that are not affected by disease status.
Here we focused on nonpreserved modules which may help to reveal the disease mechanism.
The R package NetRep (v1.2.1) was used to identify these non-preserved modules
Table
Three of the 54 modules in the PDPD network were not preserved in PDHC network, and one of those 27 PDHC modules was not preserved in the PDPD network.
The Gene Ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) terms that were significantly enriched within non-preserved modules (Pvalue < 0.01) were found using the Enrichr web tool
The PDPD salmon module was found to be associated with insulin signaling (KEGG pathway, Pvalue = 0.0030, 7/108 overlap).
The PDPD darkseagreen4 module was found to be associated with antigen processing and presentation (KEGG pathway, Pvalue = 5.38E-16, overlap = 14/77) and natural killer cell mediated cytotoxicity (KEGG pathway, Pvalue = 2.94E-15, overlap = 10/41).
Table
Of the 29 ADAD modules, one was not preserved in both ADHC and ADMCI networks.
In addition, one of the 32 ADMCI modules was not preserved in ADAD and ADHC networks.
Moreover, three of the 58 ADHC modules were not preserved in both ADAD and ADMCI networks and one non-preserved in ADMCI networks.
The ADAD blue module was not preserved in ADHC and ADMCI networks and was associated with regulation of lipolysis in adipocytes (KEGG pathway, Pvalue = 6.24E-4, overlap = 10/55) and neuroactive ligand-receptor interaction (KEGG pathway, Pvalue = 0.005070, overlap = 30/338).
The ADHC darkolivegreen module was associated with sensory perception (GO biological process, Pvalue = 1.83E-4, overlap = 8/55).

Identifying hub genes
Hubs are genes that are highly interconnected or important within a module and likely have functional significance
Hubs have a role in maintaining the structure of the gene network of the module and the biological processes associated with the module.
In our study, hub genes were identified using five approaches: Betweenness centrality (BC), PageRank, module membership (MM), closeness centrality and Kleinberg's centrality.
Any gene with a Pvalue < 0.01 in any hub detection method was considered as a significant hub gene.
Using multiple methods for identifying hubs allowed for hub identification that may otherwise have been missed by use of just one method.
To demonstrate hub score distribution, Supplementary Figure
We identified 34 hubs in modules not preserved between the PDPD and PDHC networks (Supplementary Table
It was expected that larger modules may have more hubs than smaller ones, for example the PDHC purple module contained 606 genes, of which 17 were found to be hubs (e.g.
FAM110C, PAK4, NEB), and the smaller salmon PDPD module contained 351 genes, of which only 10 were hubs (e.g.
HDAC6, TYSND1).
The PD salmon module was associated with insulin resistance and was not preserved in PDHC network shown in Figure
Interestingly, it includes HDAC6 which has been shown to influence tau phosphorylation and autophagic flux in AD
The blue AD module which was associated with regulation of lipolysis in adipocytes and neuroactive ligandreceptor interaction and was not preserved in ADMCI and ADHC networks (Figure
Networks were visualized in Gephi

Identifying transcription factors (TFs)
Genes that are clustered together by WGNCA likely are regulated in a similar way, thus we intended to identify which TFs potentially regulate the gene expression of each module.
The TFs that potentially regulate each non-preserved module (Pvalue <0.01) were identified by using Encyclopedia of DNA Elements (ENCODE) and chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) Enrichment Analysis (ChEA) consensus TFs from ChIP-X by using the Enrichr web tool
We found a total of four TFs that regulated at least one of the three PDPD modules, including FOXM1 which regulated 6 genes in the salmon modules (Pvalue = 0.0066) and 9 in the AGING
We found two TFs (SUZ12, EZH2) regulating nonpreserved ADAD modules, and one TF (SUZ12) regulating 115 genes in the ADMCI sienna3 module (Pvalue = 8.24E-10).
We also identified 18 TFs that regulated at least one of four non-preserved ADHC modules.
This included REST which regulated 20 genes AGING in the darkolivegreen (Pvalue = 0.0092) and SUZ12 which regulated 68 genes in the darkolivegreen (Pvalue = 0.0039) and 107 genes in the red module (Pvalue = 1.21E-09).
In addition, CREB1 regulated 29 genes in the ADHC darkorange2 module (Pvalue = 0.007005).
Supplementary Table

Single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) analysis of significant WGCNA modules
As non-preserved modules contain genes which play a role in processes that were associated with AD or PD, they may have been more likely to contain disease associated variants than preserved modules.
We searched each non-preserved PD module for known Genome Wide Association Studies (GWAS) genes associated with PD
There are 69 known GWAS genes, of which four (TMEM163, TLR9, ITIH4, TUBG2) were in the salmon module and two (TMEM175, STAB1) were in the navajowhite2 module.
We observed a significant enrichment of GWAS genes within modules that were not preserved compared to preserved networks (OR = 2.96, 95% CI 1.04~6.88,
Pvalue = 0.02, Fisher Exact test).
Furthermore, the nonpreserved PDHC purple network contained five GWAS gene (KAT8, BIN3, TLR9, ITIH4, TUBG2), however the non-preserved HC modules were not more likely to contain GWAS genes (OR = 2.61, 95% CI 0.08 ~ 6.47, Pvalue = 0.052, Fisher Exact test).
We did the same analysis for the non-preserved AD modules, however, no AD associated GWAS genes were found within any non-preserved modules.
In addition to searching for known GWAS genes in non-preserved modules, we used the SCAN (SNP and Copy number ANnotation) database (
These SNPs were used to search the MirSNP
We identified 29 SNPs associated with 9 PD related miRNAs across all non-preserved modules in the PD dataset (Supplementary Table

Comparison of AD and PD results
There is increasing evidence that PD and AD share several common characteristics
The biological processes found to be associated with significant modules in AD and PD were compared to see which were important in both diseases.
Unfortunately, we did AGING not find any significant modules that were common between these two.
However, we identified some similarities between AD and PD.
The PDHC purple module and the ADHC darkorange2 module had four significant TFs which regulate both modules (SIX5, CREB1, NFYB, PBX3).
Of those 29 PD SNPs and 27 AD SNPs we have identified, 12 were common between the two.
The genes associated with these SNPs were: EPB41L5, CYP26B1, IQCB1, DCP1A, CLGN, TDRD6, PSORS1C1, PARP12, WISP1, PIK3C2A, CLMN, DHX33 which are highlighted in Supplementary Tables

Data accession
The hub scores for each gene in PD modules not preserved in HC networks can be accessed and downloaded from
hubs/.
The same information for HC modules not preserved in PD networks can be found at
The hub scores for each gene in the AD modules not preserved in HC or MCI networks can be found at
The same for MCI modules not preserved in HC or AD networks can be found at
hubs/ and for HC modules not preserved in MCI or AD networks at

DISCUSSION
In this study, by using gene co-expression network analysis we identified many important biological processes and key genes in PD and AD blood samples, and the common results between them.
To our knowledge this is the largest network analysis of AD and PD blood to date.
We found insulin resistance to be associated with PD and HDAC6 may play an important role in this process.
We highlight the overlap in disease miRNA associated SNPs that are shared between PD and AD, suggesting similarities in genetic risk factors between the diseases.
Our approach used blood data as the available blood datasets have a large enough sample size to construct robust and reliable networks and blood samples are easily accessible in neurodegenerative disease patients.
We previously found that DEGs in AD blood were more likely to be DEGs in AD brain tissue
However, in this study, we found that DEGs in blood were not more likely to be DEGs in brain tissue for PD, nevertheless it has been shown that changes in blood gene expression did reflect changes in PD
The PD network module associated with insulin resistance is not preserved in HCs.
Insulin resistance is increasingly being shown to be important in PD as a potential therapeutic target
Within this module we identified HDAC6 as a hub gene which promotes the formation of inclusions from α-synuclein toxic oligomers
HDAC6 can promote insulin resistance by deacetylating phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN) in ovarian OVCAR-3 cells
HDAC6 has a role in influencing tau phosphorylation and autophagic flux in neurodegenerative disease
In addition, insulin signaling promotes the DNAbinding activity of FOXM1, identified as a significant TF in the insulin resistance module, which regulates pathways to promote adaptive pancreatic β cell proliferation
The PD module associated with cellular response to misfolded proteins was also not preserved in HC networks.
PD is characterized by accumulation of misfolded α-synuclein and a failure of the proteasome to degrade these and other large protein aggregates
The hub gene SNRNP70 has been shown to be differentially expressed in PD blood previously
Additionally, SNRNP70 encodes the small nuclear ribonucleoprotein snRNP70 which co-localizes with tau in AD
We also identified MIR142, which encodes miRNA-142, as a hub.
miRNA-142 has been identified as an important miRNA in PD, regulating GNAQ, TMTC2, BEND2, and KYNU
The AD module associated with regulation of lipolysis in adipocytes and neuroactive ligand-receptor interaction was not preserved in both MCI and HC networks.
Aβ, a key molecule in AD brain pathology, can induce lipolysis within human adipose tissue
In addition, lipolysis is promoted by insulin resistance and in turn lipolysis generates ceramides further impairing insulin signaling, which is becoming increasingly more important in AD
We identified TRPC5 as a hub in this module, which along with other transient receptor potential canonical (TRPC) proteins assembles to form non-selective Ca2+-permeable channels.
Another hub, BRAP, has a polymorphism associated with obesity and other metabolic traits, which can play a role in effecting insulin signaling and aging
Interestingly, a module in the HC network that was not preserved in AD and MCI networks was also associated with regulation of lipolysis in adipocytes.
This suggests that these processes are occurring in both healthy and AD conditions, however the enrichment pathways are different between the two.
As no hubs are shared between the regulation of lipolysis in adipocytes AGING modules in healthy and AD networks they are likely regulated differently.
The module associated with sensory perception in the HC network was not preserved in AD and MCI networks.
Sensory dysfunction may precede the cognitive symptoms of AD
OR5AS1 was identified as a hub gene within the module which encodes a member of the olfactory receptor family and plays a role in triggering response to smells
The TF REST was identified as a regulator of the module and has been shown to regulate olfactory systems
We have identified REST to be an important upstream TF for DEGs identified in both AD and PD previously, and as an important potential therapeutic target
Future work to validate our identified hubs and TFs in both AD and PD disease models would further elucidate their potential as targets for disease treatment.
Although we did not identify any common nonpreserved modules in the AD and PD cohorts, there were other similarities shared in the results.
Four TFs were shared between the PDHC purple and the ADHC darkorange2 module (CREB1, NFYB, PBX3, SIX5).
These two modules were associated with different transport pathways in HCs which were not preserved in the disease networks, suggesting that the roles of these TFs are dysregulated in both AD and PD.
In addition to this, we identified 12 SNPs that were shared between the 29 PD miRNAs associated SNPs and 27 AD miRNAs associated SNPs.
This number of shared SNPs is highly significant, which suggests that there are potential risk factors that underlie both diseases.
Several studies have applied WGCNA in ND studies for gene expression and proteomics analysis.
For example, Seyfried and colleagues studied proteomic data of cortical tissue of asymptomatic and symptomatic AD
They found that there was a modest overlap between networks at RNA and protein level.
If a larger dataset becomes available, expanding our methods to proteomic data could give further understanding into the mechanisms of AD and PD and enable the investigation into the link between genomics and proteomics.
Chatterjee et al.
In addition, they used tissue from multiple brain regions which would all be affected differently by the disease
A limitation of this study is that, although it has been shown that AD blood DEGs are more likely to be DEGs in the brain
Because of this, our results may not reflect major changes that take place in the brain.
However, our network analysis approach emphasizes the interactions of genes which univariate methods like differential expression does not.
Similarly to AD, there is disruption that happens in the blood brain barrier (BBB) of PD patients
Hence, it is likely that changes that take place in the brain could be reflected in the blood and vice versa.
Additionally, a lot of the biological processes and genes we found in our PD network has been implicated in the PD brain previously
Tau and Aβ are hallmarks of both AD and PD in the brain and have potential as blood biomarkers in both diseases
Leukocytes have been shown to impact progression of neurodegenerative diseases.
An interaction between brain and systemic inflammation has been implicated in PD progression by an association between leukocyte apoptosis and central dopamine neuron loss
Increased mitochondrial respiratory activity in leukocytes has been shown in PD patients, potentially impacting progression of neurodegeneration
Peripheral leukocytes have been discussed as potential biomarkers for AD previously
In AD animal models circulating leukocytes have been shown to cross a dysfunctional blood brain barrier and impact brain integrity
Recently limbic-predominant age-related TDP-43 encephalopathy (LATE) has been reported to be underrecognized and often misdiagnosed as AD as they share common pathogenetic mechanisms and present similarly in patients
There is the potential that patients in our AD cohort may have been misdiagnosed and actually have LATE, however as LATE is seen with increasing frequency over the age of 85, and less than 6% of our AD samples were over the age of 85 this likely had little effect on our results.
The greatest risk factor for both AD and PD is age.
Adjusting AD data by age before WGCNA ensured any changes we found were reflective of disease state.
The PD data, however, did not include samples' age information when we downloaded, thus the effect of age could not be removed technically.
As a result of this, the PD results may have been biased towards changes as a result of aging if there was a significant difference in age between PD and HC cohorts.
However, the samples were age matched in the original design which should reduce such biases

AGING
From the PD dataset we removed patient samples with known PD mutations.
Although the biological pathways underlying familial and sporadic forms of PD are likely to be shared, known PD mutations may impact pathways to disease or regulators of disease
Removal of samples with known PD mutations prevented these mutations from having an impact on results, however had little impact on sample size due to the low number of samples with mutations.
AD samples were not screened for known mutations, which could have had an impact on our results.
For example, nearly 19% of the familial late onset AD population carry 2 APOE ε4 alleles which only occurs in about 1% of normal Caucasian controls
This and other known mutations may impact the progression and regulators of AD, and knowing which samples had these mutations could have improved our findings.
In conclusion, our network analysis is the largest study using AD and PD blood data to date.
We highlight the non-preserved module in PD associated with insulin resistance, and the hub HDAC6 identified in this module.
Our results reveal that a large proportion of disease miRNA associated SNPs are shared between PD and AD, suggesting similarities in genetic risk factors between the diseases.
The hub genes that we have identified have the possibility to be further investigated as potential biomarkers for disease.
These insights suggest several new areas for mechanistic studies in PD and AD research fields.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Data preparation for PD and AD blood datasets
The publicly available peripheral venous whole blood dataset comprising 205 PD and 233 control samples was downloaded from the GEO (Gene Expression Omnibus) database (
This dataset is the largest of its type and has a sample size enough to run WGCNA and reliably find hub genes
Samples with known PD mutation genes (Parkin, DJ-1 and PINK1, ATP13A2, LRRK2, SNCA) were removed to reduce biases introduced by these genes (see discussion), and outlier samples were detected and removed based on box and density plots of probe intensities.
This removed a total of one PD and three HC samples, leaving 204 PD and 230 HC samples.
Data was then Robust Multiarray Average (RMA) normalized using the affy R package
Samples missing gender information (35 samples) were assigned sex by using the massiR R package
We selected a probe-variation threshold of 4 by inspecting a probe-variation plot (Supplementary Figure
The ComBat function in the sva R package
After this, control probes and those without Entrez gene annotation were removed.
For any genes that mapped to multiple probes, the probe with the highest median absolute deviation (MAD) was kept.
MAD was used as, similarly to inter-quartile range, the probe with the highest MAD has the greatest variability and so likely has more information
Finally, the bottom 5% probes by average expression values across all samples were removed.
For AD, the two independent peripheral venous whole blood datasets GSE63060 and GSE63061, from the AddNeuroMed Cohort
As these two datasets were from the same cohort study and sample collection and analysis was carried out using the same methodologies, except using different biological samples and microarray platforms, they can be merged to produce a larger dataset that can improve the power of our study.
The two normalized datasets (generated by different Illumina platforms) were merged using the inSilicoMerging R package
Patients of Western European and Caucasian ethnicity were extracted from the merged dataset leaving a total of 245 AD, 142 MCI and 182 HC to reduce any potential genetic impact that ethnicity may have on AD.
The effect of the age and gender were controlled for using the ComBat function in the sva R package
As with the PD data, control probes and those without Entrez gene annotation were removed and for any genes that mapped to multiple probes, the probe with the highest MAD was kept.
Finally, the bottom 5% probes by average expression values across samples were removed.
Information on number of samples, gender and age of samples is shown in Supplementary Table

PD blood and brain DEG overlap
To see if there was a significant overlap between PD gene expression in blood and brain as has been shown previously in AD
Using the normalized and filtered PD data, DEGs were identified by applying limma with gender and running batch adjusted.
Slightly stringent nominal Pvalue <0.01 AGING was used for significance as only one DEG could pass multiple testing (FDR corrected Pvalue <0.05).

Gene co-expression network construction
The R package WGCNA
case and control groups separately), was created and each raised to a soft-thresholding power to achieve a scale-free topology R 2 of 0.85.
From this, a topological overlap matrix (TOM) was calculated, which takes correlation between genes expression as well as connections the genes share into consideration.
This TOM was then converted to topological overlap dissimilarities to be used with hierarchical clustering.
Then, a dynamic tree-cutting algorithm was used to determine initial module assignments of genes (cutreeHybrid, using default parameters except deepSplit of 3, minModuleSize of 10 and mergeCutHeight of 0.05)
An additional kmeans clustering step was applied to improve the results of the hierarchical clustering in WGCNA as proposed by Botía et al
All analysis was conducted in R3.

Calculation of module preservation
In order to identify modules that are not preserved between conditions within datasets, we applied NetRep (v1.2.1)
We permuted 10,000 times.
The "alternative" parameter is set to "less" to test whether each module preservation statistic is smaller than expected by chance in order to identify these nonpreserved modules which are extremely different in the two networks.
If all seven module preservation statistics had a Pvalue < 0.05 then that module was significantly non-preserved between conditions.

Pathway enrichment analysis
To identify the biological pathways that the modules represent we performed GO and KEGG pathway enrichment analysis (KEGG 2019) using the Enrichr web tool
Pathways and GO terms with a Pvalue < 0.05 were considered significant.

Hub gene identification
Generally, detecting hub genes in co-expression networks has been done using MM, which is the correlation of a gene to its eigengene (the first principle component calculated using the expression data of genes in each module)
BC of a gene is the number of shortest paths connecting all gene pairs that pass through that gene
Here we have expanded hub detection to include multiple other hub detection methods frequently used in network analysis.
In addition to MM and BC, we used closeness centrality
Genes with high closeness centrality scores have the shortest path to all other genes in the module and are placed to influence the entire network quickly
PageRank emphasizes nodes that are connected to other nodes with high Pagerank scores
Kleinberg's hub centrality score
A novel hub detection permutation test was developed to obtain Pvalues for each hub detection store and determine if they are statistically significant.
Briefly, the gene ID labels on the adjacency matrix were randomly re-labelled and hub score recalculated 1000 times to obtain a statistical distribution.
The Pvalue was calculated by dividing the number of recalculated permutation hub scores that are higher than the observed hub score in the original network by the number of permutations.
Genes were considered significant hubs if any hub scores had a Pvalue < 0.01.
This was performed for all modules not preserved between PD and HCs in the PD dataset, and the modules not preserved between any of the AD, MCI and HCs networks in the AD dataset.
BC, closeness centrality, PageRank and Kleinberg's hub centrality scores were calculated using the igraph R package with default settings without normalization
The R code used for the novel hub detection test is available at

Identifying transcription factors
To identify TFs that potentially regulate each module, we used ENCODE and ChEA Consensus TFs from ChIP-X found using the Enrichr web tool
TFs with a Pvalue < 0.01 were considered significant.
If a TF was found significant in both ENCODE and ChEA then the lower Pvalue was assigned to the TF.

SNP and microRNA analysis of significant WGCNA modules
A two-tailed Fisher's exact test was used to test our hypothesis that non-preserved modules were more AGING likely to contain GWAS identified genes than preserved modules.
The risk loci for PD and AD were from recent GWAS, between which only one GWAS gene was shared (KAT8)
We gained further insight into SNPs associated with non-preserved modules, using a similar methodology to Chatterjee et al.
The SCAN database
For each non-preserved module, only SNPs that predicted gene expression with Pvalues < 1.0e-4 and frequency > 0.10 within the CEU human samples of European descent were selected.
Previous studies have revealed that differential expression of miRNAs were associated with PD
In addition, SNPs have been identified as disease prognostic markers by association to miRNAs
SNPs we found to be associated with genes from the PD related modules were used to search the MirSNP
The same process was done for genes within the AD related modules and the 57 experimentally confirmed AD related miRNAs in the HMDD v3.0 database.
The MirSNP database identified the SNPs that are present at the 3' untranslated region of miRNA target sites, and so narrowed down the selection of SNPs to those that likely effect known miRNAs associated with the disease.

Comparison of PD and AD results
The processes associated with non-preserved modules in AD and PD were compared to see if any processes were similar between diseases.
Hub genes and TFs identified in non-preserved modules were also compared between AD and PD to see if any were shared.
In addition, we test our hypothesis that AD and PD share SNPs we identified in non-preserved modules associated with disease related miRNAs in AD and PD respectively.



Figure 3 .
Figure 3. Network visualization of PD and AD modules.
(A) Visualization of WGCNA network connections of the PDPD salmon network module found to be associated with insulin resistance and not preserved in the PDHC network.
It shows network connections whose adjacency is above 0.2, including all 351 nodes and 595 of 61776 edges.
(B) Visualization of WGCNA network connections of the ADAD blue module found to be associated with regulation of lipolysis in adipocytes and neuroactive ligand-receptor interaction and not preserved in ADHC and ADMCI networks.
It shows network connections whose adjacency is above 0.55, including all 1076 nodes and 1458 of 1157776 edges.
Hub genes are in the center of the network and are labelled with names.
Networks visualized in Gephi [23].



Table 1 . List of non-preserved modules found between PD and healthy controls (HC).



Table 2 . List of non-preserved modules found between AD, MCI and healthy controls (HC).