Temporal Effects of Neuron-specific beta-secretase 1 (BACE1) Knock-in on the Mouse Brain Metabolome: Implications for Alzheimer's Disease
• Neuron-specific knockin of human BACE1 age-dependently affects the brain metabolome
• More brain metabolites were significantly altered in 'old' PLB4 mice than 'young'
• Leucine, creatinine, putrescine, various acylcarnitines and phospholipids were affected
• Compared with other AD models (e.g.
APP/PS1) fewer metabolites were affected
• Oligomer versus plaque Aβ pathology may have divergent effects on some metabolites
Beta secretase 1 (BACE1) is an enzyme involved in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease (AD).
PLB4 mice is a neuron-specific human BACE1 knockin mouse model characterised by the accumulation of extracellular Aβ and an AD-like phenotype.
In this investigation brain hemispheres from 'young' (4-6 months) and 'old' (8 months) female PLB4 mice and age-matched wild-type littermates underwent targeted LC-MS/MS metabolomic profiling.
Powdered lyophilized brain tissue was extracted in ethanol:PBS 85%:15% (v/v)) and a total of 187 metabolites were quantified using a targeted metabolomics methodology.
Multivariate statistical analysis produced models that distinguished PLB4 from wild type (WT) mice regardless of their age group.
Univariate analysis (t-test) found that more brain metabolites were perturbed in 'old' PLB4 mice than 'young'.
Carnosine and 8 phosphatidylcholine species were significantly decreased (p<0.05) in 'young' PLB4 mouse brain.
In 'old' PLB4 mice a total of 21 metabolites were perturbed including: leucine, creatinine, putrescine and species of acylcarnitines, lysophosphatidylcholines, phosphatidylcholines and sphingomyelin.
Within the PLB4 genotype there were a range of age-dependent increases in metabolites.
This study indicates that gender-specific responses occur in models of AD-like pathology, but importantly, when changes in PLB4 mice (where Aβ oligomers predominate) are compared with APP/PS1 mice (where Aβ plaques predominate) there are consistent and also divergent effects on the brain metabolome.

Introduction
Alzheimer's disease (AD) remains the most common form of dementia suspected to cause 60-80% of all dementia cases
AD is a progressive and fatal neurodegenerative disorder clinically characterised by progressive memory loss, mood changes and cognitive problems.
The condition is typified by the pathological accumulation of extracellular amyloid-beta (Aβ) which leads to the formation of amyloid plaques in the brain.
It is also known that abnormally phosphorylated tau protein filaments occur in neurons which leads to the formation of neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs)
Given the high prevalence and poor prognosis of the disease the development of animal models has become a high research priority.
Many of the transgenic models developed are based on the amyloid cascade hypothesis
They chiefly have involved the insertion or manipulation of mutations in the amyloid precursor protein (APP) and/or the presenilins, both of which are genes causal for familial AD
Although, transgenic models cannot fully replicate the human disease they have improved our understanding of the pathophysiology of Aβ toxicity, particularly with respect to the effects of different Aβ species and the possible pathogenic role of Aβ oligomers.
The APP/PS1 models are important and well established (e.g.
APPswe/PS1deltaE9) containing mutations in the gene for APP and presenilin 1 (PS1).
Our group have recently performed longitudinal metabolomic profiling of APP/PS1 which revealed that AD-like pathology affects greatly on both the brain and blood metabolomes
A recent study described mouse models (PLB4) of AD-like pathology involving the overexpression of BACE1 in the absence of mutant APP expression.
The PLB4 mice examined in this study were developed using a targeted knock-in strategy that directed the insertion of the human BACE1 (hBACE1) transgene to the HPRT locus, a permissive site on the X chromosome
BACE1
enzymatically cleaves APP at the N-terminus, generating C-terminal fragments (CTF) which are later cleaved by γ-secretase generating the Aβ peptides
In PLB4 mice BACE1 activity is only subtly higher (approximately 2-fold higher than endogenous), however, APP processing is clearly shifted toward the amyloidogenic pathway, which results in Aβ accumulation and age-associated behavioural changes consistent with cognitive impairment
Behaviourally, the motor activity of PLB4 transgenic animals is largely intact at 3 months of age but by 6 months it is significantly altered.
PLB4 mice displayed deficits in habituation to a novel environment and semanticlike memory (social transmission of food preference) at 3-4 months of age.
The cognitive and spatial deficits, such as spatial learning and reference memory (water maze), and spatial working memory (Ymaze), manifested at around 6 months, and were independent from reductions in locomotor activity and anxiety
Complete deletion of BACE1 in APP mutant mice prevents Aβ production, neuron loss and amyloid pathology related cognitive deficits
Additionally, BACE1 has also been demonstrated to play an important role in glucose metabolism.
The BACE1 knock out mouse showed improvement in glucose metabolism, insulin sensitivity and protection from diet-induced obesity
The metabolic disturbance was observed in PLB4 mice with increased BACE1 level in the central neuronal system which induced hypothalamic dysregulation, endoplasmic reticulum stress, and Aβ and lipid accumulation
The aim of this study was to employ a targeted quantitative metabolomic methodology to measure brain metabolite changes occurring in the PLB4 transgenic model.
The intention was to monitor the biochemical responses of the brain to the initial amyloidogenic insult caused by elevated BACE1 activity and understand how this progresses with the neuropathology.

Material and methods

Brain tissue from PLB4 mice
PLB4 mice expressing hBACE1 have recently been described and characterised in detail
Homozygous female mice (4-6 months (herein referred to as 'young'): WT: n=8, PLB4: n=7; 8 months (herein referred to as 'old'): WT: n=7, PLB4: n=7) from the University of Aberdeen colony were fasted overnight.
Animals were culled and whole brains were rapidly removed and snap frozen in liquid nitrogen, and stored at minus 80C.
Brain hemispheres were transported to Queen's University Belfast on dry ice and stored at minus 80C prior to processing.

Brain tissue extraction
Mouse brain samples were collected into individual tubes to avoid cross-contamination, then lyophilized and cryogenically milled to a fine dry powder.
Powdered post-mortem brain tissue (25 mg ± 0.5 mg) was extracted in 300 µL in a solvent (85% ethanol and 15% PBS buffer) as previously described
The samples were sonicated (5 min), vortexed (30 sec), centrifuged at (10,000 g; 4°C; 5 min) and the supernatant retained for analysis.

Targeted metabolomics
Metabolites in both control and PLB4 mouse brain samples were profiled using the Biocrates AbsoluteIDQ p180 (BIOCRATES, Life Science AG, Innsbruck, Austria), as previously described
The samples were analysed on a triple-quadrupole mass spectrometer (Xevo TQ-MS, Waters Corporation, Milford, USA) operating in the multiple reaction monitoring (MRM) mode according to the manufacturer's instructions.
The data were recorded in a 96-well format with 7 calibration standards and 3 human EDTA plasma quality control samples were integrated in the kit.
Briefly, 10 µL of brain extract (prepared as described above) was used for targeted metabolomics analysis.
Metabolites (amino acids and biogenic amines) were derivatised using phenylisothiocyanate (PITC), followed by separation using a UPLC (I-Class, Waters Corporation, Milford, USA) and quantified using a triple-quadrupole mass spectrometer (Xevo TQ-MS, Waters Corporation, Milford USA) by MRM.
The flow injection analysis tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) method was used to quantify all the remaining metabolites.
Metabolite concentrations were calculated and expressed as µmol/mg tissue.

Statistical analysis
Concentration data for 187 metabolites were appropriately reformatted and exported to Simca 15 (Umetrics, Umea, Sweden) for multivariate analysis.
Data were log transformed, pareto-scaled and grouped into PLB4 and WT prior to analysis by principal component analysis (PCA), to identify any potential outliers, and then orthogonal projection to latent structures-discriminant analysis (OPLS-DA).
The validity of the model was evaluated based on the residuals (R2X, R2Y) and the model predictive ability parameter (Q2) determined through the default leave-1/7th-out cross validation.
The number of components for the OPLS-DA model was optimized using y-table permutation testing (n = 200) and an ANOVA based on the cross-validated predictive residuals (CV-ANOVA)
For CV-ANOVA assessment of significance, a p-value less than 0.05 was considered as significant.
Data were then grouped by age and reanalysed by OPLS-DA to highlight significant metabolites explaining the maximum amount of variation between the groups.
Univariate analyses consisted of a Student's t-test for metabolites exhibiting a normal distribution or the Wilcoxon Mann-Whitney test for metabolites exhibiting non-normal distributions (Metaboanalyst Version 3.5;
False discovery rates (FDR, referred to as a q-value) were also calculated using the in-built function in Metaboanalyst in order to account for multiple comparisons.
A p-value<0.05 and q<0.8 was considered significant.
Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves and heat map visualisations were developed for the metabolites short-listed based from the univariate analysis.

Results

Multivariate analysis of metabolomic data
Multivariate analysis was used to build models differentiating all four groups.
Figure
Q 2 ≤0.311) which moderately separated the groups but with age being a greater discriminating factor than genotype.
OPLS-DA model (Figure
Using 2 latent and 5 orthogonal components the data produced a discriminant model with a 69 % fit and predictive power of 51 %.
To assess the reliability of the OPLS-DA model, we applied CV-ANOVA which gave a p value of 0.047.
The model was also validated using a permutation analysis in Simca P v.15 as demonstrated Figure
The principle of this validation is to assess the correlation coefficient of the goodness of fit (R2 and Q2) between the original y-variable and the permuted y-variable while the Xmatrix has been kept intact
The results were fitted using a regression line and the Y-axis intercepts of R2 and Q2 were at 0.63 and -0.42, respectively, which suggest that the OPLS model is valid and does not show over-fit since the regression line of the Q2-points intersect below zero
OPLS-DA was then applied to each age group to assess how accurately models predicted class membership (Q2 cumulative).
Models constructed from data from 'young' mice had weak predictive ability of 58%.
Models based on data from 'old' mice were only moderately better with the predictive ability of 66%.
Variable importance in projection (VIP) plots were created to identify the top 15 metabolites responsible for the observed separation between groups (Table

Metabolites significantly altered by the PLB4 genotype
A total of 9 metabolites (carnosine and 8 PCs) were affected in 'young' mice, and all in all cases these were lower in PLB4 mice (Table
A total of 21 metabolites were affected in 'old' mice (Table
There were 5 metabolites that were lower in PLB4 mice (putrescine, dodecanedioylcarnitine and 3 PCs); and 16 metabolites that were higher in PLB4 mice (leucine, creatinine, 4 acylcarnitines, 5 lysophosphatidylcholines (LysoPCs), 4 PCs and 1 SPH).
Only 3 metabolites were commonly affected in both age groups.
PC aa C40:1 was reduced 1.46-fold (p<0.00006;
q<0.06) in young PLB4 mice and 1.
PC aa C42:1 was reduced 1.86-fold (p<0.00009;
q<0.02) in young PLB4 mice and 1.57-fold (p<0.0001;
q<0.009) in old PLB4 mice.
PC aa C42:2 was reduced 1.53-fold (p<0.001;
q<0.08) in young PLB4 mice and 1.19fold (p<0.03;
q<0.3) in old PLB4 mice.
Overall PC aa C42:1 was the most profoundly affected metabolite (Figure

Metabolites significantly altered by age in the PLB4 genotype
A total of 14 metabolites (4 acylcarnitines, 9 PCs and 1 sphingomyelin (SM)) differed between young and old PLB4 mice which were did not differ between young and old WT (Table
These shortlisted metabolites showed considerable potential as biomarkers with ROC AUC values ranging from 0.84 to 1.0.
Furthermore, all these metabolites increased with advancing age which the exception of PC aa C36:0 which decreased 2.31-fold (p=0.009;
q<0.07).
Two of the metabolites that increased (PC ae C36:3 and PC ae C42:2; 1.35-1.40-fold;
p<0.0001; q<0.02)) also increased in old PLB4 compared with WT mice.

Discussion
BACE1 has been demonstrated to be the key enzyme in amyloidosis and its subsequent pathologies, and the inhibition of this enzyme is a promising therapeutic strategy through lowering cerebral Aβ concentrations in Alzheimer's disease
The aim of this investigation was to identify the specific brain metabolite changes resulting from neural specific overexpression of BACE1.
BACE1 overexpression (achieved by knock-in of hBACE1 in the PLB4 model) leads to the development of an AD-like pathology (including elevations of oligomeric Aβ assemblies, including Aβ*56 and hexameric Aβ) and it also causes an age-dependent decline in cognitive performance
We selected mice of two different age groups.
Firstly, 'young' (4-6 months old) mice where changes in pathology are minimal and changes in behaviour and cognitive function are not overt.
Secondly, 'old' (8 months) mice where the pathology is more progressed with heightened levels of inflammation (gliosis) in several brain regions (dentate gyrus, hippocampal area CA1, piriform and parietal cortices) and significant impairments in spatial learning and working memory
The use of a targeted, quantitative and reproducible metabolomics kit makes it possible to directly compare the results with other studies where this kit has also been applied
Compared with our group's previous study on the metabolites disturbance of the APP/PS1 mice
All 8 significantly altered PCs were lower in 'young' PLB4 mice.
This is in stark contrast to APP/PS1 mice which showed 28 PCs are significantly higher in APP/PS1 brain at 8 months.
In this study the brain levels of PC aa C40:1, C42:1 and C42:2 were all significantly lower in PLB4 mice than WT -both in young and old mice brain.
The PC aa 40:1 is also altered in APP/PS1 mice.
In contrast, this PC is higher in 8 month old APP/PS1 mice, and not affected at 6, 10, 12 or 18 months
Furthermore, there are two PCs, PC ae 32:1 and PC ae 42:2, showing elevation in both 'old' PLB4 mice and APP/PS1 mice at 8 months.
In PLB4 mice elevations of PC ae 42:2 were age-dependent and were not observed in the WT.
The APP/PS1 transgenic mouse model expresses both mutated APP and PS1 genes which leads to an overproduction of full-length APP and monomeric Aβ.
Contrastingly, PLB4 mice have pronounced expression of oligomeric Aβ species
Furthermore, APP/PS1 mice develop Aβ plaques as early as 5-6 months of age
However, both APP/PS1 and PLB4 mice show cognitive deficits at 6 months old, although the cognitive deficits in PLB4 mice may not result from Aβ plaque deposition
It is evident that the differing Aβ species present in APP/PS1 and PLB4 can result in different metabolite responses.
For example, a polyamine molecule was the most significantly altered metabolite in the present study (p=8x10 -8 ; q=1x10 -5 ).
Putrescine is the precursor of other polyamines including spermine and spermidine, all of which have previously been associated with AD
Here, putrescine was reduced 1.31-fold in 'old' PLB4 brain and impressively generated a ROC AUC of 1.0 -marking it as a highly discriminating metabolite between PLB4 and WT littermates.
However, in APP/PS1 mice putrescine is not reduced but raised, not only in brain but also in plasma
It has been demonstrated that intracerebroventricular infusion of pre-aggregated Aβ25-35 significantly decreases putrescine levels the prefrontal cortex of rats
Contrastingly, Aβ1-41 upregulates of polyamine uptake and increases ornithine decarboxylase activity, which leads to increased polyamine levels in cultured neurons
Therefore, the differing levels of oligomer Aβ species of the PLB4 and APP/PS1 models may explain the deviating polyamine response.
Glycerophospholipids and sphingolipids contribute to lipid bilayer asymmetry
It has been demonstrated both APP and APP-cleaving secretases are transmembrane proteins and even the cleavage of CTFα and CTFβ by γ-secretase mainly take place in lipid rafts resulting in the secretion of Aβ
Furthermore, glycerophospholipids are also precursors of signalling molecules (diacylclycerol), inflammatory molecules and neurotransmitters (choline).
LPCs are the hydrolysis products of PCs by Phospholipases A2 (PLA2).
PLA2 enzymes have been demonstrated to directly correlate to AD pathology, not only because the PLA2 involve in the changing membrane physical properties (such as permeability and fluidity), resulting in the disturbance of Aβ production and aggregation
PC is the major subclass of glycerophospholipid, which is the component of biological membranes and also involved in intraneuronal signal transduction
In 'young' PLB4 mice the brain PCs which were significantly altered were of both main types (diacyl and acyl-alkyl), and in all cases these were lower in concentration compared with WT.
However, in 'old' PLB4 mice, only the diacyl PCs which were lower than the WT mice, whereas acyl-alkyl PCs are all higher in concentration.
Additionally, all affected lysoPCs were higher in 'old' PLB4 mice than WT.
The alteration of diacyl-PCs and acyl-alkyl PCs have been widely reported in AD patients and AD transgenic animal models
Nonetheless these observations have frequently been inconsistent and inter-study variability is common.
This may arise in part due to technical and methodological factors, but also it may reflect the transient metabolic responses which likely occur in a phased manner and are dependent on the actual extent of the neurodegeneration
We also examined whether phospholipids disturbances observed here in female mice were consistent with those reported previously in male PLB4 mice
Lower brain levels of PC ae C30:0 (previously referred to as PC(O-30:0)) occurred in both male and female PLB4 mice of similar age.
A further four lysoPCs were consistently affected in both male and female PLB4 mice.
These were: lysoPC a C 16:0 (PC 16:0), lysoPC a C 18:1 (PC18:1), PC ae C34:1 (PC (O-34:1)) and PC ae C42:2 (PC (O-42:2)).
Interestingly, PC ae C42:2 also elevated in the APP/PS1 mouse brain at 8 old month's age
It should be noted that a large number of phospholipid changes were not reproduced and diverging metabolic responses, based on gender, have the potential to confound findings in metabolomic studies unless accounted for
In this study, only one sphingomyelin molecule was affected.
Brain levels of SM(OH)C22:2 were higher in 'old' PLB4 mice.
This same sphingomyelin molecule was also elevated in the brain of 8 month old APP/PS1 mice
Sphingomyelin is a type of sphingolipid derived from ceramide.
Most studies consistently find elevated ceramide levels in human AD brain
This may be due an upregulation of enzymes involved in sphingomyelin/ceramide metabolism during AD pathology
Ceramide has also been demonstrated to stabilize BACE1 and promote the Aβ biogenesis
In contrast, sphingomyelin levels in human AD brain were reported to be either increased

Conclusion
This study uncovered several brain metabolite alternations occurring in female PLB4 mice with knockin of human BACE1.
The majority of these metabolites increased with advancing age.
Based on data in the literature we can deduce that certain metabolites are commonly affected in both in male and female PLB4 mice, however, gender-specific responses are also evident.
This underlines the importance of conducting gender-specific metabolomic investigations in animal models.
Furthermore, the kit-based nature of the approach used here made it possible to directly compare changes in PLB4 mice (where Aβ oligomers predominate) with other AD models such as APP/PS1 (where Aβ plaques predominate).
This demonstrated that each model affected the brain metabolome differently.
The divergent response of putrescine was a very notable example of this, perhaps indicating a differential effect on brain levels of ornithine decarboxylase activity.
In general though the brain metabolism of PLB4 mice was much less disturbed than that of APP/PS1.
Several phospholipids are consistently affected in both of the above models and these may reflect a common, more generalised response to upregulated Aβ production in the brain.
The need to pathologically stratify AD cases is becoming clearer in post-mortem human studies.
Therefore, it now seems timely that systematic, longitudinal and controlled metabolomic studies are undertaken across a range of well characterised models.
This will enable us to unpick the differing downstream effects of Aβ pathologies on brain metabolism.

Acknowledgement



Figure 1 .
Figure 1.
Multivariate statistical models arising targeted metabolomics data.
(A) Unsupervised PCA scores plot (R 2 ≤0.537;
Q 2 ≤0.311)and (B) OPLS-DA scores plot (R 2 ≤0.69;
Q 2 ≤0.51) classifying brain samples from young WT (open circles), young PLB4 (closed circles), old WT (open triangles) and old PLB4 (closed triangles) mice.
Data were normalised by log-transform and pareto-scaled.
(C) Permutation plot (n = 999) for the OPLS-DA model built for brain samples from young WT, young PLB4, old WT and old PLB4 mice (R2 = green circles, Q2 = blue squares).



Figure 2 .
Figure 2. Heat-map of top 10 affected metabolites in female PLB4 mice.
Data were normalised by log-transform and pareto-scaled and heat maps were created using Metaboanalyst (Distance Measure: Euclidean).
The top 10 metabolites affected (as selected by t-test p-value) were shortlisted for (A) young and (B) old mice.



Figure 3 .
Figure 3. Concentrations of PC aa C42:1 significantly differ in both young and old PLB4 mice.
Three brain PCs were commonly affected in both young and old PLB4 mice, of these PC aa C42:1 was the most profoundly affected.
Figures show the brain concentrations of PC aa C42:1 in (A) young mice (B) old mice presented as box and whisker plots (n=7-8).
(C) Receiving operator characteristic (ROC) curves constructed individually for young (open circles; WT vs PLB4) and old (open triangles; WT vs PLB4).
Figures were produced using GraphPad Prism (version 6.03).


Figure 1



Table 1 : Brain metabolites altered in 'young' PLB4 mice



Table 2 : Brain metabolites altered in 'old' PLB4 mice



Table 3 -
Highest Ranking metabolites from Variable Importance Projection (VIP) plots for 'young' and 'old' mice.
Metabolites are listed in order of their importance in the model.



Table 4 : Metabolites significantly altered with age in PLB4 which were not altered in WT mice.
Values were obtained by comparing 'young' and 'old' PLB4 mice and by cross-referencing against an identical comparison in WT mice.
AC-acylcarnitine, PC-phosphatidylcholine; SM-sphingomyelin; aadiacyl; ae-acyl-alkyl.