Longitudinal amyloid and tau accumulation in autosomal dominant Alzheimer’s disease: findings from the Colombia-Boston (COLBOS) biomarker study
Background: Neuroimaging studies of autosomal dominant Alzheimer's disease (ADAD) enable characterization of the trajectories of cerebral amyloid-β (Aβ) and tau accumulation in the decades prior to clinical symptom onset.
Longitudinal rates of regional tau accumulation measured with positron emission tomography (PET) and their relationship with other biomarker and cognitive changes remain to be fully characterized in ADAD.
Methods: Fourteen ADAD mutation carriers (Presenilin-1 E280A) and 15 age-matched non-carriers from the Colombian kindred underwent 2-3 sessions of Aβ (11C-Pittsburgh compound B) and tau (18F-flortaucipir) PET, structural magnetic resonance imaging, and neuropsychological evaluation over a 2-4-year follow-up period.
Annualized rates of change for imaging and cognitive variables were compared between carriers and non-carriers, and relationships among baseline measurements and rates of change were assessed within carriers.
Results: Longitudinal measurements were consistent with a sequence of ADAD-related changes beginning with Aβ accumulation (16 years prior to expected symptom onset, EYO), followed by entorhinal cortex (EC) tau (9 EYO), neocortical tau (6 EYO), hippocampal atrophy (6 EYO), and cognitive decline (4 EYO).
Rates of tau accumulation among carriers were most rapid in parietal neocortex (~9%/year).
EC tau PET signal at baseline was a significant predictor of subsequent neocortical tau accumulation and cognitive decline within carriers.
Conclusions: Our results are consistent with the sequence of biological changes in ADAD implied by crosssectional studies and highlight the importance of EC tau as an early biomarker and a potential link between Aβ burden and neocortical tau accumulation in ADAD.

Background
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is characterized by the presence of amyloid-beta (Aβ) and tau pathologies, which are thought to accumulate for many years during preclinical stages and lead to the neurodegeneration and cognitive decline observed at the clinical phase
Mutations of the Presenilin -1 (PSEN1; OMIM 104311) gene predispose individuals to develop autosomal dominant Alzheimer disease (ADAD) in early adulthood
Studies of extended families with ADAD, including the Colombian kindred with approximately 6000 living members and an estimated 1200 PSEN1 E280A (Glu280Ala) mutation carriers, have enabled characterization of the trajectory of AD-related biological and behavioral changes in the decades prior to clinical symptom onset
Ongoing studies of these families continue to inform natural history studies and prevention therapeutic trials for AD
Positron emission tomography (PET) has enabled the in vivo characterization and serial tracking of Aβ and tau accumulation
Whether tau accumulation follows a similar spatiotemporal pattern in ADAD remains unresolved
We previously reported that abnormally elevated MTL (entorhinal cortex, EC) tau PET was evident in PSEN1 E280A carriers relative to non-carriers from the Colombian kindred as early as 6 years prior to expected onset of mild cognitive impairment (MCI), and the overall spatial pattern of tau PET in ADAD was similar to that seen in sporadic AD
Another ADAD study found that tau PET was elevated only among impaired individuals, and suggested that MTL tauopathy including EC may be less involved in ADAD compared to sporadic AD
Longitudinal PET studies have demonstrated pathological changes in vulnerable sporadic AD populations
We tracked changes over a 2-4-year period in PET measures of tau and Aβ, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) measures of brain structure, and cognitive assessments in young PSEN1 E280A mutation carriers and age-matched non-carriers from the Colombian ADAD kindred.
We evaluated differences in biomarker change rates between carriers and non-carriers, as well as associations between age, rates of Aβ and tau accumulation, neurodegeneration, and cognitive decline.
We hypothesized that these longitudinal measures would reveal a sequence of changes in ADAD beginning with Aβ accumulation, followed by EC tau, neocortical tau, neurodegeneration, and cognitive decline.

Methods

Participants and procedures
Eleven cognitively unimpaired PSEN1 mutation carriers, three cognitively impaired mutation carriers, and fifteen age-matched non-carriers from the Massachusetts General Hospital (MGH) COLBOS (Colombia-Boston) longitudinal biomarkers study participated in this study (Table
which includes subjective cognitive concerns, mild impairment in memory tests, intact activities of daily living, and FAST score of 3. The expected years to onset (EYO) were calculated by subtracting carriers' ages from 44, the median age of clinical onset in PSEN1 E280A carriers (95% CI = 43-45)
All participants traveled from Colombia to Boston every 18 to 24 months to undergo MRI and amyloid and tau PET imaging at MGH. Neuropsychological (NP) evaluations were conducted in Spanish at the University of Antioquia within 6 months of imaging.
Table
A total of 26 participants had PET, MRI, and NP sessions at baseline and 18-24-month follow-up, and 10 of these had an additional follow-up time point at 42-48 months.
Three participants had baseline imaging and NP but only completed NP at 18-24 months (due to inability to travel to Boston for follow-up imaging); these were included in analyses of baseline imaging vs. cognitive change.
All participants provided informed written consent prior to enrollment and were studied under guidelines approved by local institutional review boards of the University of Antioquia in Colombia and the Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston.
Investigators and participants were blinded to the participants' PSEN1 E280A carrier status.

MRI
Structural T1-weighted data were acquired using a Siemens 3 Tesla Tim Trio (Siemens, Erlangen, Germany; repetition time = 2300 ms, echo time = 2.95 ms, flip angle = 9°, and a voxel size = 1.05 × 1.05 × 1.2 mm.
Images were processed with FreeSurfer (FS) v6.0 (
to identify white and pial surfaces, standard regions-of-interest (ROI) from the Desikan atlas for PET sampling, and hippocampal volumes (HV)
FS outputs were quality checked and manually edited where necessary to ensure accurate segmentation and surface identification.
HV measures derived from FS were adjusted for intracranial volume (ICV) by regressing out the contribution of ICV on HV, using previously published parameters

PET
18F-flortaucipir (FTP) and 11C-Pittsburgh compound B (PiB) were prepared and acquired according to previously published protocols
All PET data were acquired on a Siemens ECAT HR+ (3D mode; 63 image planes; 15.2 cm axial field of view; 5.6 mm transaxial resolution; and 2.4 mm slice interval).
PiB data were acquired using a 60-min dynamic protocol and analyzed by the Logan reference method with distribution volume ratio (DVR) as outcome.
FTP data were acquired from 80 to 100 min post-injection in 4 × 5-min frames with the standardized uptake value tissue ratio (SUVR) as outcome.
Cerebellar gray matter was used as reference for PiB and FTP.
Partial volume correction (PVC) was applied to the PET frame data using geometric transfer matrix (GTM) method for PiB and an extended Muller-Gartner method (implemented in FS) for FTP
We also assessed PET data without PVC for comparison.
PET images were affine co-registered to each subject's contemporaneous T1 images (SPM8) and all PET data sets were sampled using FS-derived ROIs.
Aβ burden was represented using PiB DVR in a large neocortical target region that included frontal, lateral temporal and parietal, and retrosplenial cortices (FS-defined FLR region)
These neocortical PiB values were standardized to an approximate Centiloid (CL) scale
A previously published PiB PVC FLR DVR threshold of 1.32 (~19 CL) was used to indicate elevated Aβ burden
For comparison with other studies, rates of PiB change were characterized in all ROIs from the Desikan atlas as well as striatum (volume-weighted average of bilateral caudate and putamen), which may represent an earlier stage of Aβ accumulation in ADAD
Based on previous neuropathology
These three ROIs were used for statistical analyses, described below.
SUVR thresholds for elevated tau in each ROI were defined as two standard deviations above the mean in non-carriers (EC: 1.26, IT: 1.42, PC: 1.30).
For comparison with other studies, we also reported rates of FTP change for all Desikan atlas ROIs as well as rhinal cortex (RC), a PET-compatible measure of the transentorhinal region
For visualization purposes, FTP SUVR and PiB DVR images were normalized to standard (MNI) space and projected onto the fsaverage surface using FS methods (sampled at the midpoint of gray matter, surfacesmoothed 8 mm).
Mean rates of PiB and FTP change within carriers were computed vertex-wise and visualized on the cortical surface (Fig.
Mean images of FTP SUVR and PiB DVR for each group at baseline and 2-year follow-up are shown in Supplementary Figure

Neuropsychological evaluations
Participants underwent a comprehensive NP battery at each time point, including the Spanish-language version of the Consortium to Establish a Registry for Alzheimer's Disease (CERAD) battery, which has been validated for the assessment of memory, language, and praxis in the Colombian kindred
Specifically, PACC scores were computed using the following measures: Free and Cued Selective Reminding Test (FCSRT) Total Recall score (range 0-48)
Raw scores were z-transformed using the non-carriers' baseline mean and standard deviation and averaged to produce PACC z-scores, which were used in subsequent statistical analyses.
Our primary NP outcome measures were PACC and CERAD word list learning (WLL) scores (0-10), as CERAD WLL has been previously reported to be an early indicator of cognitive decline in this kindred

Statistics
Annualized change rates were calculated for all imaging and NP variables by extracting slopes from linear regression models of each variable as a function of time from baseline (in years) within each participant.
These change rates were used in subsequent statistical analyses, described below.
To ensure that biomarker change rates were not systematically biased by the use of individual regression models, we also confirmed our main findings using slopes derived from linear mixed-effects models (Supplementary Figure
For the purposes of interpretability and comparison with other studies, we also reported rates of change as annualized percentage change, defined as the annualized change rate (as described above) divided by the baseline value and multiplied by 100.

Group differences between carriers and non-carriers
were assessed with Mann-Whitney U tests, and bivariate relationships among baseline and change measures using Spearman correlations.
Regional differences in rates of tau accumulation (between EC, IT, and PC) among carriers were evaluated using paired Wilcoxon tests.
We used a Bonferroni-Holm correction for multiple comparisons in analyses that included tau variables to mitigate the possibility of false positives from testing multiple tau ROIs.
Given previous reports showing a sigmoidal trajectory of Aβ accumulation
For comparison, we also assessed the relationship between baseline tau and tau change rates in the same way.
We report the r 2 estimates with standard error (SE) and p values for these models.
All statistical analyses, including group comparisons, Spearman correlations, and regressions, were performed in R (version 3.4.1).

Results

PSEN1 mutation carriers show faster Aβ accumulation rates compared to non-carriers
Compared with age-matched non-carriers, PSEN1 E280A mutation carriers showed significantly faster rates of Aβ accumulation (Mann-Whitney p < 0.001 for neocortex, Figs.
Rates of Aβ change were similar for unimpaired and impaired carriers (Fig.
Regionally, the highest rates of Aβ change among carriers were observed in anterior cingulate, lateral parietal, and middle frontal cortices (Fig.
While age and Aβ burden were highly correlated cross-sectionally (r s = 0.93, p < 0.001), longitudinal rates of Aβ accumulation were not associated with baseline age among carriers (Fig.
One of the youngest carriers in our sample (15-20 EYO) showed baseline Aβ burden comparable to non-carriers (1.09 neocortical DVR, ~2 CL), but accumulated neocortical Aβ over 4 years at a faster rate compared to non-carriers (0.04 DVR/year ~2.7 CL/year; 3.5%/year), consistent with previous work suggesting that neocortical Aβ increases beginning more than a decade prior to symptom onset in carriers.
Supplementary analyses of striatum and precuneus Aβ indicated that these regional measures may be elevated at younger age compared to the global measure (Supplementary Figure
In the full sample (including carriers and noncarriers), the relationship between baseline Aβ and Aβ change was quadratic (Fig.

Rapid neocortical tau accumulation is observed in carriers near time of symptom onset
Longitudinal rates of regional tau accumulation are shown in Fig.
While we observed considerable variability among carriers in rates of tau accumulation, carriers on average had higher mean rates of tau change in PC (0.16 ± 0.18 SUVR/year; 9.3 ± 9.8%/year) compared to IT (0.06 ± 0.10 SUVR/year; 3.8 ± 6.0%/year, paired Wilcoxon test p = 0.03) and EC (0.03 ± 0.07 SUVR/year; 1.8 ± 4.0%/year, p = 0.04).
Group differences in tau change rates between all carriers and non-carriers were significant for PC (Mann-Whitney p = 0.009), but not for IT (p = 0.12) or EC (p = 0.4).
The highest overall mean rates of tau change among all carriers were observed in inferior and superior parietal, followed by PC and isthmus and posterior cingulate cortices (Fig.
Baseline age was associated with greater tau change rates in IT and PC (Fig.
These associations were driven by 4 older carriers in IT and 6 in PC who showed rapid tau increase (i.e., > 0.1 SUVR/year) around the time of symptom onset (39-45 years, Figs.
By contrast, EC tau change rates were less rapid and not associated with baseline age (Fig.
Baseline tau measures were significantly associated with subsequent tau change rates within neocortical ROIs (IT: r s = 0.69, p = 0.034; PC: r s = 0.81, p = 0.006), but not in EC (r s = 0.40, p = 0.20).
In contrast with Aβ, the relationship between baseline tau and tau change rate in PC was significantly quadratic with a positive quadratic term (Fig.
Across ROIs, the baseline EC tau level predicted subsequent tau change rates in IT (r s = 0.80, p = 0.018) and PC (r s = 0.76, p = 0.03), whereas baseline IT and PC tau levels did not predict subsequent EC tau change rates (p > 0.2), consistent with EC tau accumulation preceding neocortical tau accumulation.

Aβ rise precedes rapid neocortical tau increase in ADAD
Individual trajectories of Aβ and tau PET within carriers (shown for neocortical Aβ and PC tau in Fig.
The level of neocortical Aβ at which rapid PC tau increase was observed varied: of six carriers who showed the greatest increases in PC tau, four were older (42-44 years old, 0-2 EYO) and had baseline neocortical PiB DVR > 2.0 (~65 CL), while the two with the fastest PC tau accumulation rates
Associations between baseline Aβ and subsequent tau accumulation rates within carriers were in the expected direction but not significant after multiple comparisons correction (PC: r s = 0.50, p = 0.20, Fig.
Supplementary analysis of striatum and precuneus PiB revealed that striatum PiB was a stronger predictor of subsequent neocortical tau accumulation compared to either precuneus or global PiB (Supplementary Figure
Baseline tau levels were not associated with subsequent Aβ change rates (Fig.
Tau and Aβ change rates were not correlated among carriers (Fig.

Hippocampal volume loss occurs in temporal proximity to tau accumulation
Relationships between HV, age, and PET measures are shown in Fig.
Within carriers, age was significantly associated with lower baseline HV (r s = -0.57,
p = 0.03) and marginally associated with steeper HV slope (r s = -0.49,
p = 0.1, Fig.
HV slopes were not significantly associated with baseline Aβ (r s = -0.29,
p = 0.35) or baseline tau burden after multiple comparisons correction (PC: r s = -0.56,
p = 0.12; EC baseline: r s = -0.46,
p = 0.26; IT baseline: r s = -0.31,
p = 0.33).
Similarly, HV slopes were not associated with Aβ slopes (r s = 0.18, p = 0.57, Fig.
By contrast, HV slopes were significantly associated with tau change rates in PC (r s = -0.83,
p = 0.006, Fig.
p = 0.08; IT: r s = -0.64,
p = 0.06) within carriers, suggesting that HV loss occurs closer in time to neocortical tau PET than to Aβ accumulation.

Compared to longitudinal Aβ accumulation rates, tau accumulation rates are more closely related to cognitive decline
Individual trajectories of cognitive decline as measured by PACC score are shown in Fig.
Rates of PACC decline were marginally associated with greater age within carriers (r s = -0.54,
p = 0.07, Fig.

Discussion
Expanding upon previous cross-sectional findings, the longitudinal analyses in this study help to clarify the temporal sequence of the initiating pathological events in ADAD.
Consistent with previous work in ADAD
Rapid increase in neocortical tau (inferior temporal cortex and precuneus) was observed in carriers closer to the time of symptom onset (1-6 EYO), neocortical tau change rates were associated with contemporaneous hippocampal volume loss (~6 EYO), and baseline tau levels were associated with subsequent cognitive decline (~4 EYO).
These results are consistent with a trajectory of ADAD-related changes beginning with Aβ accumulation, followed by medial temporal tauopathy, followed by a cascade of neocortical tau accumulation, neurodegeneration, and cognitive decline.
Brain fibrillar Aβ accumulation associated with the PSEN1-E280A mutation is a steady process beginning decades prior to symptom onset
Consistent with previous PET studies of ADAD
Aβ change rates showed a negative quadratic relationship with baseline Aβ levels, consistent with previous work implying that Aβ follows a sigmoidal trajectory of accumulation
As expected, the anatomy of cortical Aβ PET change in carriers was diffuse, and we observed the highest change rates in frontal, parietal, and lateral temporal cortices, consistent with other PET studies describing regional Aβ PET in ADAD
Supplementary analyses of regional Aβ (Supplementary Figure
This is, to our knowledge, the first report assessing longitudinal rates of tau accumulation in ADAD in vivo using PET.
Contemporaneous change rates of tau and Aβ PET were not correlated among carriers, consistent with the two pathologies being asynchronous.
Among carriers who showed rapid neocortical tau increase, baseline Aβ burdens ranged from 1.3-2.2
DVR (~20-80 CL).
These Aβ levels are all above thresholds generally considered to indicate abnormality (i.e., 14-20 CL), consistent with Aβ preceding tau accumulation in ADAD, as well as with findings from sporadic AD that Aβ appears to be a major driver of neocortical tau accumulation
On the other hand, we observed considerable variability in rates of tau accumulation among carriers with similarly elevated Aβ burdens, and striatum Aβ was a stronger predictor of subsequent tau increase than cortical Aβ in this sample, suggesting that there are likely other factors in addition to cortical fibrillar Aβ pathology that trigger neocortical tau accumulation in ADAD.
This is consistent with a recent report of a PSEN1 E280A carrier who also carried the APOE3 Christchurch mutation and, remarkably, was in her seventies with severely elevated neocortical Aβ, but relatively limited neocortical tau and preserved cognitive function
We assessed tau PET primarily in three ROIs-EC, IT, and PC, representing MTL allocortex, temporal neocortex, and extra-temporal neocortex, respectively.
EC tau levels were significantly elevated in all impaired carriers and in unimpaired carriers as early as 9 EYOyounger than we previously reported in this cohort
IT and PC tau levels were elevated later (6 EYO), although still during the preclinical phase, in contrast to a previous report that tau PET is only elevated in ADAD cases with impairment
Across ROIs, baseline EC tau levels predicted subsequent neocortical tau change rates but not vice-versa, consistent with MTL tauopathy occurring before tauopathy in temporal and extratemporal neocortices.
While this is consistent with the typical spatiotemporal progression of AD tauopathy implied by autopsy studies
Our results suggest that EC tau plays an important role in ADAD: EC tau levels were predictive of subsequent neocortical tau increase and cognitive decline, supporting the idea that elevated EC tau PET signal is detectable at a relatively early disease stage
We observed higher rates of tau change among carriers in neocortical regions compared to EC.
This is consistent with studies in sporadic AD showing that cognitively impaired patients show lower rates of tau
Notably, the rapid increase in neocortical tau PET we observed mirrors the observation that cerebrospinal fluid measures of soluble p-tau decrease around the time of symptom onset in ADAD
Together with reports that CSF tau measures are consistently elevated in ADAD around 15 EYO
We note several differences between our longitudinal tau PET findings and what has been reported in sporadic AD.
First, elevated tau PET levels were only observed in carriers with elevated neocortical Aβ PET (Fig.
Similarly, while autopsy and PET studies of sporadic AD have consistently observed greater tau burden in temporal neocortex than parietal neocortex
This suggests that neocortical tau accumulation may proceed in a different anatomical sequence in ADAD compared to typical sporadic AD
Recent longitudinal tau PET studies have highlighted the heterogeneity of tau accumulation patterns in sporadic AD
The rates of neocortical tau increase we observed here (PC mean: 0.16 SUVR/year, 9%/year; max: 0.46 SUVR/ year, 28%/year) were markedly higher than has been reported in sporadic AD (~0.05 SUVR/year, 3-6%/year)
In previously reported longitudinal PET data from our group processed with the same pipeline reported herein
These findings are consistent with early neuropathological reports suggesting that some ADAD mutations, including PSEN1 E280A, may be associated with more rapid accumulation of neurofibrillary tangle pathology compared to sporadic AD
However, both ADAD and sporadic AD cohorts show substantial variability in rates of tau accumulation, and direct, systematic comparison of these groups modeling for various confounds should be pursued in future work.
Consistent with previous observations
HV change rates were highly correlated with tau change rates but not Aβ change rates, suggesting that hippocampal atrophy occurs in temporal proximity to neocortical tau accumulation.
This is consistent with findings from sporadic AD, where it has been reported that neurodegeneration is more closely associated with tau than with Aβ
Whereas we focused our analyses on proxy variables for tau PET and structural measurements in this study, future studies of local associations between tau PET and atrophy in ADAD may help to elucidate the extent to which neurodegeneration is mediated by coincident (local) tau pathology.
Finally, we measured changes in cognitive performance over time and observed that rates of cognitive decline were correlated with baseline age, Aβ level, and all tau measures within carriers.
Steep cognitive decline (> 0.2 z-score/year) was observed within carriers as early as 4 EYO with the PACC, comparable to previous reports in ADAD assessing change in a composite cognitive measure
PACC slopes were more closely associated with contemporaneous neocortical tau slopes than with Aβ slopes, although these associations did not reach statistical significance within carriers, probably due to the small sample size.
These results suggest that there may be some temporal offset between neocortical tau accumulation and cognitive decline in ADAD, and raises the possibility that intervening against tauopathy even in the context of elevated Aβ could be of therapeutic benefit.

Limitations
This study has several limitations.
First, our small sample size likely limited our ability to detect some significant effects, meaning that null findings, including those trending toward significance, may be significant with greater power.
Similarly, whereas we limited the present study to hypothesis-driven analyses to limit the number of statistical comparisons, future studies with larger samples will be able to employ data-driven methods to comprehensively explore imaging and cognitive measures.
For instance, previous studies have suggested that specific composite ROIs for structural MRI measurements may reflect AD-related neurodegeneration better than a single HV measure
Our longitudinal PET findings require confirmation in other ADAD cohorts, as we only examine one ADAD mutation here.
Finally, PET results can be influenced by the method of partial volume correction and choice of reference region
Studies using alternative processing methods and/or PET ligands may provide important opportunities to validate our findings.

Conclusions
In summary, this study expands on previous crosssectional findings by tracking the longitudinal relationships between Aβ, tau, neurodegeneration, and cognitive decline in ADAD.
Our observations were consistent with a progression of pathologic changes beginning with Aβ accumulation and followed by entorhinal tau, neocortical tau, neurodegeneration, and cognitive decline.
Notably, entorhinal tau accumulation is observable with PET years before symptom onset despite the young age of this ADAD cohort, and entorhinal tau burden predicts subsequent neocortical tau accumulation and cognitive decline in those with elevated Aβ burden.
These findings have important implications for sporadic AD and suggest that entorhinal tau may act as a link between Aβ accumulation and catastrophic neocortical tau spread in both contexts.



Fig. 1 PSEN1
Fig. 1 PSEN1 E280A mutation carriers show greater rates of tau and Aβ increase compared to non-carriers.
Upper, dot plots of Aβ (a, left) and tau (b, right) PET change rates, expressed as annualized change in PiB DVR and FTP SUVR respectively, in all regions of interest (ROIs).
Dots are colorencoded by carrier and cognitive status according to inset legend (lower right).
Primary ROIs for each modality are shown above horizontal dashed line; other ROIs below the dashed line are ordered from top to bottom by highest to lowest mean change rate within all carriers.
Neocortical Aβ change rates were normalized to the Centiloid scale, shown at top ( †); note that the Centiloid scale does not apply to any other ROI.
Adjusted p values for group difference (Mann-Whitney, Bonferroni-Holms correction) between all carriers and non-carriers are given for primary ROIs (*p < 0.05 after multiple comparisons correction); other regions are shown for comparison with other studies but were not included in statistical analyses.
EAOT = aggregate (unweighted average) of bilateral entorhinal, amygdala, occipital, and inferior temporal ROIs (Mishra et al. [33]); TempMeta = aggregate of bilateral entorhinal, amygdala, parahippocampal, fusiform, inferior and middle temporal (Jack et al. [20]).
Lower, Surface visualization of mean rates of Aβ (c, left) and tau (d, right) change within all carriers, expressed as annualized change in PiB DVR and FTP SUVR, respectively, according to the color bar



Fig. 2
Fig. 2 Longitudinal Aβ and tau PET images in PSEN1 E280A carriers.
Top left: Matrix showing baseline Aβ (PiB DVR) and tau (FTP SUVR) PET measures (color bar) for all subjects: Each column is a PET variable, and each row is a subject, separated by PSEN1 E280A carrier status and ordered by age increasing from top to bottom (right labels; expected age at symptom onset in carriers = 44 years, 95% CI [43-45]).
Bottom left: Matrix showing annualized Aβ and tau PET change rates (color bar) for all subjects, arranged as above.
Horizontal thick black line separates cognitively unimpaired carriers (UC, above line) from cognitively impaired carriers (IC, below line).
We assessed Aβ burden in a large neocortical aggregate (Neo.) and tau burden in three primary ROIs: entorhinal cortex (EC), inferior temporal gyrus (IT), and precuneus (PC).
Four exemplary cases are labeled (A-D), with corresponding baseline and 2-year follow-up PET slice data shown at right.
A-D: Aβ (PiB DVR, left) and tau (FTP SUVR.
right) PET images at baseline and 2-year follow-up in coronal (upper) and sagittal (lower) slices for four exemplary cases, labeled in color matrices at left.
Age and carrier status are given for each participant (y/o, years old; NC, non-carrier; UC, unimpaired carrier; IC, impaired carrier)



Fig. 3
Fig. 3 Steady Aβ accumulation precedes rapid neocortical tau increase in PSEN1 E280a mutation carriers.
Spaghetti plots show Aβ (top, a) and tau (bottom, d-f) PET levels in ROIs vs. age at baseline and 2-4-year follow-up; scatter plot (b) shows rates of Aβ accumulation vs. baseline age.
Aβ PET (PiB DVR) was assessed in a neocortical aggregate (Neo., a-b); Neo.
Aβ levels were normalized to an approximate Centiloid (CL) scale, shown in A-B at right; horizontal dashed line in a indicates previously-published high-PiB threshold DVR = 1.32 (15).
Tau PET (FTP SUVR) was assessed in entorhinal (EC, d), inferior temporal (IT, e), and precuneus (PC, f) cortices.
Vertical dashed line indicates expected age of cognitive symptom onset (44 years); horizontal dashed lines in (d-f) indicate two standard deviations above the mean FTP SUVR in non-carriers (EC: 1.26, IT: 1.42, PC: 1.30).
Dots and lines are colored by subject group according to inset legend (top, center).
c Gives the Spearman correlations between age and annualized change rates (i.e., slopes) in each PET variable (rows) within carriers (N = 12) with p values after adjustment for multiple comparisons



Fig. 4
Fig. 4 Contemporaneous rates of Aβ and tau accumulation are not correlated among PSEN1 E280a mutation carriers.
a Longitudinal trajectories of tau and Aβ burden, expressed as precuneus (PC) Flortaucipir (FTP) standardized uptake value ratio (SUVR) and neocortical (Neo.)
Pittsburgh Compound B (PiB) distribution volume ratio (DVR), respectively.
Lines and dots are colored by subject group according to inset legend, and arrowhead indicates most recent follow-up time point.
b Relationship between baseline Aβ and Aβ change rate, which was quadratic in the full sample (inset text, top left).
Linear and quadratic regression fits are shown as dashed and solid gray curves, respectively.
c Relationship between baseline Aβ and PC tau change rates.
d Relationship between Aβ and PC tau and change rates, expressed as annualized PiB DVR or FTP SUVR change, respectively.
e Baseline PC tau vs PC tau change rate.
Linear and quadratic regression fits are shown as dashed and solid gray curves, respectively.
f Baseline PC tau vs Aβ change rate



Fig. 5
Fig. 5 Hippocampal volume loss occurs in temporal proximity to tau accumulation.
Top, longitudinal trajectories of hippocampal volume (HV, adjusted for intracranial volume) by a age, b neocortical (Neo.)
Aβ burden, and c precuneus (PC) tau.
Arrowheads in b, c indicate most recent time point; lines are color-encoded by PSEN1 E280a carrier and clinical status according inset legend at top-right.
Bottom, Relationships between annualized change in HV and d age, e neo.
Aβ change rate, and f PC tau change rate.
Inset text gives Spearman correlation and p value within carriers.
HV change was marginally associated with and significantly associated with PC tau change rate, but not neo.
Aβ change rate, suggesting that loss of HV occurs in temporal proximity to tau accumulation



Fig. 6
Fig. 6 PACC captures cognitive decline in carriers near expected symptom onset.
Top, longitudinal trajectories of Preclinical Alzheimer's Cognitive Composite (PACC) score by a age, b neocortical (Neo.)
Aβ burden, and c precuneus (PC) tau.
Arrowheads in b, c indicate most recent time point; lines are color-encoded by PSEN1-E280a carrier and clinical status according to the inset legend at top-right.
Bottom, Relationships between annualized change in PACC and d age, e neo.
Aβ change rate, and f PC tau change rate.
Inset text gives Spearman correlation and p value within carriers.
PACC change rate showed negative but non-significant associations with age and PC tau change rate, and no association with neo.
Aβ change rate


). Participants were recruited from the Alzheimer Prevention Initiative (API) registry.
Exclusion criteria included a diagnosis of dementia, a significant medical, psychiatric, or neurological disorder, or a history of stroke, seizures, substance abuse, or other disorders affecting motor, visuospatial, or cognitive abilities.
Cognitively unimpaired individuals had to demonstrate no cognitive impairment on the Consortium to Establish a Registry for Alzheimer's Disease neuropsychological battery (CERAD) word list recall and visuospatial memory tests, a Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) score of 26 or greater, a clinical diagnostic rating scale (CDR) score of 0, and a Functional Assessment Staging Test (FAST) score of 2 or less, to be included in this study.
Individuals with mild cognitive impairment (MCI) were diagnosed based on Petersen et al.'s (2014) criteria



Table 1
Sample characteristics Continuous variables are given as mean ± standard deviation [range].
Y years, MMSE Mini Mental State Examination score