Sex differences in CSF biomarkers vary by Alzheimer disease stage and <i>APOE</i> ε4 genotype
To evaluate sex differences in CSF biomarkers, taking the potential modifying role of clinical disease stage and APOE e4 genotype into account.
We included participants (n = 1,801) with probable Alzheimer disease (AD) dementia (n = 937), mild cognitive impairment (MCI; n = 437), and subjective cognitive decline (SCD; n = 427).
Main outcomes were CSF β-amyloid 1-42 (Aβ 42 ), total tau (t-Tau), and tau phosphorylated at threonine 181 (p-Tau) levels.
Age-corrected 3-way interactions between sex, disease stage (i.e., syndrome diagnosis at baseline), and APOE e4 were tested with linear regression analyses for each outcome measure.
In case of significant interactions (p < 0.05), sex differences were further evaluated by stratifying analyses for clinical disease stage and APOE e4 genotype, including age as a covariate.
Three-way interactions were significant for t-Tau (p < 0.001) and p-Tau (p < 0.01) but not Aβ 42 .
In APOE e4 carriers, women showed higher p-Tau concentrations than men in SCD (Cohen d [95% confidence interval]: t-Tau = 0.52 [0.19-0.84],
p < 0.001; p-Tau = 0.44 [0.11-0.77]
p = 0.004) and MCI (Cohen d [95% CI]: t-Tau = 0.54 [0.28-0.80],
p < 0.001; p-Tau = 0.52 [0.26-0.77],
p < 0.001) but not in AD dementia.
In APOE e4 noncarriers, women showed higher p-Tau concentrations in MCI (Cohen d [95% CI]: t-Tau = 0.49 [0.17-0.80],
p = 0.002; p-Tau = 0.47 [0.16-0.78],
p = 0.003) and AD dementia (Cohen d [95% CI]: t-Tau = 0.42 [0.19-0.65],
p < 0.001; p-Tau = 0.38 [0.15-0.61]
p = 0.002) but not in SCD.
Within APOE e4 carriers, sex differences in CSF p-Tau are more evident in early disease stages, whereas for APOE e4 noncarriers, sex differences are more evident in advanced disease stages.
These findings suggest that the effect of APOE e4 on sex differences in CSF biomarkers depends on disease stage in AD.
Alzheimer disease (AD) is a global health care challenge due to the rapidly growing disease prevalence and the lack of preventive or curative treatment.
Therefore, knowledge regarding the underlying pathophysiological process of AD that could potentially contribute to the development of treatments is needed.
Current knowledge indicates that AD is characterized by initial brain depositions of β-amyloid (Aβ), followed by accumulation of neurofibrillary tangles (NFT).
4]
]
However, postmortem studies do not show this sex-specific association.
A possible explanation for these seemingly discrepant results is that in vivo studies included mostly predementia individuals (i.e., those with normal cognition or mild cognitive impairment [MCI]), whereas postmortem studies included largely patients with end-stage dementia.
It could be hypothesized that the association between APOE e4 genotype and sex differences in AD neuropathology may be present in initial phases of the disease but diminishes as the disease progresses and is no longer seen in end-stage AD dementia during postmortem examinations.
Therefore, in the present study, we investigated whether sex differences in CSF Aβ 42 , t-Tau and p-Tau are modified by APOE e4 genotype and clinical disease stage.

Methods

Participants
We selected 1,801 patients who visited our outpatient clinic between October 2000 and July 2015.
Selection from the Amsterdam Dementia Cohort was based on a clinical diagnosis of probable AD dementia (n = 937), MCI (n = 437), or subjective cognitive decline (SCD; n=427) and the availability of CSF biomarker results and APOE genotype.
here were no exclusion criteria.
All participants underwent a standardized dementia screening at baseline that included physical and neurological examination, a neuropsychological test battery that included a Mini-Mental State Examination, EEG, MRI, and laboratory tests.
Clinical diagnosis was given by consensus in a multidisciplinary team according to international research and clinical criteria.
Subjects were labeled as having SCD when results of clinical examinations and test results were normal (i.e., criteria for MCI or dementia were not fulfilled, and no psychiatric diagnosis was given).
Patients with MCI were labeled according to the criteria by Petersen et al.
The core clinical NIA-AA criteria were met for all patients with probable AD.
Sex was self-reported and defined as a biological characteristic that discriminates women from men.

Standard protocol approvals, registrations, and patient consents
All participants gave written informed consent, and the study was approved by the local ethics review board.
vivo markers of AD pathology CSF Aβ 42 , t-Tau, and p-Tau concentrations were used as in vivo markers for the presence of AD pathology.
CSF samples were collected and processed according to international consensus protocols as previously described.
Commercially available ELISAs were used to measure baseline Aβ 42 , t-Tau, and p-Tau (Innotest Aβ 1-42 , Innotest hTAU-Ag, and Innotest Phosphotau [ 181 P]; Fujirebio, Ghent, Belgium) concentrations.
Intra-assay and interassay variations for all analyses were <3.2% and 10.9%, respectively.
The team performing the CSF analyses was not aware of the clinical diagnosis.
To correct for the drift in CSF Aβ 42 concentrations throughout the analysis-years, we used adjusted Aβ 42 concentrations.
Cutoffs to determine abnormality were <813 pg/mL for Aβ 42
I measurements MRI measurements were acquired on 3T whole-body magnetic resonance system (Discovery; GE Medical Systems, Milwaukee, WI) with an 8-channel head coil at the Amsterdam UMC Location VUmc.
Medial temporal lobe atrophy scores ranged from 0 to 4 and were rated on coronal reconstructions of T1-weighted images.
There was no intravenous contrast administration.
All scans were evaluated by an experienced neuroradiologist.
APOE genotyping DNA was isolated from 10-mL vacutainer tubes containing EDTA with the QIAamp DNA blood isolation kit from Qiagen (Venlo, the Netherlands), followed by genotype determination with the LightCycler ApoE mutation Detection Kit (Roche Diagnostics, GmbH, Mannheim, Germany).
Subjects with at least 1 APOE e4 allele were defined as APOE e4 carriers, whereas having no e4 allele defined individuals as noncarriers.

Statistical analysis
Statistical analyses were completed with R studio (version 3.3.2;
sincere Pumpkin Patch).
Before the statistical analyses, t-Tau and p-Tau were log-transformed because they were not normally distributed.
Demographical and clinical data were compared between groups by use of independent t tests, χ 2 tests, and Mann-Whitney U tests as appropriate.
To assess how sex differences in biomarkers depend on APOE e4 genotype and clinical disease stage, we used general linear models with the factors sex, APOE e4 genotype, and clinical disease stage, their 2-way interactions, and their 3-way interactions, and age was included as a covariate (table
In case of a significant interaction between sex, APOE e4 genotype, and clinical disease stage, we performed general linear models in CSF biomarker concentrations stratified for APOE genotype and clinical disease stage as shown in the figure.
These analyses included sex as a factor and age as covariate.
We repeated analyses restricted to individuals with abnormal CSF Aβ 42 concentrations (<813 pg/ mL) to study the specificity of the findings for the AD

Data availability
The dataset generated during or analyzed during the current study is available from the corresponding author on reasonable request.

Results
Within those with SCD, the majority were male (61%), and women and men showed a similar frequency of APOE e4 (women 38% vs men 37%, p > 0.05).
Within those with MCI, the majority were male (62%), women showed a higher frequency of APOE e4 than men (women 65% vs men 50%, p = 0.002), and women had less atrophy than men (table
Within the patients with AD dementia, the percentages of women and men were similar (52% vs 48%), as was the frequency of APOE e4 carriers between women and men (women 67% vs men 68%, p > 0.05).
Women had less medial temporal atrophy than men (women 1.32 vs men 1.52, p > 0.01).
Women and men did not differ in age within clinical disease stages.
In patients with MCI and AD dementia, men had higher educational levels and higher Mini-Mental State Examination scores compared to women.
Subject characteristics of the CSF amyloid-positive cohort were largely comparable to those of the total cohort (table
For CSF Aβ 42 , age-adjusted general linear models including sex, APOE e4 genotype, diagnosis, and all interactions showed main effects for diagnosis and APOE e4 genotype but not for sex.
There were no significant interactions.
For CSF t-Tau and p-Tau, there was a 3-way interaction between sex, APOE e4 genotype, and clinical diagnosis (full models shown in table
Therefore, we further stratified these analyses for APOE e4 and clinical diagnosis as shown in the figure.
Within APOE e4 carriers, women showed higher t-

Discussion
Our findings suggest that APOE differentially affects sex differences in CSF biomarkers throughout the AD spectrum.
Within APOE e4 carriers, women show higher t-Tau and p-Tau concentrations in early disease stages (i.e., SCD and MCI), which equalized in the later dementia stage.
Within APOE noncarriers, we observed an opposite pattern, with women showing higher t-Tau and p-Tau concentrations in later disease stages (i.e., AD dementia and MCI) but not in the early disease stage of SCD.
We did not find sex differences in Aβ concentrations between women and men for any disease stage or APOE e4 genotype.
Although derived from cross-sectional data, our findings suggest that within APOE e4 carriers sex differences in t-Tau and p-Tau become less evident in advanced disease stages, whereas for APOE e4 noncarriers, sex differences in t-Tau and p-Tau become more evident in advanced disease stages.
Our results seem to be in line with previous studies that reported higher CSF t-Tau and p-Tau concentrations for female APOE e4 carriers.
We expand on those studies by showing that the sex-specific interaction of APOE e4 on CSF biomarkers also depends on disease stage.
Here, we observed that female APOE e4 carriers had higher t-Tau and p-Tau concentrations than male APOE e4 carriers in the SCD and MCI stage of AD, which is in line with previous work in cognitively normal older adults and patients with MCI. 9,10,28,
In addition, a recent study showed that within cognitively normal amyloid-positive adults, female APOE e4 carriers in particular exhibited accelerated rates of longitudinal CSF p-Tau concentrations.
We further show that at the AD dementia stage these sex differences within APOE e4 carriers seem to diminish.
This could possibly explain why multicohort autopsy studies did not find an interaction between sex and APOE e4.
has been suggested that the sex difference in APOE e4 carriers diminishes with increasing age; previous studies found a sex-specific interaction with APOE e4 only in younger individuals (age <75 years).
Seemingly in contrast to these previous studies, stratification for age in our study revealed that results were attributable largely to older elderly individuals (age >67 years).
However, closer inspection of the data shows that our older participants fall within the same age range as the younger participants in former studies (i.e., 65-75 years).
Another explanation for these age-dependent sex differences could be that younger and older participants might have different underlying AD pathologic mechanisms.
For instance, younger participants with a cognitive status similar to that of older individuals may not reflect an earlier phase of AD than older participants and vice versa.
Therefore, it could be possible that younger individuals might have more (unknown) genetic risk factors for AD, which in turn influence t-Tau accumulation and sex differences in t-Tau concentrations.
Taken together, our results support the idea that the sex-by-APOE e4 interaction depends on age, and we further show that this interaction effect also depends on clinical disease stage.
In the latest framework for AD, t-Tau is considered a marker for neuronal injury.
Therefore, higher t-Tau and p-Tau concentrations in female APOE e4 carriers may imply an initial steeper pathologic disease course and more neurodegenerative change compared to male APOE e4 carriers.
Increased neurodegenerative changes in female APOE e4 carriers was also implied by previous studies that reported increased hypometabolism and (hippocampal) atrophy
However, other studies have shown discordant findings.
Previous population studies reported lower hippocampal volume in men compared to women
In the current study, we observed more atrophy in men than women in both APOE e4 carriers and noncarriers, which seems in contrast to the higher t-Tau levels we found in women.
This suggests that discrepant findings between CSF t-Tau and atrophy may reflect different pathologic processes and perhaps should not be used interchangeably.
Similar discrepant findings between t-Tau and MRI have been reported previously, which may depend on sex as well.
Future research combining in vivo CSF biomarker and MRI data with pathology data is needed to examine the relationship with each other and neuropathology.
Possible explanatory biological mechanisms for higher levels of t-Tau and p-Tau in women might be related to abrupt hormonal changes that have occurred in postmenopausal women.
A drastic drop of estradiol levels in postmenopausal women has shown to lead to an increased activity of enzymes involved in Tau phosphorylation (glycogen synthase kinase 3-β and protein kinase A), thus resulting in higher p-Tau concentrations.
In addition, postmenopausal women show indications of increased oxidative stress and mitochondrial dysfunction, which through cell death and apoptosis mechanisms may lead to increases in CSF t-Tau concentrations.
APOE e4 has also been associated with higher levels of CSF t-Tau and NFTs, 2 and it was shown to stimulate Tau phosphorylation as a result of impaired cholesterol exchange between neuronal and nonneuronal cells.
Therefore, it is conceivable that the lack of neuroprotective effects of estrogen, together with the presence of APOE e4, might act synergistically, leading to increased t-Tau concentrations in female APOE e4 carriers.
Another factor that may influence t-Tau levels is cerebrovascular injury.
]
However, we did not observe a difference between sexes in Fazekas scores, which are considered a marker of cerebrovascular injury.
Further (fundamental) research is needed to discover the true underlying cause of the sex differences seen in AD.
Other possible explanations for higher t-Tau and p-Tau concentrations in female APOE e4 carriers in the earlier stages of the disease spectrum could be a difference in survival between women and men.
A faster disease progression in men or a higher mortality rate of the very sick men dying of comorbid conditions at young ages could possibly cause an overrepresentation of healthier men with lower levels of neuropathology (i.e., CSF t-Tau concentrations), therefore making it seem as though women have higher t-Tau concentrations.
However, in our cohort, this seems less likely because men had more atrophy in general.
In our study population, women and men showed similar Aβ 42 concentrations within both APOE e4 genotypes throughout clinical stages of AD.
Our findings align with previous work suggesting that sex differences in AD pathology occur mainly in t-Tau and p-Tau concentrations, downstream from amyloid deposition.
31]
However, in our cohort, t-Tau and p-Tau are highly correlated (r = 0.93, p < 0.001), and sex differences in both APOE e4 carriers and noncarriers were similar for t-Tau and p-Tau.
This suggests that t-Tau and p-Tau to some extent reflect similar or overlapping aspects of neuronal injury.
Among the limitations of our study is that, to adequately assess the temporal order of AD pathology markers, longitudinal data are needed.
Moreover, our data are derived from a tertiary memory clinic cohort that consist of a relatively young population, which may result in a lack of generalizability of our findings.
Among the strengths of this study are the use of a large well-defined cohort and the careful clinical workup that was used to diagnose all participants.
Moreover, because our findings were largely replicable in an Aβ 42 -positive subset, we were able to show that our findings were specific for the AD spectrum.
Our data show that a woman's brain can be more susceptible to t-Tau pathology, depending on disease stage and APOE e4 genotype.
The effect sizes we found for p-Tau concentrations between women and men were moderate and therefore not large enough for clinical use, for instance by developing sex-specific cutoffs for t-Tau or p-Tau.
However, a moderate difference in the underlying pathology of AD between women and men is large enough to be taken into consideration in the development of disease-modifying therapies.
In APOE e4 carriers, sex differences in t-Tau and p-Tau become less evident in advanced disease stages, whereas in APOE e4 noncarriers, sex differences in t-Tau and p-Tau become more evident in advanced disease stages.
These findings largely remain for the amyloid-positive subgroup.
Our findings imply a difference in neuropathologic trajectories for women and men depending on APOE e4 genotype and add to a growing body of evidence of sex differences in the underlying mechanism of AD.

Acknowledgment
The


spectrum.
Reported effect sizes were calculated as the difference of the means of 2 groups divided by the weighted pooled SDs of these groups according to Cohen d statistics.
In an additional set of sensitivity analyses, 3-way interactions were repeated in the total sample stratified by age (cutoff: median 67 years) to assess the effects of age.
Three-way interactions included the factors sex, clinical disease stage, and APOE e4 genotype, their 2-way interactions, and main factors.
Separate models were run for CSF t-Tau and p-Tau.
Finally, we performed 2 additional analyses to test APOE genotype dose effects: (1) we repeated analyses after excluding APOE e2e4 carriers (n = 43) because the conveyed risk of APOE e2e4 carriers for AD is not fully known; (2) We evaluated the effect of e2 (i.e., e2e2 = 4; e2e3 = 111) and e4 allele carriers (i.e., e3e4 = 690; e4e4 = 298) against the e3 allele for sex effects on CSF biomarkers.
Values of p < 0.05 were considered significant for main and interaction effects (p < 0.004 after Bonferroni correction).



Figure
Figure Mean differences in CSF t-Tau and p-Tau concentrations between women and men stratified for APOE e4 genotype and clinical syndrome in picograms per milliliter



Table 1
Subject characteristics for the total cohort stratified per APOE e4 genotype and clinical disease stage



Table 2
Subject characteristics CSF Aβ 42 -positive subgroup stratified per APOE e4 genotype and clinical disease stage When analyses were restricted to individuals with abnormal CSF Aβ 42 , results for t-Tau and p-Tau were largely comparable to those of the total cohort, albeit significance was overall somewhat attenuated for t-Tau and p-Tau and was lost for t-Tau in APOE e4 carriers in the SCD stage and for p-Tau in noncarriers in the MCI stage due to a smaller effect size (table4).



Table 3
Full models for sex, APOE e4 genotype, and clinical disease stage per CSF biomarker



Table 4
Differences in CSF t-Tau and p-Tau concentrations in men vs women in the amyloid-positive subgroup stratified per clinical diagnosis and APOE e4 genotype Alzheimer disease; CI = confidence interval; MCI = mild cognitive impairment; p-Tau = tau phosphorylated at threonine 181; SCD = subjective cognitive decline; t-Tau = total tau.
Differences in CSF t-Tau and p-Tau for women and men in the amyloid-positive subgroup stratified per APOE e4 genotype and clinical diagnosis.
t-Tau and p-Tau were log-transformed to meet assumptions of normality.
We performed general linear models in CSF biomarker concentrations stratified for APOE genotype and clinical disease stage as shown in the figure.
These analyses included sex as a factor and age as covariates.
Cohen d statistics were used to calculate effect sizes: small = 0.2, medium = 0.5, large = 0.8.
Values of p < 0.004 are considered significant after correction for multiple testing.



Table 5
Full models for sex, APOE e4 genotype, and clinical disease stage for p-Tau stratified per age group


Piramal, and Merck.In the past 2 years, he has received consultancy/speaker fees (paid to the institution) from Lilly, GE Healthcare, Novartis, Sanofi, Nutricia, Probiodrug, Biogen, Roche, Avraham, and EIP Pharma.F.Barkhof serves as a consultant for Biogen, Bayer, Genzyme, Jansen Research, Merck, Novartis, Roche, SynthonBV, and Teva.W.M.vander Flier holds the Pasman Chair, performs contract research for Biogen, and has research programs funded by the ZonMW, NWO, EU-FP7, Alzheimer Nederland, CardioVascular Onderzoek Nederland, Stichting Dioraphte, Gieskes-Strijbis Fonds, Boehringer Ingelheim, Piramal Neuroimaging, Roche BV, Janssen Stellar, and Combinostics.
All funding is paid to her institution.
S.A.M. Sikkes is supported by an Off Road grant (ZonMw No. 451001010).
C.E. Teunissen received grants from the European Commission, the Dutch Research Council (ZonMW), Association of Frontotemporal Dementia/Alzheimer's Drug Discovery Foundation, The Weston Brain Institute, and Alzheimer Netherlands.
C.E. Teunissen has served on advisory boards for Roche,



Table 6
Full models for sex, APOE e4 genotype and clinical disease stage for p-Tau in APOE subgroups Total cohort excluding APOE «2«4 carriers Cohort containing only APOE «2 allele carriers Alzheimer disease; APOE = Apolipoprotein E4; MCI = Mild Cognitive Impairment; NA, Not Applicable; SCD = subjective cognitive decline.
Full models: We used general linear models with factors sex, APOE e4 genotype and clinical disease stage, their 2-way interactions and 3-way interactions, and age was included as a covariate.
This full model was run separately for each of the biomarkers.
Values of p < 0.05 are considered significant.