The Edinburgh cognitive and behavioral amyotrophic lateral sclerosis screen (ECAS): sensitivity in differentiating between ALS and Alzheimer’s disease in a Greek population

Introduction
Cognitive impairment in the ALS can be found in 15-60% of patients
The most ubiquitous deficits in ALS are related to executive dysfunction and verbal fluency
However, evidence of language deficit and compromised social cognition have been revealed
Behavioural changes include apathy and disinhibition, similar to those in bvFTD
Accordingly, diagnostic criteria have been proposed to differentiate between ALS with cognitive (ALSci) and/or behavioural changes (ALSbi) and ALS with FTD incorporating the recent findings of a more heterogeneous cognitive profile
The ALS Cognitive Behavioural Screen (ALS-CBS) is the sole screening tool detecting cognitive impairment in ALS that has been translated into Greek
It is a short bedside screen (administration time ≤ 10 mins) that assesses frontal lobe-mediated cognitive and behavioural changes
Studies in ALS have demonstrated that 40-50% of patients show impairment on conventional tests of executive functions
The ALS-CBS includes a section that assesses executive functions and appears to be an appropriate tool to assess ALS patients
However, it has not been designed to assess the more recently recognized heterogeneous cognitive impairments in ALS, namely in language and social cognition
Alternatively, the Edinburgh Cognitive and Behavioural ALS Screen (ECAS) has been developed as a more comprehensive brief assessment
It has been adapted for Italian
The ECAS is a brief screening tool (administration time approximately 20 mins) that is adjustable for patients with various motor impairments.
It comprises a comprehensive assessment of a spectrum of cognitive and behavioural abnormalities in ALS
Furthermore, it has been validated in detecting the milder focal impairments in ALS
The ECAS comprises an ALS-specific score (executive function, social cognition, verbal fluency, and language), an ALS-non-specific score (memory and visuospatial functions), and a carer's interview to detect the behavioural and psychotic changes typical in FTD
Importantly, the ECAS assesses the recently recognized impairments in inhibitory control
In particular, it assesses object naming
Furthermore, the ECAS has been designed to identify the changes that are not typical of ALS but are characteristic of other disorders, particularly Alzheimer's disease (AD)
However, the profile of impairment on the ECAS in AD is yet to be demonstrated.
This study aimed to 1) Adapt the ECAS into Greek, validate it in ALS patients and compare it with the ALS-CBS.
It should be noted that the ECAS has demonstrated good convergent validity with the ALS-CBS in a Spanish ALS population
2) Determine the sensitivity and specificity of ECAS in the differentiation of AD from non-demented ALS patients as compared to the ACE-III and mini-ACE.
The relationship between the ACE-III and the ECAS has been previously examined in a healthy population, and the ECAS was found to be less affected by IQ and ceiling effects

Methods and Materials

Participants
All the participants and/or their carers signed an informed consent form in compliance with the revised Declaration of Helsinki, 1987.
The present study was approved by the Psychology Research Ethics Committee of the University of Edinburgh and the Aeginition Hospital Ethics Committee.
All participants had to be Greek native speakers and be free from the following:
(1) psychiatric disorders, (2) psychoactive drugs, antidepressants, and anticonvulsants,

ALS Patients
The ALS patients (n = 28) were recruited in the Neurological Clinic (inpatients) and ALS Clinic (outpatients) of Aeginition Hospital, Athens, Greece.
The recruitment was conducted in accordance with the general inclusion criteria and the following inclusion criteria specific to ALS: (1) a diagnosis of definite, probable, probable and laboratory-supported, or possible ALS based on the revised El Escorial criteria [27], (2) no clinical diagnosis of frontotemporal dementia as defined by the Neary et al. criteria (FTD)
A neuropsychologist and/or psychiatrist interviewed the patients and administered the ALS Depression Inventory (ADI-12) (cut-off > or = 23)
The patients' motor ability was evaluated using the revised Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis Functional Rating Scale (ALSFRS-R)
The disease duration was calculated in months, from the onset of first symptoms to the testing date.
Lastly, 28 caregivers (close relatives of the patients) of the ALS were interviewed to assess behavioural changes in ALS.

AD Patients
AD patients (n = 26) of the Maroussi Alzheimer Clinic, Athens, Greece were recruited to match a subgroup of ALS patients (n = 24) in age, sex, and education.
The recruitment was conducted in accordance with the general inclusion criteria and the following inclusion criteria specific to AD: (1) a diagnosis of AD according to the National Institute of Neurological and Communicative Disorders and Stroke/Alzheimer's Disease and Related Disorders Association (NINCDS-ADRDA)
A neuropsychologist and/or psychiatrist interviewed the patients and administered the Hospital Anxiety and Depression Screen (HADS)
The duration of the disease was calculated in years, from the onset of the first symptoms to the testing date.
Lastly, 26 caregivers (close relatives of the patients) of the AD patients were interviewed to assess behavioural changes in AD.

Healthy Subjects
108 healthy participants were recruited who were either (1) members of Athens Association of Alzheimer's Disease and Related Disorders, Athens, Greece; (2) or members of the ALS HELLAS patients' association;
For the recruitment we implemented the above-mentioned general inclusion criteria.
56 were recruited to provide the data for the verbal fluency index (VFI) conversion tables of ECAS.
A separate group of 52 healthy participants were recruited to form the ECAS normative data.
These groups were distinct from each other with no overlap.

Procedures

Translation-Adaptation
The adaptation of ECAS was conducted in accordance with the guidelines by Abrahams et al.,2014 (
The ECAS comprises a written or spoken verbal fluency task of the letters 'S' and 'T'.
The letters 'Σ' (Sigma) and 'Π' (Pi) were opted for the Greek version.
The letter 'Σ' in Greek resembles the difficulty of 'S' in English
However, the rule of producing words using only 4 letters was modified to 5 letters due to the scarcity of 4-letter words in Greek.
The spoken and written versions of both letters were administered separately to a different sample of healthy controls to produce the VFI conversion tables of ECAS (see Box 1 in Supplementary Material).
The calculations were made as per the ECAS translation instructions
The adaptation of ACE-III and M-ACE in Greek required minor modifications, since most of the tasks remained the same as in ACE-R.
The sole significant adjustment was in the task of proverb repetition.
In terms of pronunciation, the first item should be a low-difficulty proverb, i.e., 'All that glitters is not gold' and the second item should be a medium-to harddifficulty, i.e., 'A stitch in time saves nine'.
The proverbs of the Greek version are culturally adjusted and correspondent to this difficulty measure, i.e., 'All that glitters is not gold' and 'Better donkey-tying than donkey-seeking'.

Administration of Screens -Spoken and Verbal Versions of ECAS
The 52 healthy participants for the normative data were allotted to two groups matched in age, sex, and education.
The spoken version of the ECAS was administered to the first group, while the written version of the ECAS was administered to the second.
The rest of the screens were administered to both groups.

Statistical Analyses
Thresholds of p < 0.05 (two-tailed) and BF10 ≥ 10 were used for statistical inference.
The demographic and cognitive data were analysed and compared.
Between-group comparisons were made via Bayesian independent sample t-tests.
Bayesian Pearson Correlation Analysis was used to assess the associations between screening tools.
Receiver operating characteristics (ROC) curve analyses and area under the curve (AUC) were implemented to appraise sensitivity and specificity in the differentiation between AD and non-demented ALS patients.
The statistical analyses were executed using the IBM Statistical Package for the Social Sciences (SPSS) 24.0.
(Scale, ROC, and AUC analyses)
(Bayesian Pearson's Correlation analyses, Bayesian t-tests)

Inter-Rater Reliability & Internal Consistency
The inter-rater reliability between the assessors and the independent interviewer was appraised using the Intraclass Correlation Coefficient (ICC), which displays the outcomes from 'no match' = 0 to 'seamless match' = 1
The internal consistency of the Greek versions of ECAS and ACE-III was determined by the calculation of Cronbach's alpha coefficient.
A Cronbach's alpha coefficient of 0.70 or greater was considered substantial

Results
The descriptive statistics of the normative sample are displayed in Supplementary Material Table
No significant difference was detected between the written and spoken versions of the ECAS.

Inter-Rater Reliability & Internal Consistency
The inter-rater reliability analysis displayed ICC = 0.88 for the ECAS, which postulates an almost seamless agreement between the assessors and substantial suitability for clinical implementation
The scale analyses demonstrated an excellent internal consistency with Cronbach's alpha = 0.84

Correlations with Education & Age
Educational level correlated with the total score of ECAS but not with the ECAS-ALS Specific, ECAS-ALS Non-Specific, ACE-III, M-ACE, and ALS-CBS (see Table
Further, the age of participants did not correlate with any of the above scores.

Convergent Validity of ECAS against ALS-CBS
The ECAS and its sub-scores demonstrated a robust correlation with the ALS-CBS (see Table
The ECAS Behavioural score also correlated with the ALS-CBS behavioural score.
The subsequent Bayesian analysis of the correlations confirmed the convergent validity of the screens.

Cognitive and Behavioural Changes in ALS as Assessed by the ECAS
Impairment in language and verbal fluency were the most prominent deficits in ALS patients, followed by executive functions (see Figure
64% of the ALS group presented with a behavioural change.
The most frequent behavioural change was apathy, followed by loss of sympathy and perseverative behaviour (see Figure
Changes in eating behaviour were less commonly found among this population.

Differentiation between ALS and AD Patients
The researchers examined which screen or sub-score would be most effective in discriminating between AD and ALS patients.
The ROC analysis demonstrated the ECAS-ALS Non-Specific score to be the most sensitive and specific in differentiating AD between ALS patients (see Figure
The other measures expressed high sensitivity but poor specificity.
The sensitivity and specificity of each screen are displayed in Table
The ALS group performed significantly better than the AD group in all the measures (see Table
However, the former showed greater behavioural changes than the latter.
In ALS patients, the Bayes correlation pairs analysis revealed an absence of substantial evidence (BF10 ≥ 3) for a correlation between either the total scores or the sub-scores of the tests and either the disease duration or ALSFRSR.
The ECAS Behavioural and ALSFRS-R alone correlated significantly as r (26) = -44, p<.05, BF10 = 3.15.

Discussion

The ECAS in Greek Population
The present study validates the Greek ECAS in ALS patients and demonstrates good convergent validity with the already adapted Greek version of ALS-CBS for both cognitive and behavioural components.
The ECAS also exhibited substantial internal consistency, allowing implementation in clinical and research settings
Therefore, the Greek ECAS can be considered a valid and effective tool for clinical and research purposes.

Behavioural and Cognitive Changes in ALS
In the present study, 50% of the subjects were impaired on the ECAS Total score and 46% on the ECAS-ALS Specific score, which is in accordance with other studies
The most prominent cognitive impairments were found in language (36%), verbal fluency (36%), and executive functions (32%), which aligns with the previous studies in ALS patients
Moreover, the comorbidity of impairments was detected only in a small percentage of the ALS patients in language and verbal fluency (14%), language and executive functions (14%), verbal fluency and executive functions (14%), and language, executive function, and verbal fluency (11%).
The prevalence of executive function and verbal fluency in addition to language impairment in the current study is in accordance with the English, Italian, and German validation studies of ECAS
These findings are aligned with the recently revised diagnostic criteria of Strong et al., 2017 for cognitive and behavioural impairment in ALS
The most frequently reported behavioural changes were apathy (54%), loss of sympathy (29%), and compulsive behaviour (22%).
The first two changes have been considered as highly prevalent behaviour changes in previous studies
The present study and the Italian validation study of the ECAS highlighted comparably high percentages of apathetic behaviour (54% and 45%, respectively)
Moreover, an increased ECAS-Behavioural score was associated with poorer physical function, as assessed by the ALSFRS-R.
These findings are, hence, in line with
It can be postulated that the behavioural changes seem to become prevalent in ALS as the neurodegeneration progresses and the functionality rate deteriorates
Notably, in this sample, neither the depression index, nor the ECAS-Behavioural score were related to any cognitive measure.

Differentiation of ALS cognitive and behavioural profile from AD
ALS patients presented with more behavioural changes than AD patients.
However, these results should be interpreted cautiously.
Behavioural changes in AD are more likely to be presented in the later stages of the disease, when cognitive decline is marked
Our sample included early-to-mid-stage AD patients who presented mild-to-moderate cognitive decline.
Therefore, we recommend caution in using the ECAS Behavioural screen alone to differentiate between ALS and AD patients; it should be used in conjunction with the cognitive performance profile.
In contrast, ECAS-ALS Non-Specific was the most sensitive and specific score when differentiating between AD and non-demented ALS patients.
ACE-III and M-ACE were sensitive, but not specific, in differentiating between the diseases.
The superior performance of the ECAS ALS Non-Specific could be attributed to its adjustments to motor disability.
However, ACE-III and M-ACE do not accommodate for physical decline.
Hence, the ALS patients' deficits were most likely exaggerated by these tests.
Furthermore, the ECAS ALS Non-Specific score assesses memory and visuospatial abilities that are recognized to be impaired disproportionately in AD.
The sensitivity of the ECAS ALS Non-Specific score also permits the identification of AD in ALS patients, which is of great clinical benefit.

Utility of the Screens
The ALS-CBS is adjusted to possible motor impairments and comprises a behavioural assessment.
The ALS-CBS efficiently detects frontal-mediated cognitive impairments and behavioural changes and requires a short administration time.
However, it does not use a VFI to convert the score in the verbal fluency task, and it does not include a language task even though language impairment is highly prevalent among ALS patients
In contrast, the ECAS with two distinct sub-scores and the behavioural interview have displayed the characteristics of an exceptional multi-purpose screening tool.
The behavioural outcomes may accompany the cognitive profile of the patient and inform about the probable caregiver's burden.
The ECAS-ALS Specific appraises the whole spectrum of highly prevalent cognitive impairments in ALS patients
The ECAS-ALS Non-Specific is a sensitive screening tool used to detect AD-related deficits and to differentiate AD patients from nondemented ALS patients.
In poly-pathological clinical settings, where possible motor disabilities are prevalent amongst patients, the ECAS is an indispensable screening tool.
However, in patients with severe motor dysfunction in upper limbs and impaired speech, tests that use brain machine interface
The study is limited by the small size of the sample.
Also, in accordance with previous studies, the educational level was associated with both, the ECAS and the ACE-III
However, the ACE-III appeared to be significantly more dependent on the IQ and with greater ceiling effects than the ECAS, which may be an important advantage of the ECAS for use among clinical populations
In the current study, cut-offs adjusted to the educational level are not specified.
The healthy participants in this study belonged to an older age range (63% > 60) and had a low educational level (62% < 13 years).
The abnormality cut-offs presented here are, therefore, conservative.
The absence of adjusted cut-off scores may have influenced the estimates of abnormality rates.
Furthermore, the validation of the ECAS was against ALS-CBS, which does not assess the whole spectrum of cognitive changes in ALS patients.
Thus, in line with previous studies, validation against a comprehensive neuropsychological battery
In this study, only ALS patients without dementia were recruited, and their genetic status was unknown.
Future studies can investigate the ALS-FTD profile and genetic subtypes.
In conclusion, this study demonstrates a highly effective tool for evaluating the range of cognitive and behaviour changes in the Greek population that can assist in managing patient care and alleviating the caregivers' burden.
The 4 assessors and the independent reviewer were equally trained in the administration and scoring of ECAS based on the relevant guidelines (
The 4 assessors administered the screens to healthy participants (N=52), ALS patients (N=28), and AD patients (N=26).
The responses of the examinees were also recorded (typed) in a distinct sheet, which were solely accompanied with an id-number to maintain traceability and anonymity.
The independent reviewer hence was blinded to the identity of both the examiner and the examinee.
The independent reviewer evaluated the responses of the participants from all populations (N = 106).
We thus formed two groups of scores i.e. (1) by the 4 assessors; (2) by the independent reviewer.
The inter-rater reliability was calculated between the scores (ECAS Total Score, ECAS ALS-Specific, ECA ALS-Non-Specific) provided by the 4 assessors (1), and the independent reviewer (2).
The inter-rater reliability analysis indicated an excellent ICC for all the scores i.e.
ECAS Total Score (ICC = .88),
ECAS ALS-Specific (ICC = .86),
and ECA ALS-Non-Specific (ICC = .92).
However, regarding the suitability of the ECAS for clinical implementation, solely the ICC of ECAS-Total Score (ICC = .88)
should be considered.
The finest tool to discriminate between AD and ALS is presented in bold.



Figure 1 -Figure 2 -Figure 3 -
Figure 1 -Percentages of Abnormal Performance in ALS Patients



Table 1 -
Normative Data SDs distance below the mean, they are presented out of the maximum score.15
males and 13 females, age 57.07 years old (11.28), education 12.6 years (2.87), were tested in the spoken task of both letters (Π and Σ) to produce two discrete tables of the spoken Σ and Π. 28 healthy participants, 12 males and 16 females, age 56.97(9.15),
education 13.73(2.84),
were examined in the written task of both letters to develop the distinct tables of written Σ and Π.



Table 2 -
Bayesian Pearson's Correlations with Education & Age



Table 3 -
Convergent Validity in ALS: Bayesian Pearson's Correlations



Table 1 -
Sensitivity and Specificity in differentiation between AD and ALS patients



Table 2 -
Comparison Between ALS & AD Patients: Descriptive Statistics ALS -Mean (SD) AD -Mean (SD)