Genome-wide meta-analysis, fine-mapping, and integrative prioritization identify new Alzheimer's disease risk genes
Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have discovered numerous genomic loci associated with Alzheimer's disease (AD), yet the causal genes and variants remain incompletely identified.
We performed an updated genome-wide AD meta-analysis, which identified 37 risk loci, including novel associations near genes CCDC6, TSPAN14, NCK2, and SPRED2.
Using three SNP-level fine-mapping methods, we identified 21 SNPs with greater than 50% probability each of being causally involved in AD risk, and others strongly suggested by functional annotation.
We followed this with colocalisation analyses across 109 gene expression quantitative trait loci (eQTL) datasets, and prioritization of genes using protein interaction networks and tissue-specific expression.
Combining this information into a quantitative score, we find that evidence converges on likely causal genes, including the above four genes, and those at previously discovered AD loci including BIN1, APH1B, PTK2B, PILRA, and CASS4.

Introduction
Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) for family history of disease, known as GWASby-proxy (GWAX), are a powerful method for performing genetic discovery in large, unselected cohort biobanks, particularly for age-related diseases
Recent meta-analyses have combined GWAS of diagnosed late-onset Alzheimer's disease (AD) with GWAX for family history of AD in the UK Biobank
However, the causal genetic variants and genes which influence AD risk at these and previously discovered loci have only been clearly identified in a few cases.
Discovering causal variants has led to deeper insight into molecular mechanisms of multiple diseases, including obesity 4 , schizophrenia
For AD, known causal variants include the 4 haplotype in APOE, the strongest genetic risk factor for late-onset AD, and a common nonsynonymous variant that strongly alters splicing of CD33 exon 2
In addition, likely causal rare nonsynonymous variants have been discovered in TREM2
These findings have strengthened support for a causal role of microglial activation in AD.
Although non-synonymous variants are highly enriched in trait associations, most human trait-associated variants do not alter protein-coding sequence and are thought to mediate their effects via altered gene expression, which is likely to occur in a cell type-dependent manner.
A growing number of studies have mapped genetic variants affecting gene expression traits, known as expression quantitative trait loci (eQTLs), in diverse tissues or sorted cell types
While it has become common to integrate GWAS results with eQTLs, this is often limited to a small number of datasets thought to be relevant.
To identify putative causal genetic variants for AD, we performed a meta-analysis of GWAX in the UK Biobank with the latest GWAS for diagnosed AD
Notably, this updated GWAS tested more genetic variants than the Lambert et al. study
The increased power from our meta-analysis enabled us to discover four additional AD risk loci at genome-wide significance, and the higher density genotype imputation identified new candidate causal variants at both novel and established risk loci.
We also performed statistical colocalisation analyses with a broad collection of eQTL datasets, including a recent study on primary microglia
We find that multiple lines of evidence, including colocalisation, tissue-or cell typespecific expression and prioritization using information propagation in gene networks, converge on a set of likely causal AD genes.

Results

Meta-analysis discovers 37 loci associated with Alzheimer's disease risk
We performed a GWAX in the UK Biobank for family history of AD, based on 53,042 unique individuals who were either diagnosed with AD or who reported at least one first-degree relative (parent or sibling) having dementia, and 355,900 controls.
This identified 13 risk loci at genome-wide significance (p < 5x10 -8 ), 10 of which have been reported previously.
Three novel loci were located near genes NCK2, PRL, and FAM135B.
Notably, PRL has been reported as a CSF biomarker of AD
We next did a fixed-effects meta-analysis of these GWAX results with the Kunkle et al. stage 1 GWAS meta-analysis of 21,982 cases with diagnosed AD and 41,944 controls
This revealed 34 AD risk loci (p < 5x10 -8 ), 22 of which were reported in the Kunkle et al. study, while 8 others were reported in either Jansen et al.
Four loci were novel, located near genes NCK2, TSPAN14, SPRED2, and CCDC6.
Notably, the PRL and FAM135B regions showed no evidence of association in Kunkle et al. (p > 0.1), and hence were not significant in meta-analysis.
Three additional loci were found at suggestive significance (p < 5x10
We included these loci in our follow-up analyses, for a total of 37 loci (Figure
LD score regression
with SE=0.0069,
Supplementary Table
We looked for replication of our signals in two other cohorts: the Gr@ace study of 4,120 probable AD cases and 3,289 controls
Of our 37 loci, 16 were nominally replicated (p < 0.05) in either Gr@ace or FinnGen (Supplementary Table
Among our four novel loci, only TSPAN14 replicated with p < 0.05 (in FinnGen), although power was limited in these smaller datasets (estimated at 28 -76%) and most of the alleles had concordant directions of effect.
In a meta-analysis with all four datasets, support for most loci was strengthened (Supplementary Figure
Although not included in downstream analyses, four new loci became genomewide significant, near genes GRN, IGHG1, SHARPIN, and SIGLEC11 (Supplementary Table
Next, we applied stepwise conditioning using GCTA
We excluded the APOE locus from conditional analyses and fine-mapping, because the strength of the association made these analyses unreliable (see methods).
Apart from APOE, 9 loci had two independent signals, while the TREM2 locus had three signals (Figure
Interestingly, a number of the loci discovered recently

Colocalisation between AD risk loci and gene expression traits

96
To identify genes whose expression may be altered by risk variants, we performed statistical 97 colocalisation
The latter include multiple studies in tissues of potential relevance to AD, such as brain, as well as sorted blood immune cell types under different stimulation conditions
For each gene, the colocalisation analysis reports the probability that the GWAS and gene eQTL share a causal variant, referred to as hypothesis 4 (H4).
Some studies using colocalisation have suggested that there is relatively limited overlap between GWAS associations and gene expression QTLs above that expected by chance
A possible reason is that colocalisation analyses can suffer from a lack of sensitivity to detect shared causal variants between traits, which could occur for a number of reasons.
First, when a locus has multiple causal variants, and not all causal effects are shared between a pair of studies (e.g.
GWAS and eQTL study), colocalisation may not be detected
Second, if the relevant tissue, cell type, or cellular context has not been assayed, then a colocalisation may not be found.
Third, differences in LD patterns in a pair of studies can reduce the likelihood of a positive colocalisation.
Lastly, relatively low power in either study can further reduce the colocalisation probability.
To mitigate the first effect, we performed colocalisations separately for each conditionally independent AD signal, to model the case where not all causal variants are shared, as well as for the main AD signal at each locus.
Problems relating to power, LD mismatch, or missing the relevant cell type or context are partially mitigated by our use of a large number of the most highly-powered eQTL datasets currently available, which include those with stimulated conditions.
column shows, for each gene, the number of eQTL datasets with a colocalisation probability 127 above 0.8 (Supplementary Tables
128
Across the 36 loci, we found 391 colocalisations with at least 80% probability of a shared 129 causal variant between AD and eQTL, representing 80 distinct genes at 27 loci 130 (Supplementary Tables
The genes implicated by colocalisation include many which 131 have previously been investigated for roles in AD, such as PTK2B
However, the presence of multiple genes with colocalisation evidence 134 within individual loci suggests that additional lines of evidence are important for prioritizing 135 relevant genes.
136

Fine-mapping identifies credibly causal variants
Confirming the causal genes underlying AD risk will ultimately require experiments to identify the molecular mechanisms by which gene function is altered.
Such experiments must be motivated by strong hypotheses regarding potentially causal variants and their possible effects.
We sought to identify candidate causal variants using three distinct fine-mapping methods.
First, we used the WTCCC Bayesian fine-mapping method
Second, we used FINEMAP
Third, we used PAINTOR
As a reference panel for our fine-mapping analyses we used LD computed from UK Biobank individuals, who are primarily of British ancestry, as well as ~5% of European ancestry.
Although these are a good match for the UK Biobank portion of our study, they only approximately match the study of Kunkle et al.
Previous work has shown that using reference panels which are either too small or poorly matched can result in spurious fine-mapping signals
For this reason we excluded variants with allele frequency below 0.2% (10.0% of 170,479 variants across loci), some of which may be causal.
We also excluded those failing imputation or study heterogeneity cutoffs (3.0% and 0.4% of variants; see methods).
A sensitivity analysis showed that using the same reference panel for conditional analysis and fine-mapping on the non-UK Biobank portion of our meta-analysis (Kunkle et al.) gave comparable independent signals and SNP probabilities, with the exception of a few loci, namely ABCA7, HLA, EPHA1, and ECHDC3
(Supplementary Note and Supplementary Figure
We used 44 annotations individually as input to PAINTOR (Supplementary Table
We also used scores from
DeepSEA
We used probabilities from this PAINTOR model, and computed the mean causal probability per variant across the three fine-mapping methods.
There were 21 variants with a mean causal probability above 50% across the fine-mapping methods, and 79 further variants with probabilities from 10 -50% (Table
These include SNPs near established AD risk genes, such as rs6733839 ~20 kb upstream of BIN1, which has recently been shown to alter a microglial MEF2C binding site
Highconfidence variants also include a well-known missense SNP in PILRA
Missense SNP rs4147918 in ABCA7 had 55% causal probability, and ABCA7 harbored 5 further missense SNPs with FINEMAP probabilities greater than 0.01%, at varying allele frequencies.
Notably, rs4147918 as well as 6 other variants within ABCA7, including the lead SNP rs12151021, had positive SpliceAI scores for predicted changes to gene splicing.
This is consistent with reports of a burden of deleterious variants at ABCA7 associated with AD
A number of newly identified AD risk genes had high-confidence fine-mapped variants.
These include the NCK2 rare intronic SNP rs143080277 (>99% probability, MAF 0.4%), APH1B missense SNP rs117618017 (90% probability), rs2830489 at the APP-ADAMTS1 locus (72% probability), rs61182333 intronic in SCIMP (61% probability), and rs268120 intronic in SPRED2 (56% probability).
Annotation-based fine-mapping and manual review highlighted a number of candidate causal variants, where the annotation-based SNP probability was higher than that of the other two methods (Figure
Within TSPAN14, rs1870137 and rs1870138 reside within a DNase hypersensitivity peak found broadly across tissues, which is also an ATAC peak in microglia.
Of these, rs1870138 lies at the centre of a ChIP-seq peak for binding of multiple transcription factors, including FOS/JUN and GATA1, and is within a FOS/JUN motif, albeit at a relatively low information content position.
However, the alt allele rs1870138-G alters an invariant position of a binding motif for TAL1, a gene highly expressed in microglia, and which is a binding partner for GATA1.
The AD risk allele, rs1870138-G, is also associated with increased monocyte count
Notably, the AD signal in the region colocalises with both an eQTL and a splicing QTL for TSPAN14 in multiple datasets, and rs1870138-G associates with higher TSPAN14 expression in brain and in microglia, but with lower expression in some GTEx tissues.
Missense SNP rs117618017 in exon 1 of APH1B (T27I) is the likely single causal variant at its locus, with fine-mapping probability of 90% (Figure
APH1B is a component of the gamma-secretase complex, other members of which (PSEN1, PSEN2) have rare variants associated with early-onset AD
Interestingly, the AD signal colocalises with an APH1B eQTL in monocytes, neutrophils and T-cells, as well as numerous GTEx tissues, and the rs117618017-T allele associates with higher AD risk and higher APH1B expression across datasets.
rs117618017-T introduces a motif for transcriptional regulator YY1, and is predicted by DeepSEA to increase YY1 binding in multiple ENCODE cell lines.
Therefore, it is an open question whether AD risk is mediated by altered APH1B protein structure or altered gene expression.
(bottom) read density of ATAC-sequencing assay from primary microglia
Finally, the AD association on chromosome 20 colocalises with an eQTL for CASS4 in Blueprint monocytes and in GTEx whole blood, as well as in fibroblasts.
While lead SNP rs6014724 (55% probability), intronic in CASS4, shows no evidence of transcription factor (TF) binding in ENCODE data, rs17462136 (7% probability) lies in a region of dense TF binding in the 5' UTR of CASS4 (Figure
The nucleotide position is highly conserved (GERP score 3.46), overlaps an ATAC peak in microglia, and the rs17462136-C allele  Chromosome 20 position (bp)  microglia ATAC introduces a TEAD1 binding motif, making it the strongest functional candidate SNP.
In addition, rs17462136 is more strongly associated with CASS4 expression in multiple eQTL datasets than is rs6014724.

Network evidence prioritizes genes within and beyond GWAS loci
As a further line of evidence, we developed a method that leverages gene network connectivity to prioritize genes at individual loci.
We first constructed a gene interaction network combining information from the STRING, IntAct and BioGRID databases.
Next, we nominated 32 candidate AD genes (Supplementary Table
For each locus in turn, we used as input all seed genes except those at the locus, and propagated information through the network with the page rank algorithm (see methods).
The "networkScore" for a gene thus represents the degree to which the gene is supported by its interaction with top AD candidate genes across all other loci, unbiased by any locus-specific features.
Across AD loci, our selected seed genes were highly enriched for having high networkbased gene scores (Wilcoxon rank sum test, p = 5x10 -9 ; Supplementary Figure
Notably, at our four novel AD loci, the nearest gene (NCK2, TSPAN14, SPRED2, CCDC6) in each case was one of the top two highest-scoring genes within 500 kb.
Many established or recently discovered AD genes were also the top gene within 500 kb by network score, including ACE, BIN1, CASS4, CD2AP, PICALM, PLCG2, and PTK2B.
At the SLC24A4 locus, RIN3 was strongly supported, whereas SLC24A4 was not, in line with evidence from deleterious rare variants that RIN3 may be causal
At the EPHA1 locus, EPHA1 was the top scoring gene, but ZYX also scored highly.
Interestingly, AD candidate genes ABCA7 and CD33 had only modest network scores, suggesting a need to integrate across independent lines of evidence to prioritize genes.
Genes highly ranked by network propagation also include many outside of genome-wide significant AD loci (Supplementary Table
Consistent with their involvement in AD, such genes tended to have SNPs with lower p values nearby (within 10 kb) than did remaining genes (Figure
Top network-ranked genes include LILRB2 (nearby rs3855678 p = 9.8x10 -6 ), a leukocyte immunoglobulin-like receptor that recognizes multiple HLA alleles, and which may also be involved in amyloid-beta fibril growth
Overall, genes with high network ranks were strongly enriched in biological processes and pathways that have previously been associated with AD, including clathrin-mediated endocytosis, activation of immune response, phagocytosis, Ephrin signaling, and complement activation (Supplementary Table
Minimum p value 0.01 -10 -2 10 -4 -10 -6 10 -6 -10 -8 <= 10 -8 projecting), or by binary marker genes (LAMP5, PAX6, PVALB, VIP, SST).
OPC: oligodendrocyte precursor cells.

AD risk is enriched near genes with high microglial gene expression
To understand the contribution of cell-type specific gene expression to AD risk, we used fgwas
Out of 18 broad cell type clusters, only microglia showed clear enrichment of AD risk (odds ratio (OR) 6.0) near genes with expression above the 90th percentile across cell types (Figure
We performed a similar analysis looking at bulk gene expression across human tissues from GTEx, along with a small number of additional RNA-seq datasets including sorted primary microglia from brain surgeries 14 (Supplementary Figure
This gave consistent results, with microglia showing strong enrichment (OR 4.4), followed by tissues rich in immune cells, including spleen (OR 3.6) and whole blood (OR 3.2).
Notably, iPSC-derived microglia showed similar enrichment to primary microglia, while bulk brain tissues (including hippocampus) showed no enrichment.

Integrative gene prioritization from five lines of evidence
Determining the genes responsible for AD risk across GWAS loci is challenging, in part because few genes have been definitively confirmed as having a causal role.
We therefore developed a comprehensive gene prioritization score, which incorporates quantitative information, unlike binary indicator scores that have been used by others for GWAS gene prioritization
We used predictors (each in the range 0 -1) based on five lines of evidence:
gene distance to lead SNPs, colocalisation, network score, bulk and single-cell gene expression, and the sum of fine-mapped probability for any coding SNPs within a gene (Figure
We first explored how best to use colocalisation information.
We found that genes with maximum colocalisation probability (maxH4) above 0.9 had higher prioritization scores based on the other 4 predictors, but this was not the case for genes with weaker colocalisation evidence (Supplementary Figure
We also examined colocalisations in different cell type or tissue groups, such as brain, microglia, and other GTEx tissues.
There was little evidence that colocalising genes within any specific groups had higher total scores than other groups (Supplementary Figure
We therefore based our colocalisation score on the maximum colocalisation probability across tissues (> 0.9) and normalised this to the range 0 -1.
A priori, we do not know which lines of evidence are most important for prioritizing genes.
We therefore sought a systematic way to identify appropriate weights for the predictors.
Although we do not know the causal AD genes, we selected two independent, unbiased sets of candidate genes for use in supervised learning: genes nearest to the GWAS peaks, and genes with high network scores (>80th percentile).
In order to identify weights for our predictive features, we defined two models to discriminate these two gene sets from others within 500 kb, in each case using cross-validated lasso-regularized logistic regression with the remaining variables as predictors.
As expected, when predicting genes nearest GWAS peaks, the highest-weight predictor was fine-mapped coding variants; however, only a few loci have such variants.
The most informative predictor, determined based on change in mean-squared error when the predictor is left out, was colocalisation, followed by coding variants and then network score (Supplementary Table
When predicting high network score genes, the most informative predictor was distance to GWAS peak, followed by microglial gene expression, and neither colocalisation nor coding variant predictors improved the model.
For both models, including hippocampus expression (GTEx) or single-cell astrocyte expression resulted in worse models (increased mean squared error).
We defined our gene prioritization "model score" as the average of the predictions from our two models.
The model prioritization score identified as top-ranked many AD candidate genes previously suggested as causal (Figure
Indeed, although the network score is independent of locus-specific features, gene ranks based on network scores within each locus were highly correlated with gene ranks based on the other four evidence sources (Spearman rho=0.47;
p < 2.2x10
Exemplifying the importance of integrating genetic evidence, ABCA7, SORL1, and CR1 were top-ranked by overall score at their respective loci, despite having only moderate networkbased scores, while SORL1, PICALM and SPI1 were top-ranked despite having limited eQTL colocalisation evidence.
While our prioritization further supports many established AD candidate genes, it also implicates novel genes.
Among these are FCER1G at the ADAMTS4 locus, which has been reported as a hub gene in microglial gene modules associated with neurodegeneration
Another candidate is ZYX at the EPHA1 locus, which receives a top network score, is highly expressed in microglia, and which was recently nominated as an AD risk gene based on chromatin interactions between the ZYX promoter and AD risk variants in a ZYX enhancer
we also show the top scoring protein-coding gene.
Score components for each gene are 365 indicated by coloured bars, and points show the distribution of scores for all genes within 366 500 kb at the locus.
Bold gene names are those with evidence of causality based on rare 367 variants from other studies.
Scores for all genes are in Supplementary Table
368

Discussion
Identifying therapeutic targets for human diseases is a key goal of human genetics research, and is particularly important for neurodegenerative diseases such as AD, for which no disease-modifying therapies yet exist.
However, identifying the causal genes and genetic variants from GWAS is challenging: association peaks span large genomic regions, and noncoding associations can act via regulation of distal genes.
We approached this challenge for AD by performing a meta-analysis of the largest currently available studies, followed by comprehensive fine-mapping, eQTL colocalisation, and quantitative gene prioritization.
Our meta-analysis identified four novel associations with genome-wide significance, near NCK2, SPRED2, TSPAN14, and CCDC6.
Each of these genes was supported by both eQTL colocalisation and network ranking, and in each case was the nearest gene to the association peak.
Indeed, when distance was excluded from the priority score, for 21 of the 37 loci the top prioritized gene was the nearest gene, and for a further 8 loci the top gene was within 100 kb.
This is consistent with observations from eQTL studies that the majority of gene regulatory variants lie within 100 kb of their regulated genes
Despite the large number of eQTL datasets that we used, colocalisation of likely AD risk genes was sometimes found in only one or a few datasets; this was the case for SPRED2 (TwinsUK LCL coloc probability 0.99), RIN3 (GTEx frontal cortex probability 0.94), and PILRA (Fairfax LPS-2hr monocyte coloc probability 0.99).
Many factors could account for dataset-specific colocalisations, such as biological differences in sample state, differences in LD match between the GWAS and eQTL datasets, and technical differences in the transcriptome annotations used for eQTL discovery.
As a result, absence of colocalisation provides only weak evidence for lack of an effect in a given tissue type, whereas positive colocalisation provides strong support for a shared genetic effect.
It is therefore useful to look broadly across eQTL studies for colocalisation, which will be facilitated by resources that simplify access to these datasets, such as the eQTL catalogue 11 .
Our gene prioritization incorporated multiple lines of genetic evidence to distinguish genes most likely to causally mediate AD risk.
This analysis supported roles for many established AD genes, while also pointing to novel candidates.
One of our most confidently prioritized genes was APH1B, encoding a gamma-secretase complex component involved in APP processing.
APH1B harbors the likely causal missense variant T27I, yet also has strong colocalisation evidence that higher expression correlates with higher AD risk.
One possibility is that impaired function of APH1B due to the missense variant leads to upregulation of APH1B transcription.
This interpretation would be consistent with evidence from both mice
It is noteworthy, however, that recent experiments failed to find an effect of the T27I variant on gamma-secretase activity in HEK cells
Although APH1B loss may be associated with non-AD dementia
However, ADAM10 also cleaves the microglia-associated protein TREM2 to generate its soluble ligand-binding domain
Our fine-mapping showed that the risk SNP rs1870138 is also associated with higher risk for inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), an immune-mediated disease, and with higher monocyte count in UK Biobank individuals.
Since TSPAN14 is expressed more highly in immune cell types, including microglia, than in brain tissue, it is also plausible that AD risk is mediated by its effect on either immune cell count or activation.
SPRED2 is a negative regulator of ERK/MAPK signalling, and its loss in mice leads to increased macrophage activation and tissue inflammation
The AD-associated SNPs in SPRED2, rs268134 and rs268120, are also associated with increased neutrophil percentage and decreased lymphocyte percentage in the UK Biobank.
Recently proposed AD candidate genes supported by our analyses include RIN3, HS3ST1, and FCER1G.
As noted above, FCER1G is a microglial master regulator
In summary, our study reports fine-mapping SNP probabilities for 36 AD-associated regions, including 4 novel loci.
By combining evidence from eQTL colocalisations across 109 datasets, functional annotations and gene network analysis, we generate a quantitative prioritization score and provide a comprehensive map of AD candidate genes.
Our genetic findings highlight the presence of diverse mechanisms in AD pathogenesis, suggesting different possible entry points for interventions to treat AD or to reduce risk of the disease, and identify candidate targets for therapeutic development.
with standard error:
where βLMM and seLMM are the SNP effect sizes and standard errors respectively from BOLT-LMM, and f is the fraction of cases in the sample
Since the affected individuals in our analysis include both true and proxy-cases, we then multiplied the transformed logORs and standard errors by 1.897 so that it approximates the logORs obtained from a true case/control study 1 .
We combined the transformed UK Biobank white British cohort, the transformed UK Biobank white non-British cohort and the Stage 1 summary statistics from Kunkle et al. using a fixedeffects (inverse variance weighted) meta-analysis across 10,687,126 overlapping variants.
For display purposes (Supplementary Table

Replication
To assess replication of our discovered signals, we downloaded the publicly available summary statistics for the Gr@ace study of AD 17 from the GWAS catalog, and for the FinnGen GWAS of phenotypes "Alzheimer's disease, wide definition" and "Alzheimer's disease (Late onset)" from FinnGen release 3.
We extracted summary results for our lead SNPs, or a partner in strong LD when the lead SNP was not found, and present these results in Supplementary Table
We estimated power to detect our 4 novel loci at nominal significance (p < 0.05) using the genetic power calculator (zzz.bwh.harvard.edu/gpc/cc2.html)
with the genotype relative risks estimated from our meta-analysis, and the allele frequency and case/control count from the GWAS study of interest (Gr@ace or FinnGen), and assuming a disease prevalence of 5%.
We also performed an inverse variance-weighted meta-analysis of all four studies (Kunkle et al., UK Biobank, Gr@ace, and FinnGen "AD wide"), similar to our discovery meta-analysis.

Conditional analysis and statistical fine-mapping
To run GCTA, we prepared plink input files with genotypes from 10,000 randomly sampled UK Biobank individuals at variants within +/-5 Mb from each lead SNP.
We excluded variants with INFO < 0.85, or which had a p-value from Cochran's Q test for study heterogeneity < 0.001.
We also excluded variants with allele frequency in UK Biobank below 0.1%, as LD estimates are unreliable at low allele counts.
We selected these thresholds after manual examination of subsequent fine-mapping results, where we found that more lenient cutoffs led either FINEMAP or PAINTOR to select implausible causal variants at a few loci, such as pairs of very weakly associated rare variants to explain a common variant signal.
We ran GCTA --cojo-slct with a p-value threshold of 10 -5 to identify secondary signals at each locus, and then retained only loci with a lead p-value below 5x10 -8 .
For the HLA locus we used a GCTA p-value threshold of 5x10 -8 .
We also retained the loci TSPOAP1, IKZF1, and TMEM163 since they had p < 5x10 -8 in an earlier version of our analysis.
We excluded the APOE locus from conditional analysis and fine-mapping because the strength of association in the region would require a more perfect LD panel match to avoid spurious signals.
We then ran FINEMAP at each locus, with --n-causal-snps given as the number of independent SNPs determined by GCTA.
For FINEMAP, we excluded variants with allele frequency below 0.2%.
For loci with multiple signals, we also used GCTA --cojo-cond to condition on each independent SNP identified in the previous analysis, and retained SNPs within 500 kb of any conditionally independent SNP at the locus.
To compute SNP causal probabilities based on GCTA conditional signals, we converted effect size (beta) and standard error values to approximate Bayes Factors (BF) 101 using a prior of W=0.1 (in Wakefield notation), and used the WTCCC single-causal variant method
To assess sensitivity of the results to our choice of reference panel, we applied the same steps (GCTA + FINEMAP) to summary statistics from the Kunkle et al. sub-study, which are described further in the Supplementary Note.

Colocalisation with eQTLs
For eQTL colocalisation, we downloaded summary statistics for the eQTL datasets mentioned in the main text, as well as the xQTL dataset 21 based on dorsolateral prefrontal cortex brain samples.
QTL calling for primary microglia was performed with RASQUAL 102 with the --no-posterior-update option.
We determined eQTL genes at FDR 5% for each dataset in a uniform manner, first using Bonferroni correction of lead SNP nominal p values based on the number of variants within 500 kb of the gene, and using the Benjamini-Hochberg method to compute FDR.
We matched variants between eQTL and GWAS based on chromosomal position; for datasets in GRCh38 coordinates, we first used CrossMap 100 to convert back to GRCh37 coordinates.
We used the coloc package
We also performed colocalisation tests using GWAS p-values for each conditionally independent GWAS signal, obtained with GCTA as described above.

Functional annotations
All functional annotations used were in GRCh37 coordinates, as was the AD meta-analysis.
We used the Ensembl VEP online Web tool (www.ensembl.org/vep)
to predict variant consequences, and to add selected annotations (Supplementary Table
We downloaded bed files based on imputed data for Roadmap Epigenomics DNase, histone peaks, and 25state genome segmentations for 127 epigenomes
We grouped these into groups "all", "brain" (epigenomes 7, 9, 10, 53, 54, 67, 68, 69, 70, 71, 72, 73, 74, 81, 82, 125), and "blood & immune" (epigenomes 33, 34, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 47, 48, 62, 29, 30, 31, 32,    35, 36, 46, 50, 51, 116).
For genome segmentations, we considered 9 states to represent enhancers: TxReg, TxEnh5, TxEnh3, TxEnhW, EnhA1, EnhA2, EnhAF, EnhW1, EnhW2.
We used bedtools 103 to determine overlaps, and counted the number of overlaps for each variant with peaks in the above groups.
We downloaded FANTOM5 104 permissive enhancer annotations from fantom.gsc.riken.jp/5/data/.
We downloaded pre-computed SpliceAI scores
We merged filtered whole-genome and exome scores together to obtain the most comprehensive predictions, and for each AD variant we annotated the maximum predicted score across splice donor gain, donor loss, acceptor gain, acceptor loss.
We used the DeepSEA 57 online tool (deepsea.princeton.edu) to annotate variants selected for functional fine-mapping with DeepSEA's "functional significance" score.
BigWig files with PhastCons, PhyloP and GERP RS scores in hg19 (GRCh37) coordinates were downloaded from UCSC.
We downloaded microglial ATAC-seq based on the study by Gosselin et al.
We prepared bigWig files from alignments by using bedtools genomecov, followed by bedGraphToBigWig.
To visualise microglia ATAC-seq tracks we adapted code from wiggleplotr 107 .

Annotation-based fine-mapping
For fine-mapping with PAINTOR, we selected 3,207 variants which had (a) FINEMAP probability >= 0.01% based on the GCTA-identified number of causal variants at the locus (restricting the number of considered variants was necessary for computational feasibility), or (b) had FINEMAP probability >= 1% when run with either 1 or 2 causal variants, even if this was not the number identified by GCTA, or (c) were among the top 20 variants at the locus by FINEMAP probability.
We defined binary annotations for input to PAINTOR based on the features described above, which included thresholding certain scores at multiple levels (e.g.
CADD >= 5, 10, 20).
For Roadmap DNase and enhancer annotations, we included a category based on whether a variant was in a peak or enhancer in >= 10 epigenomes.
We next ran PAINTOR v3.1 once for each of the 43 annotations (Figure
To determine enrichment of low p-value AD SNPs near genes in specific bins of PageRank percentile (Figure
(For 1,070 genes we could not get GRCh37 coordinates or found no SNP in the meta-analysis, and so these genes had no minimum p value assigned.)
We excluded genes within 1 Mb of APOE.
Then, for genes in each PageRank percentile bin, we used Fisher's exact test to determine the odds ratio for a gene in that bin (relative to genes with PageRank percentile <50%) to have a minimum SNP p value in the given bin (relative to genes with minimum SNP p value > 0.01).

Gene expression
Gene expression values for all tissues were determined in units of transcripts per million (TPM).
Both GTEx v8 and the eQTL catalogue provide tables of the median TPM expression across samples for each tissue and gene.
For primary microglia we obtained a table of read counts per gene, computed using FeatureCounts 1.5.3 as described in
For use in gene prioritization and enrichment analyses, we first selected 4 GTEx brain tissues (cortex, hippocampus, substantia nigra, cerebellum) to avoid over-representing brain, and then the remaining 41 GTEx tissues, as well primary microglia and in-house expression data from iPSC-derived microglia, iPSC-derived NGN2 cortical neurons, and iPSC-derived neurons from growth factor differentiation.
For each gene we determined the expression level in TPM relative to all tissues/cell types.
Single-cell gene expression data were obtained from the Allen Brain Institute (
For each cell type "subclass" as defined in the metadata, counts were summed across cells and then normalised to TPM within each subclass.
Of 20 subclasses, we excluded VLMC for having too few cells (11 total), and also a subclass of outliers named "exclude".
For each gene we determined its TPM expression in each subclass relative to all 18 subclasses.

Genome-wide enrichment
We determined the genomic positions of 18,055 genes present in the gene network in GRCh37 coordinates using the R package annotables 0.1.91.
For each AD GWAS SNP, excluding the APOE region (chr19:44-47 Mb), we determined the nearest gene.
We defined annotation inputs for fgwas labelling a SNP 1 if it was nearest to a gene with network score in a given percentile bin (50-60, 60-70, 70-80, 80-90, 90-95, >95) and 0 otherwise.
To determine network enrichment, we ran fgwas 78 (-cc) with all network annotations as input, so that enrichments are with respect to SNPs nearest to genes with network score < 50th percentile.
For every bulk gene expression dataset selected above, we defined an annotation for SNPs nearest genes with relative expression above the 80th (or 90th) percentile, and similarly for cell types from single-cell gene expression.
We ran fgwas once for each expression annotation to determine enrichment of SNPs near high-expression genes relative to remaining genes.
Results are in Supplementary Table

Gene prioritization
Five predictors were used for gene prioritization.
The coding score is the sum of the mean fine-mapping probability for missense or LoF variants in a gene.
The expr(ession) score is the sum of component scores for bulk and single-cell expression.
Each score is defined based on the expression of a gene in microglia relative to the other tissues or cell types, and rewards genes with expression percentile above the 50th: exprScore = (bulkExprScore + singleCellExprScore) / 2 bulkExprScore = max(0, bulk microglia pctile -50) / 50 singleCellExprScore = max(0, sc microglia pctile -50) / 50 Genes without measured expression in a given dataset (bulk, single-cell) are assigned an exprScore of zero for that dataset.
Although it is clear that long-distance gene regulation can occur, recent evidence from both eQTLs 114 and metabolite GWAS 115 suggests that genomic distance from the association peak is a strong predictor of causal target genes.
The dist(ance) score is defined as: distScore = (log10(maxDist) -log10((abs(x)+distBias))) / (log10(maxDist) -log10(distBias)) where x is the minimum distance of any portion of the gene footprint to the region defined by independent lead SNPs at a GWAS locus, maxDist is 500,000 and distBias is 100, chosen to give reasonable scores over the main range of interest of 0 -200 kb (Supplementary Figure
The coloc score is defined based on the maximum value across QTL datasets of the "H4" hypothesis probability output by the coloc R package, and rewards colocalisation probabilities above 0.9: colocScore = max(0, max(QTL dataset H4) -0.9)
The network score is determined based on the pagerank percentile for a gene relative to permutations: networkScore = max(0, (pagerank pctile -50) / 50) Prior to computing the network score, pagerank percentile values were normalised to a uniform distribution across genes.
Genes not present in the network are assigned a networkScore of zero.
The total score for a gene is the sum of five scores: geneScore = codingScore + exprScore + distScore + colocScore + networkScore To give appropriate weight to each component, we trained lasso-regularized logistic regression models with cross-validation using the glmnet R package 116 .
Glmnet searches across values of the regularization penalty parameter to find the value with the best crossvalidation accuracy.
As input we used all protein-coding genes within 500 kb of our AD GWAS peaks, excluding the APOE region due to lack of colocalisation information, and excluding genes not present in the network.
For the distance model, genes within 10 kb of each GWAS peak (40 genes) were set as positives, genes 10 -100 kb were excluded, and genes >100kb (394 genes) were set as negatives.
These were predicted using the four nondistance predictors.
For the network model, genes with pagerank percentile >80% (143 genes) were set as positives, those with pagerank percentile 50-80% were excluded, the 230 other genes were set as negatives, and these were predicted using the four nonnetwork predictors.
In each case we selected the model that minimised mean squared error (MSE), shown in Supplementary Table
We defined the model score for a gene as the average prediction from the two models.
To determine the importance of the predictors to each model (apart from looking at regression coefficients) we ran glmnet models excluding each predictor in turn.
If the MSE was lower with a predictor excluded then we removed it from the final model.
For each model we compared the MSE when using our quantitative predictors as defined above, or using categorical predictors by thresholding the predictors into 2 -4 bins.
For both models the quantitative predictors gave improved MSE.
We also examined models that included as predictors expression scores from astrocytes (based on the single-cell data) and from brain hippocampus (based on the GTEx data), but for both models this resulted in higher MSE and the regularization set the coefficients to zero.


had multiple signals; specifically, NCK2, EPHA1, ADAM10, ACE, and APP-ADAMTS1.
To extract insight from both the new and established AD GWAS discoveries, we performed comprehensive colocalisation, annotation, fine-mapping and network analyses to identify causal genes and variants (Fig 1a).



Figure 1 :
Figure 1: Analysis overview.
(a) Summary of AD meta-analysis and data processing steps.
89 (b) Manhattan plot of the meta-analysis of GWAS for diagnosed AD and our GWAX in UK 90 Biobank.
Novel genome-wide significant loci are labelled in blue, sub-threshold loci in red, 91 and recently discovered loci 2,3,12 replicated in our analysis in black.
(c) The number of 92 independent signals at each locus which is either recently discovered or which has more 93 than one signal.
* The PLCG2 locus was significant (p < 5x10 -8 ) when including Kunkle stage 94 3 SNPs.
Conditional analyses were not done at APOE due to the strength of the signal.
95



FINEMAP



Figure 2 :
Figure 2: Colocalisation with eQTLs.
For genes with the top overall colocalisation scores 123 across AD risk loci, the colocalisation probability (H4) is shown for selected brain, microglia, 124 and monocyte eQTL datasets.
For three loci with multiple signals (BIN1, EPHA1, PTK2B-125 CLU), scores are shown separately for the conditionally independent signals.
The last 126column shows, for each gene, the number of eQTL datasets with a colocalisation probability 127 above 0.8 (Supplementary Tables5-6).
128



4 F
in _ m e ta R O S M A P _ b r a in b r a in s e q _ b r a in x Q T L _ e Q T L m ic r o g li a b lu e p r in t F a ir fa x _ L P S 2



4 F
in _ m e ta R O S M A P _ b r a in b r a in s e q _ b r a in x Q T L _ e Q T L m ic r o g li a b lu e p r in t F a ir fa x _ L P S 2



4 F
in _ m e ta R O S M A P _ b r a in b r a in s e q _ b r a in x Q T L _ e Q T L m ic r o g li a b lu e p r in t F a ir fa x _ L P S 2



Figure 3 :
Figure 3: Fine-mapping summary.
(a) Number of variants with mean causal probability > 1% for each independent signal.
Variant counts for independent signals are shown in different shades.
(b) PAINTOR outputs, showing (left) log-likelihood (LLK) of model for each individual annotation; (middle) log-odds enrichments for individual genomic annotations determined by PAINTOR; (right) fraction of SNPs which are in each annotation (among those selected by FINEMAP probability > 0.01%).
Annotations selected for the final model are shown with a black border.



Figure 4 :
Figure 4: Fine-mapped variants.
(a) SNP rs1870138 in an intron of TSPAN14 disrupts an invariant position of a TAL1 motif.
(b) Missense SNP rs117618017 in exon 1 of APH1B.
(c) SNP rs17462136 in the 5' UTR of CASS4 introduces a TEAD1 motif.
Each panel shows (top) locus plot with GWAS p-values, SNP color representing LD to the lead SNP; (middle) expanded view of a subregion showing the mean SNP probabilities from fine-mapping; (bottom) read density of ATAC-sequencing assay from primary microglia 52 .



Figure 5 :
Figure 5: Genome-wide network and gene expression enrichments.
(a) Enrichment of low GWAS p values within 10 kb of genes having high vs. low network pagerank percentile (low pagerank defined as below 50th percentile).
(b) Enrichment of AD risk near genes with high expression in each brain cell type (above 80th or 90th percentile) relative to the other cell types.
Cell types are defined based on single-cell clusters defined in Hodge et al. 77 .
Neuronal cells are defined either by cortical layer (L4, L5, L6), and/or by projection target (IT: intratelencephalic; CT: corticothalamic; ET: extratelencephalic-pyramidal tract; NP: near-



r o c y t e E n d o t h e li a



r o c y t e E n d o t h e li a



Figure 6 :
Figure 6: Gene evidence summary.
The top gene at each locus is shown, as well as the 363 next 13 top genes by model score; for 3 loci where a non-coding gene was the top scoring, 364we also show the top scoring protein-coding gene.
Score components for each gene are 365 indicated by coloured bars, and points show the distribution of scores for all genes within 366 500 kb at the locus.
Bold gene names are those with evidence of causality based on rare 367 variants from other studies.
Scores for all genes are in Supplementary Table13.
368



(
Kunkle et al.
OR 95% CI=[1.071,
1.127]) and dementia in UK Biobank (OR 95% CI=[1.064,
1.104]).



Table 4 )
. The eQTL datasets include a study of primary microglia from 93 100


58, deep-learning methods that predict the effects of variants on transcription factor binding or splicing.
Missense mutations were the most enriched annotation, with a 19.2-fold increased odds of being causal SNPs, but they comprised only 1% of input SNPs.
Blood or immune DNase hypersensitivity peaks merged from 24 Roadmap Epigenomics tissues provided the highest model likelihood, as these peaks



Table 1 :
Top



Table 1 -
Top candidate variants