Structural magnetic resonance imaging for the early diagnosis of dementia due to Alzheimer's disease in people with mild cognitive impairment
Mild cognitive impairment (MCI) due to Alzheimer's disease is the symptomatic predementia phase of Alzheimer's disease dementia, characterised by cognitive and functional impairment not severe enough to fulfil the criteria for dementia.
In clinical samples, people with amnestic MCI are at high risk of developing Alzheimer's disease dementia, with annual rates of progression from MCI to Alzheimer's disease estimated at approximately 10% to 15% compared with the base incidence rates of Alzheimer's disease dementia of 1% to 2% per year.
To assess the diagnostic accuracy of structural magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) for the early diagnosis of dementia due to Alzheimer's disease in people with MCI versus the clinical follow-up diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease dementia as a reference standard (delayed verification).
To investigate sources of heterogeneity in accuracy, such as the use of qualitative visual assessment or quantitative volumetric measurements, including manual or automatic (MRI) techniques, or the length of follow-up, and age of participants.
MRI was evaluated as an add-on test in addition to clinical diagnosis of MCI to improve early diagnosis of dementia due to Alzheimer's disease in people with MCI.
Structural magnetic resonance imaging for the early diagnosis of dementia due to Alzheimer's disease in people with mild cognitive impairment (Review)
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews

B A C K G R O U N D
The shi from normal aging to Alzheimer's Disease dementia is a continuous process where the transitional state between normal cognition and Alzheimer's disease dementia progressively involves, to a variable extent and in di erent stages, episodic memory (i.e. the ability to learn and retain new information), executive functions (e.g.
set-shi ing, reasoning, problem-solving, planning), language (e.g.
naming, fluency, expressive speech, and comprehension), visuospatial skills, attention and perceptual speed
The criteria of a clinical diagnosis of probable or possible Alzheimer's disease dementia were proposed in 1984 by the National Institute of Neurological and Communicative Disorders and Stroke (NINCDS) and the Alzheimer's Disease and Related Disorders Association (ADRDA) (the NINCDS-ADRDA criteria; Appendix 1).
A diagnosis of definite Alzheimer's disease dementia requires clinical criteria for probable Alzheimer's disease and histopathologic evidence obtained from a biopsy or autopsy, but these are not applicable in daily clinical practice
The NINCDS-ADRDA criteria were updated in 2011 by the National Institute on Aging (NIA) and the Alzheimer's Association (AA), known as the NIA-AA criteria
In agreement with the NINCDS-ADRDA criteria, the NIA-AA criteria require a significant interference in the ability to function at work or in usual daily activities.
The presence of any positive biomarker (e.g.
medial temporal lobe atrophy detected by MRI) is not essential for the diagnosis but is useful to investigate the "biomarker probability of AD [Alzheimer's disease] dementia etiology"
The NIA-AA criteria for the diagnosis of MCI due to Alzheimer's disease dementia define MCI as the symptomatic pre-dementia phase of Alzheimer's disease dementia, and include two sets of criteria:
Single or multiple cognitive domains may be a ected in a person with MCI.
If memory only is a ected, MCI is defined as 'amnestic'.
When single or more cognitive domains di erent from memory are a ected, MCI is defined as 'non-amnestic'.
In clinical series, people with amnestic MCI are at high risk of developing Alzheimer's disease dementia, with annual rates of progression from amnestic MCI to Alzheimer's disease dementia estimated at 10% to 15% compared with the base incidence rates of Alzheimer's disease dementia of 1% to 2% per year
In the general population also, people with amnestic MCI are at high risk of progression to Alzheimer's disease dementia over three years
Progression is high in the first few years following MCI diagnosis
However, people diagnosed with MCI may be stable or revert to normal condition over time, while some of them may develop non-Alzheimer's disease dementia
People with early cognitive impairments are increasingly presenting to both primary and secondary care
Since an early intervention could be more e ective in delaying the development of dementia, these people may represent the suitable target for addressing future disease-modifying therapies.
A survey conducted among members of the American Academy of Neurology, who had an aging, dementia, or behavioural neurology practice focus, found that the majority of respondents recognised MCI as a clinical diagnosis and used its diagnostic code for billing purposes.
When seeing these patients, most respondents routinely communicated the dementia risk and sometimes prescribed cholinesterase inhibitors
While our protocol was under development, the ClinicalTrials.gov
(clinicaltrials.gov),
registry contained 230 references referring to completed or ongoing trials of medication as well as non-medication approaches for treating MCI.
In 2018 the NIA-AA published a "Research framework: towards a biological definition of Alzheimer's disease", which defined Alzheimer's disease on the basis of biomarkers as a proxy for the neuropathology of Alzheimer's disease
Recommended biomarkers are markers of amyloid deposition (A), markers of neurofibrillary tangles tau (T), and markers of neurodegeneration (N).
For each category, both a cerebrospinal fluid and a neuroimaging biomarker were suggested.
According to the biological definition of Alzheimer's disease, cognitive symptoms can be added to the ATN system but are not mandatory for the diagnosis.
The NIA-AA emphasised that it is premature and inappropriate to use this research framework in clinical practice.
In a published comment Cochrane Dementia and Cognitive Improvement reported that the biomarkers described in the NIA-AA framework are neither sensitive nor specific to the diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease dementia
In this context, the objective of this review is to determine the accuracy of structural MRI for the early diagnosis of dementia due to Alzheimer's disease in people with MCI.

Target condition being diagnosed
The primary target condition is dementia due to Alzheimer's disease, a degenerative disease of the brain accounting for 60% to 80% of dementia cases.
In 2019 the Alzheimer's Disease International (ADI) estimates that there were over 50 million people living with dementia globally, a number set to increase to 152 million by 2050, primarily driven by increased longevity

Index test(s)
This review assesses the diagnostic accuracy of structural MRI in detecting atrophy in the whole brain and in specific brain regions, such as the hippocampus, lateral ventricles, entorhinal cortex, amygdala, medial temporal lobe, lateral temporal lobe, medial temporal gyrus, and cortical grey matter.
Structural MRI assesses the structure of the brain tissues as opposed to functional MRI, which assesses functional brain activity.
Atrophy is a decrease in volume of tissues.
MRI does not involve X-rays or the use of ionising radiation.
It is noninvasive and has no significant adverse health e ects.
Patients are at risk of injury from MRI if they have metal objects in their bodies, such as pacemakers, clips or metallic prostheses.
Since individuals with fear of confined spaces may become anxious during MRI, the test is contraindicated in people with claustrophobia.
Structural magnetic resonance imaging for the early diagnosis of dementia due to Alzheimer's disease in people with mild cognitive impairment (Review)
Copyright © 2020 The Cochrane Collaboration.
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

Cochrane

Library
Trusted evidence.
Informed decisions.
Better health.

Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews

Clinical pathway
Alzheimer's disease dementia shows an insidious onset characterised by progressive decline of cognitive functions such as memory, thinking, comprehension, calculation, language, learning capacity and judgement that are su icient to impair personal activities of daily living
This disease needs to be clearly di erentiated from age-related cognitive decline.
The onset of Alzheimer's disease dementia is usually a er 65 years of age, though earlier onset is not uncommon.
As age advances, the incidence increases rapidly (it roughly doubles every five years).
Since life expectancy increases in the population, the total number of individuals a ected by dementia is expected to rise.
Dementia due to Alzheimer's disease has economic as well as quality of liferelated consequences, not only for the patients but also for their families.
People who present with symptoms of cognitive decline generally are evaluated first by the general practitioner who obtains information from the patient or a family member.
The National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence (NICE) guideline recommends that if dementia is suspected a er the initial clinical judgement, a physical examination, appropriate blood and urine tests to exclude reversible causes of cognitive decline, and a cognitive assessment should be undertaken.
Moreover, if dementia is still suspected, the person should be referred to a specialist dementia diagnostic service (such as a memory clinic or community old age psychiatry service).
Specialists have to confirm cognitive decline, rule out reversible causes and, when possible, diagnose the dementia subtype.
Brain computed tomography (CT) or MRI should be used to rule out reversible causes of cognitive decline and to assist the subtype diagnosis, unless dementia is well established and the subtype is clear

Role of index test(s)
We evaluated the potential role of structural MRI in improving an early diagnosis of dementia due to Alzheimer's disease in people with MCI when MRI is used in addition to clinical judgement or cognitive test performance or both (add-on test).
Hippocampal atrophy measured by MRI has been qualified by the European Medicines Agency (EMA) for enrichment in regulatory clinical trials in the pre-dementia stage of Alzheimer's disease (European Medicines Agency 2011).
The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) issued a letter supporting the role of a low baseline hippocampal volume as a prognostic biomarker for enrichment (US Food and Drug Administration 2015).
Hippocampal or medial temporal lobe atrophy measured on MRI has been included as a marker of neuronal injury in the recommendations of the NIA-AA on the diagnosis of MCI due to Alzheimer's disease
Although no treatment is currently available to cure MCI due to Alzheimer's disease, an early diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease dementia could be of significant support for patients and their families.
For example, lifestyle interventions to prevent or postpone the onset of dementia or inclusion in clinical trials might be suggested to people with a diagnosis of MCI at risk of progression to Alzheimer's disease dementia.

Alternative test(s)
We did not include an alternative test in the review.
An initial singletest review is preliminary to conducting comparative reviews or reviews of test combinations.
The accuracy of other biomarkers (cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) biomarkers, plasma biomarkers, amyloid positron imaging tomography (PET), fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) PET for the longitudinal prediction of dementia due to Alzheimer's disease and other dementias in people with cognitive decline but no dementia are presented in other Cochrane Reviews

Rationale
MCI is considered either a risk factor or a symptomatic predementia phase.
MCI represents a target to better understand mechanisms underlying dementia onset and progression, and a clinical condition to test preventive strategies or early intervention.
The Lancet Commission on prevention and management of dementia reported a large body of research evidence showing that interventions for improving modifiable risk factors might have the potential to delay or prevent a third of dementia cases
Early diagnosis of dementia due to Alzheimer's disease would facilitate timely referral to education, counselling and support services for people with cognitive impairment and their carers, and would likely allow input from the patients about their care plans.
An early di erential diagnosis is also important to identify treatable medical causes of cognitive impairment, such as depression, metabolic conditions, cardiovascular or cerebrovascular disease.
Moreover, early diagnosis would allow people to participate in treatment trials preventing or delaying cognitive decline
Currently there are more than 200 treatments under investigation (www.clinicaltrials.gov),
and a large consensus exists on the hypothesis that the earlier the intervention takes place, the greater will be the protection against further neuronal damage.
Disease-modifying approaches for people with MCI require better knowledge of the accuracy of diagnostic tests that are used in clinical trials.
The new criteria for the diagnosis of MCI due to Alzheimer's disease (Albert 2011), incorporate biomarkers based on imaging and CSF measures in order to increase the probability to identify MCI due to Alzheimer's disease.
These biomarkers used with clinical judgement might increase the sensitivity or specificity of a testing strategy.
However, biomarkers must be preliminarily assessed for individual accuracy before starting to use them as add-on tests in clinical practice.

O B J E C T I V E S
To assess the diagnostic accuracy of structural MRI for the early diagnosis of dementia due to Alzheimer's disease in people with MCI versus the clinical follow-up diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease dementia as a reference standard (delayed verification).

Secondary objectives
To investigate sources of heterogeneity in the diagnostic accuracy of structural MRI for the early diagnosis of dementia due to Alzheimer's disease in people with MCI.
Potential sources of heterogeneity included the following.
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 5. MRI technology: magnetic field strength less than 1 Tesla versus 1 Tesla or higher 6.
MRI techniques: visual versus manual versus automatic and semiautomatic computer-based methods.

M E T H O D S
Criteria for considering studies for this review

Types of studies
We included studies if they:
1. were prospective cohort studies with a clinical follow-up as a reference standard for diagnosis of dementia due to Alzheimer's disease.
In the cohort design, participants are enrolled and undergo the index test before the final outcome (presence or absence of Alzheimer's disease dementia) is known 2. contained su icient data to construct 2 x 2 contingency tables expressing MRI results by disease status 3. were conducted in any healthcare setting, that is, populationbased studies or clinical settings 4. were published in any language.
We excluded case series or case-control studies, which lead to inflated estimates of disease prevalence and test accuracy
We excluded retrospective studies when participants were selected through a retrospective review of clinical records.
We also excluded studies reported only in abstract form or in conference proceedings for which the full text was not available and study authors did not respond to our request to clarify study eligibility.

Participants
Study participants included people with a diagnosis of MCI, based on a decline in memory objectively verified by neuropsychological tests in combination with a precise history, referred by the patient, an informant, or both
We included participants with a decline in other cognitive domains and not meeting the criteria for dementia, as defined by the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (American Psichiatric Association 2000; American Psychiatric Association 2013).
We included all subtypes of MCI (amnestic single domain, amnestic multiple domain, nonamnestic single domain, non-amnestic multiple domain).
Since clinical criteria for the diagnosis of MCI have changed over the past 20 years, we accepted the diagnostic criteria reported by the study authors, for example, a Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR) score of 0.5
We accepted only studies in which the MCI diagnosis was based exclusively on clinical judgement or cognitive test performance, or both.
We included all people with MCI for whom clinicians would suspect initial dementia and who would undergo MRI in clinical practice (Di erences between protocol and review).
We excluded studies reporting results of MRI on healthy people, or subjective cognitive decline in the absence of objective cognitive dysfunction.
We ruled out papers that based MCI definition on biomarker results.
Eventually, in order to avoid participants overlapping, if more studies were performed on the same database (e.g.
ADNI, AddNeuroMed) and reported results for the same brain regions, we included only the paper reporting the highest number of participants.

Index tests
We assessed the diagnostic accuracy of structural MRI in detecting atrophy in the whole brain or in specific brain regions: hippocampus, medial temporal lobe, lateral ventricles, entorhinal cortex, medial temporal gyrus, lateral temporal lobe, amygdala, and cortical grey matter.
For the interpretation of the atrophy patterns, Scheltens 1992 and Ten Kate 2017b validated and reported visual rating scales and Frisoni 2017a quantitative volumetric measures.
Methods of image quantification vary among research groups and are constantly being refined.
A minimum set of MRI criteria for the evaluation of memory clinic patients consists of 3D T1-weighted imaging, fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR), turbo-spin or fastspin T2-weighted images, di usion-weighted images (DWI) and T2weighted gradient-recalled echo (GRE) imaging (Vernooij 2019).
We included studies that used either visual assessment or quantitative volumetric measurements, including manually outlining the brain structure and computer-based, semi-automated or automated segmentation methods that allow anatomical identification of areas of the brain.
We included studies that used an 'automatic classifier' of MRI data only when accuracy results were based on the volume of individual brain regions.
We included any strength of magnetic field, that is, 0.5, 1 or 3 Tesla.
We considered studies only if they reported diagnostic accuracy estimates per number of participants ('participant-level' analysis) and reported data in su icient detail for construction of 2 x 2 contingency tables.
We excluded studies that reported a single index of MRI accuracy estimate derived from multiple volumetric measures (e.g.
multiple regions of interest (ROI)), because of a wide heterogeneity in the number and areas of the brain considered in such studies, or studies that reported MRI-derived index as the spatial pattern of abnormalities for recognition of early Alzheimer's disease (SPARE-AD).
In order to estimate accuracy of a pure volumetric index test, we excluded studies that assessed:
1. a "mixed index test", i.e. comprehensive of both volumetric and cortical thickness measures of the brain 2. an "MRI-derived index", in which volumetric data were summed or divided for other values 3. sub-volumes of brain regions 4. a voxel-based-morphometry (VBM) test which allows to detect important information about regions of atrophy across groups, but cannot provide reliable information about single-subject diagnosis (Teipel 2013).
We excluded studies that used more than one volumetric technique, that is, manual and automated, without reporting separated results per technique.
We excluded studies that reported accuracy results of combined MRI test with other Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews methods to diagnose dementia due to Alzheimer's disease (e.g.
neuropsychological tests or genetic data).
We did not include longitudinal changes of the volumes of brain regions.

Target conditions
Dementia due to Alzheimer's disease was the target condition.
We excluded studies in which the diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease dementia was not the primary outcome of the study and separate data for Alzheimer's disease dementia were not available.
We also excluded studies in which findings of the baseline MRI index test formed the basis of selection for the reference standard because this was likely to distort any assessment of the diagnostic value of MRI.

Reference standards
The reference standard for this review was clinical diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease dementia during the follow-up using the NINCDS-ADRDA criteria

Search methods for identification of studies

Electronic searches
We searched: See Appendix 3 for a list of the sources searched and the search strategies used.
We did not apply any language restriction to the electronic searches.
In addition, we did not use any methodological search filters, aimed to increase specificity, as filters currently published have been shown to lack sensitivity and can therefore miss potentially relevant studies
We performed the most recent search for this review on 29 January 2019.

Searching other resources
We handsearched reference lists of all relevant publications (retrieved full-texts of key articles and reviews).

Data collection and analysis

Selection of studies
Four teams of two review authors each
If the study eligibility was unclear from the abstract, or if no abstract was available but the title suggested a potentially relevant study, we obtained the full-text of the article to assess eligibility for inclusion on the basis of criteria listed above under Criteria for considering studies for this review.
We also screened the reference lists of systematic reviews and included articles to identify any studies missed by the electronic database search.
We prepared a manual to assist review authors in the selection of studies.
We solved any disagreement in selection of abstracts or full-text articles by discussion.
We stored all abstracts and full-text articles in a database designed for the review.
When articles reported on a cohort (same database) that overlapped with a cohort in another paper, we used the study with the higher sample size.
We included articles reporting results on di erent MRI techniques on the same study population or separate results for relevant participants' subgroups.
If we included more than one article from the same study authors, we assessed the absence of overlap by using the reported recruitment periods or directly contacting the study authors to clarify study eligibility.
For excluded studies, we documented reasons for exclusion (Characteristics of excluded studies).

Data extraction and management
Two teams of two review authors each (AGB and EC; GL and GC) independently extracted data and solved disagreements by consensus.
If required, we contacted study authors for missing data.
We designed for the review a data extraction form and pilottested it on five studies.
The extraction form was uploaded in a Microso Access 2003 database.
Review authors who extracted data were not blind to publishing journal, names of study authors, and institutions.
We prepared a manual to assist review authors in data extraction and management.
We extracted the following data from eligible studies.
1. Study characteristics: identity number (ID), first author, country, language, year of publication, journal name, additional bibliographic references linked to the study 2. Characteristics of study participants: multicentric study (item A0), inclusion and exclusion criteria (item A1 to A11), clinical characteristics (item A12 to A22), co-pathologies and treatments (item A23 to A25) 3. Features of the index test (item B1 to B5) 4. Features of the reference standard, including the follow-up length (item C1 to C8) 5. Data tables and missing data (item D1-D19) 6. Numbers of true positives (TP), false negatives (FN), true negatives (TN) and false positives (FP) were used to construct a 2 Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews
x 2 table for the index test.
If studies did not report these values, we contacted the study authors or attempted to reconstruct 2 x 2 tables from the accuracy estimates reported in the article.

Notes

Assessment of methodological quality
We used QUADAS-2, a modified version of the QUADAS (Quality Assessment of Diagnostic Accuracy Studies) tool, to assess the methodological quality of each included study (Whiting 2011).
We have presented the review-specific QUADAS-2 tool and an explanatory document in Appendix 4. We judged each paper as having a 'low', 'high' or 'unclear' risk of bias for each of the following four domains: patient selection; index test; reference standard; flow and timing.
We assessed concerns about applicability in three domains: patient characteristics and setting; index test; reference standard.
We judged low-quality studies as having high or unclear risk of bias in at least one QUADAS-2 domain.
Two review authors (GL and GC) independently assessed each included study and solved disagreement by reaching consensus.
Any disagreement that could not be solved by consensus was referred to a third author (GF).

Statistical analysis and data synthesis
We used data from 2 x 2 tables of structural MRI performance (TP, FN, FP, TN) to summarise accuracy estimates of each primary study.
We estimated sensitivity, specificity, positive and negative likelihood ratios (LR+ and LR-), with their 95% confidence intervals (CI).
We provided graphical representation of the studies by plotting sensitivity and specificity estimates with their 95% CIs in both a forest plot and a receiver operating characteristic (ROC) space.
We used the hierarchical summary ROC curve (HSROC) model proposed by Rutter and Gatsonis
We used this technique to plot the summary ROC curve, and we also calculated pooled point estimates of sensitivity and specificity, since we found studies yielded heterogeneous estimates and no clear threshold e ects were apparent both graphically and statistically in analyses with more data.
We used the metadas user-written command in Statistical Analysis System (SAS) (version 9.4.
SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NC, USA) statistical package for the analyses (Takwoingi 2010).
Very few studies reported MRI data extracted with both manual and automated methods and we decided post-hoc to use manual methods in order to be consistent with the majority of the studies.
If an individual study reported results for more than one followup period, we reported accuracy estimates for all the periods, but selected just the estimate from the three years' (or longer) followup for the meta-analysis.
This choice is based on the assumption that the conversion rate to Alzheimer's disease dementia is higher in the first few years following MCI diagnosis and declines therea er, and that short-term MRI accuracy is therefore the most relevant information for patients and clinicians.
Moreover, most of the data were available at two or three years of follow-up and very few studies reported a follow-up period of more than three years.
If estimates of sensitivity and specificity or su icient data to construct a 2 x 2 table of test performance were not available, we wrote to the authors of the primary study requesting the individual participant data.
If we received the individual participants' data, we calculated the estimates of sensitivity and specificity corresponding to the threshold nearer to the upper le point of the ROC curve.
We were aware that this data-driven method for threshold selection could lead to an overestimate of diagnostic accuracy
However, there are no accepted thresholds to a priori define a positive MRI, and published accuracy estimates are likely to be based on data-driven threshold selection.
If the primary study authors did not provide data (e.g.
we were not able to locate contact details of study authors, we received no reply from study authors, study authors replied that the requested information was unavailable), we excluded the study from the review.

Investigations of heterogeneity
We initially assessed heterogeneity by visually examining forest plots of sensitivities and specificities and ROC plots.
We planned to formally explore heterogeneity by a likelihood ratio test comparing the model without covariate with the model including the test type covariate.
We stated potential sources of heterogeneity under Secondary objectives.

Sensitivity analyses
We planned to conduct sensitivity analyses to assess the impact of the methodological quality of included studies on MRI accuracy estimates excluding studies at high risk of bias (see Assessment of methodological quality).
However, we were not able to do this because we judged almost all studies at high risk of bias.
Thus we decided to perform specific analysis according to the brain region and considering MRI techniques, duration of follow-up length and age of participants as covariate.

'Summary of findings' table
We presented the main results of the review in a 'Summary of findings' table, according to recommendations described in Chapter 11 of the Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of Diagnostic Test Accuracy (version 0.9; Bossuyt 2013).
We graded the quality of evidence according to the GRADE system for diagnostic tests, considering study limitations (risk of bias), indirectness, inconsistency, imprecision, and risk of publication bias
According to the so ware GRADEpro GDT, we assigned four levels of quality of evidence: high, moderate, low, and very low.

R E S U L T S

Results of the search
A flow chart describes the results of the selection process (Figure
The literature search identified 29,335 references.
We screened titles and abstracts to exclude duplicates (n = 5064) and irrelevant studies
We retrieved the full texts of the remaining 309 references and assessed them for eligibility.
Ultimately, 33 studies that were eligible according to the inclusion criteria provided data for the review; we excluded 276 studies.
We reported the list and descriptions of excluded studies under Characteristics of excluded studies.
For 112 studies the index test was outside the inclusion criteria, reporting data for a combination of multiple Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews volumetric measures, or a test comprehensive of both volumetric and cortical thickness measures of the brain, or a voxel-basedmorphometry test.
We excluded an additional 43 studies as they were of retrospective, case-control, or cross-sectional design.
Thirty-one studies were not diagnostic test accuracy studies and focused on technical aspects of the test.
We excluded another 24 studies as they reported on a cohort that overlapped with a cohort in another included paper.
We excluded 23 studies as they enrolled healthy participants or participants with dementia.
Twenty studies presented insu icient descriptions of study results needed to construct 2 x 2 tables and we were unable to contact study authors.
We could not extract data for 2 x 2 tables from 14 studies and authors did not reply to our request
In four excluded studies, the reference standard was outside the inclusion criteria.
We excluded four unpublished studies.
We excluded one additional study that reported outcomes for number of MRI, not number of participants.
We reported the list and details of the included studies under Characteristics of included studies and Table
The 33 included studies involved 3935 participants, with a median of 43 participants per study (range 13 to 480).
All the included studies were conducted at tertiary referral centres and 16 (48%) were multicentric.
Nineteen studies were conducted in Europe, nine in North America, three in North America and Europe, one in Taiwan and one in Australia.
The articles were published from 1999 to 2019.
The median proportion of women was 53% (range 26% to 71%), and the mean age of participants ranged from 63 to 87 years (median 73 years).
At baseline, participants had a median Mini Mental State Examination (MMSE) score of 27 (range 22 to 29) and a mean level of education (years of schooling) of 12 years (range 5 to 16 years).
Of the 3935 participants, 1341 (34%) progressed to Alzheimer's disease dementia and 2594 (66%) did not progress.
Of the participants who did not progress to Alzheimer's disease dementia, 2561 (99%) remained stable MCI and 33 (1%) converted to other types of dementia.
The percentages of participants who remained stable with MCI and those who converted to other types of dementia varied among the included studies from 31% to 81%, and from 1% to 19% respectively.
The mean length of follow-up ranged from 1 to 7.6 years (median 2 years) and the percentages of participants who progressed to Alzheimer's disease dementia during follow-up ranged from 19% to 69%.
All included studies reported accuracy estimates for one follow-up period, except Gaser 2013, who reported data at one and three years' follow-up.
We included data from the three years' follow-up.

Structural magnetic resonance imaging for the early diagnosis of dementia due to
During the literature screening we assessed the eligibility of several Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) papers.
ADNI is a multicenter project ongoing in 50 medical centres and university sites across the USA and Canada.
The primary objective of ADNI is to collect, validate and utilise data, acquired serially over two to three years of follow-up, including structural MRI and positron emission tomography (PET) images, genetic data, cognitive tests, cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and blood biomarkers as predictors of Alzheimer's disease dementia.
In order to avoid participants overlapping, we excluded all studies performed on the ADNI database in the same period and focusing on the same brain region (Table
Thus, we included ADNI studies with the larger sample size.
Among the 33 included papers, we identified seven eligible ADNI studies, from which we extracted sixteen 2 x 2 contingency tables
We also applied the same selection criteria to studies performed on other databases belonging to DESCRIPA study (Development of Screening Guidelines and Clinical Criteria for Predementia Alzheimer's disease), VUmc study (University Medical Center Amsterdam) and AddNeuroMed study.
Review authors focused on one to eight di erent brain regions (hippocampus, entorhinal cortex, amygdala, medial temporal lobe, lateral temporal lobe, lateral ventricles, medial temporal gyrus, cortical grey matter) or whole brain, using several MRI techniques.
In response to our request
Studies generally measured the volume of the hippocampus and the entorhinal cortex with a quantitative manual method, whereas they mainly used a visual method based on the Scheltens scale
The choice of a threshold value for the medial temporal lobe atrophy was heterogeneous between studies.
Three study authors
One study (Monge Argilés 2014), considered a cut-o based on the sum of le and right medial temporal lobe atrophy scores (≥ 3.0).
The most used so ware for the manual assessment of the brain region volume was DISPLAY (Caroli 2007; Prestia 2013 (ADNI); VanderFlier 2005) and for the automated assessment it was Freesurfer
Some study authors used so ware developed in house.
The main manufacturers of MRI scanners used in the included studies were Philips, Siemens and General Electric (29 of the 33 included studies).
Several studies, such as ADNI studies, used all three manufacturers.
Two studies used Toshiba and Technicare; two studies did not report manufacturers.
Twenty-six (79%) of the included studies performed the MRI at 1.5 Tesla, one study at 3.0 Tesla (Jang 2018), and two studies at 0.5 Tesla
Only Visser 1999 used MRI at 0.6 Tesla.
One study did not report this information.
The majority of the included studies used the NINCDS ADRDA criteria as a reference standard
Non-consecutive enrolment or the use of registry data, such as in ADNI or AddNeuroMed studies, which, despite being prospective registries, imposed specific participant selection criteria, such as the availability of multiple biomarkers, were the main reasons for assessment of high risk of bias.
Moreover, in prospective registries it was unclear if inappropriate exclusions (e.g.
depression, vascular lesions on MRI) were avoided.
Absence of a clear definition of inclusion and exclusion criteria was the reason for assessment of high risk of bias in other included cohort studies.

Index test
We judged 24 (73%) studies at high risk of bias, six (18%) at unclear risk, and three (9%)
Overall, 30 studies did not provide su icient details on the index test, either because of a lack of a clear, pre-specified definition of what was considered to be a 'positive' result of the MRI or lack of blinding of radiologists to the reference standard, or both.
Twenty-four studies had unclear criteria for a positive MRI result.
Only nine studies reported a clear, pre-specified definition of a positive MRI result
Clerx 2013a, Frolich 2017, Prieto del Val 2016 and Wood 2016 used criteria for a positive manual MRI test based on the Youden's index, which has the advantage of being a single measure, but it loses the distinction between false positives and false negatives
Blinding of radiologists to the clinical diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease dementia was unclear in 18 (54%) studies.
To evaluate blinding, we applied the same criteria for visual, manual, or automated methods.
However, we acknowledge that the absence of blinding of radiologist or the interpretation of MRI by di erent radiologists for di erent participants may be considered less severe when the automated method was used rather than the visual or manual methods.
In three studies (Clerx 2013a; Erten-Lyons 2006; Jang 2018), more than one radiologist interpreted MRI scans for di erent participants, whereas in sixteen studies it was unclear if one or more radiologists interpreted MRI separately or in a joint session.
Thirteen studies assessed interobserver or intraobserver variability in the whole cohort or in a subset of randomly selected participants

Reference standard
Twenty-nine (88%) studies were at low risk of bias in the 'reference standard' domain and we classified four as unclear risk.
We judged one study (Prestia 2013 (ADNI), at unclear risk of bias because baseline biomarker results of participants were available to clinicians who diagnosed Alzheimer's disease dementia.
As specified in the Methods section, we accepted the new diagnostic criteria for dementia due to Alzheimer's disease
When this information was not available, we judged the included study at unclear risk of bias and unclear concern about the incorporation of MRI into the diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease during follow-up (incorporation risk)
We judged one study

Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews

Flow and timing
Nine (27%) studies
We classified a study as having high risk of bias when study authors did not adequately explain withdrawals or losses to follow-up, or study authors excluded from the analysis participants who progressed to non-Alzheimer's disease dementia.
Erten-Lyons 2006 did not report if all participants received the same reference standard and we judged it at unclear risk.
Eckerstrom 2013 was at unclear risk of bias because it did not specify if non-Alzheimer's disease dementia cases were included in the analysis.
The median interval between MRI test and reference standard was two years (range 1 to 7.6 years).

Concerns regarding applicability
We had no concerns for any studies about applicability in the 'patient selection' and 'index test' domains.
Participants and the index text in the included studies did not di er from those targeted by the review question.
Three studies

Findings
We have presented findings under five main brain regions (Summary of findings 1).

Hippocampus
Twenty-two studies
The studies used di erent MRI techniques: manual (11 studies, 512 participants); semiautomatic or automatic (nine studies, 1334 participants); manual and semiautomatic or automatic (two studies; 421 participants).
The overall sample size ranged from 13 participants (Visser 1999), to 447 participants (Khan 2015).
Sensitivity ranged from 0.28 to 1.00, while specificity ranged from 0.43 to 0.94.
Forest plots demonstrated a high degree of heterogeneity and wide confidence intervals for estimates of both sensitivity and specificity between the included studies (Figure
Two studies used two techniques for total hippocampal volume, thus we chose the manual technique for these studies (Clerx 2013a; Prestia 2013 (ADNI)), for consistency with other studies.
The mean sensitivity and specificity (summary operating point) were 0.73 (95% CI 0.64 to 0.80) and 0.71 (95% CI 0.65 to 0.77) respectively (Figure
Positive likelihood ratio was 2.53 (95% CI 2.09 to 3.06) while negative likelihood ratio was 0.38 (95% CI 0.29 to 0.50).
The certainty of the evidence (Summary of findings 1) was low for both sensitivity and specificity due to risk of bias (-1) and inconsistency due to heterogeneous study results (-1).

Investigation of heterogeneity
Potential sources of heterogeneity are outlined under the section Secondary objectives.
We were able to assess the impact of heterogeneity on the MRI diagnostic accuracy for MRI technique, duration of follow-up and age of participants.
We have reported the numbers of participants in the subgroup analyses in Table
Because very few studies reached a follow-up of more than three years, we used the cut-o value for subgroup analyses on follow-up time at 'less than three years' versus 'at least three years'.
All these comparisons were between studies or indirect.
Sensitivity was 0.82 (95% CI 0.69 to 0.90) for manual technique (13 studies) and 0.59 (95% CI 0.48 to 0.70) for automatic or semiautomatic technique (11 studies); specificity was 0.74 (95% CI 0.67 to 0.81) and 0.66 (95% CI 0.56 to 0.74), respectively (Table
The relative DOR was 4.83 (95% CI 1.82 to 12.8), suggesting better accuracy with the manual compared with the automatic technique.
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews Sensitivity was 0.74 (95% CI 0.65 to 0.81) for less than three years' follow-up (14 studies), and 0.71 (95% CI 0.54 to 0.84) for at least three years' follow-up (8 studies); specificity was 0.69 (95% CI 0.61 to 0.76) and 0.76 (95% CI 0.67 to 0.82), respectively.
No di erence in accuracy was found (relative DOR 0.80, 95% CI 0.34 to 1.92) for the longer versus shorter follow-up).
Sensitivity was 0.72 (95% CI 0.54 to 0.84) for studies including patients with a mean age of less than 70 years (6 studies), and 0.73 (95% CI 0.64 to 0.81) for a mean age of 70 years or more (16 studies); specificity was 0.77 (95% CI 0.67 to 0.84) and 0.69 (95% CI 0.62 to 0.75), respectively.
We found no di erence in accuracy (relative DOR
We were not able to explore the e ects of amnestic versus non-amnestic MCI, medial temporal lobe versus other structures, hippocampus versus other structures, entorhinal cortex versus other structures, or temporoparietal regions versus other structures, as potential sources of heterogeneity, because studies providing these data were too few to make this a meaningful analysis.
Furthermore, we performed no assessment of heterogeneity for setting and MRI Tesla because all included participants had been referred to tertiary centres and the majority of the included studies used a magnetic field strength of 1.5 Tesla.

Direct comparisons of le and right hippocampal volumes
Seven studies, including 298 participants, made a direct comparison of the le and right hippocampal volumes that were measured by manual technique
Galton 2005, including 29 participants, used a visual technique and found sensitivity and specificity of 0.64 (95% CI 0.31 to 0.89) and 0.89 (95% CI 0.65 to 0.99) for the right hippocampus and 0.91 (95% CI 0.59 to 1.00) and 0.89 (95% CI 0.65 to 0.99) for the le hippocampus, respectively.
We considered that the visual technique should not be pooled with quantitative manual or automatic techniques and excluded this study from direct comparisons of right versus le hippocampus, as follows.
1. Le hippocampal volume: sensitivity varied from 0.44 to 0.89, while specificity varied from 0.64 to 1.00 (Data table 2; Data table
The mean sensitivity and specificity (summary operating point) were, respectively, 0.71 (95% CI 0.62 to 0.79) and 0.76 (95% CI 0.67 to 0.83; Figure
Positive likelihood ratio was 2.95 (95% CI 2.14 to 4.06) while negative likelihood ratio was 0.38 (95% CI 0.28 to 0.51).
2. Right hippocampal volume: sensitivity ranged from 0.61 to 1.00, specificity from 0.43 to 0.81 (Figure
The mean sensitivity and specificity were, respectively, 0.81 (95% CI 0.73 to 0.88) and 0.71 (95% CI 0.61 to 0.80; Figure
Figure
The relative DOR suggested no overall di erence in accuracy (1.37, 95% CI 0.63 to 2.99).

Medial temporal lobe
Seven Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews and specificity due to risk of bias (-1), but we did not downgrade for imprecision since confidence intervals were large, but still their upper limit was below 0.75 for both sensitivity and specificity, which is a modest performance.
VanderFlier 2005 analysed separately le and right medial temporal lobe and reported sensitivity and specificity of 0.89 (95% CI 0.52 to 1.00) and 0.33 (95% CI 0.04 to 0.78) for the le lobe, 0.22 (95% CI 0.03 to 0.60) and 1.00 (95% CI 0.54 to 1.00) for the right lobe (Data table 5; Data table 6).

Lateral ventricles
Five
Positive likelihood ratio was 1.61 (95% CI 1.39 to 1.87) while negative likelihood ratio was 0.66 (95% CI 0.57 to 0.78).
The certainty of the evidence (Summary of findings 1) was moderate for both sensitivity and specificity due to risk of bias (-1), but was not downgraded for imprecision since confidence intervals were large, but still their upper limit was below 0.75 for both sensitivity and specificity, which is a modest performance.
Four studies
Three studies used a manual method and one study
The smallest study (Herukka 2008) recruited 21 participants, while the largest study
Sensitivities and specificities ranged from 0.50 to 0.88 and from 0.60 to 1.00, respectively.
We did not do a meta-analysis because of sparse and heterogeneous data, which were suggestive of moderate accuracy.
The certainty of the evidence (Summary of findings 1) was very low due to risk of bias (-1), imprecision (-1) and inconsistency due to heterogenous study results (-1).

Whole brain
Four
Sensitivities and specificities ranged from 0.33 to 0.92 and from 0.41 to 1.00, respectively.
We did not do a meta-analysis because of sparse and heterogeneous data, which were suggestive of moderate accuracy, particularly the largest study
The certainty of the evidence (Summary of findings 1) was very low for both sensitivity and specificity due to risk of bias (-1), imprecision (-1) and inconsistency due to heterogeneous study results (-1).

D I S C U S S I O N

Summary of main results
This review analysed the diagnostic accuracy of structural MRI for the early diagnosis of dementia due to Alzheimer's disease in people with MCI.
We used clinical diagnosis of dementia due to Alzheimer's disease at follow-up as the reference standard.
Data from 3935 participants with a diagnosis of MCI at baseline, who undertook a structural MRI and were followed for at least one year, were analysed in 33 primary studies published from 1999 to 2019.
Sociodemographic and clinical characteristics of participants are presented in Table
We assumed an add-on role of structural The results of this review cannot be considered conclusive because the included studies were at high or unclear risk of bias and heterogeneous, and data were not su icient to compare test accuracy between di erent brain regions or di erent types of MCI, for example, amnestic or non-amnestic MCI.
We found no significant di erences in sensitivity or specificity of total hippocampal volume between included studies with regards to follow-up length, or age of participants, but the overall accuracy was better for manual versus automatic MRI techniques in mixed (mostly indirect) comparisons.
In a qualitative review, the authors concluded that, for the early diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease dementia, volume of entorhinal cortex provided better diagnostic accuracies than volume of other brain regions, such as the hippocampus
However, key aspects of this qualitative review undermine its conclusion.
The results were based on two studies
We included the deToledo-Morell 2004 study and judged it at high risk of bias for patient selection and index test.
Sensitivity and specificity of entorhinal cortex were 0.50 and 1.00 respectively.
We excluded the study of Killiany 2000 because participants were people with normal cognition or "questionable AD dementia".
Leandrou 2018 and colleagues did not assess the quality of evidence of the results arising from their review.

Strengths and weaknesses of the review
Strengths of this review include the following.
1. We conducted an extensive, comprehensive, and sensitive literature search, using di erent electronic databases, and assessed the eventuality of participants' overlapping in the eligible studies.
2. Two teams of two review authors each independently extracted data and two independent review authors used the QUADAS-2 tool for quality assessments of the included studies.
3. We included only prospective studies of participants who underwent structural MRI before diagnosis of dementia due to Alzheimer's disease, minimising the risk of bias in interpretation of the index test results.
4. We approached authors of studies in an attempt to obtain missing information.
Limitations of this review include the following.
1.
Only heterogeneous, small studies were available, and few studies were available for some brain regions.
This undermined our confidence in the pooled estimates of structural MRI diagnostic accuracy and likely contributed to the great variability in sensitivity and specificity observed in the included studies.
2. We judged most of the included studies at high or unclear risk of bias, which contributed to the low certainty of evidence we presented in this review for the region with the most studies, total hippocampal volume.
3. The studies varied with respect to the included participants and definition of MCI.
Moreover, consecutive enrolling of participants and the method of recruitment used were seldom reported in most of the included studies.
We considered Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews participant selection at high risk of bias in 31 out of 33 included studies.
4. Twenty-four studies did not provide su icient information regarding the index test, and we had to judge them at high risk of bias in this domain.
5.
The studies varied with respect to protocols for structural MRI.
Most of the included studies (24 out of 33) described the MRI findings but did not provide a clear, pre-specified definition of what was considered a 'positive' result of structural MRI. 6.
Only 13 studies addressed interobserver and intraobserver variability for MRI. 7. Diagnosis of dementia due to Alzheimer's disease would require a histopathological confirmation but this is not feasible in clinical practice.
The clinical diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease dementia at follow-up is a delayed verification test, which is an imperfect reference standard and could have introduced bias.
Furthermore, the experience of clinicians and the clinical pathway were poorly reported in most of the included studies.
Additional limitations of this review may be the following.
1. We excluded studies that reported MRI accuracy obtained from multiple volumetric brain regions.
However, some studies reported the highest diagnostic accuracies when both entorhinal cortex and hippocampus were combined in the analysis
2. We addressed accuracy of structural MRI alone and not as a component of a combination of tests.
Other reviews reported that assessment of hippocampal volume or medial temporal lobe atrophy in isolation for the early diagnosis of dementia due to Alzheimer's disease in people with MCI is not supported by the current evidence
These authors recommended that clinical research should focus on assessing the impact of combinations of biomarkers.
Neuropsychological tests and multiple putative biomarkers including neuroimaging (MRI or PET) have been proposed, but the clinical usefulness of these biomarkers is still under evaluation.
3. We have presented pooled estimates of sensitivity and specificity, despite the fact that explicit volume cut-o s were not reported, which limits the clinical usefulness of summary estimates.
Nonetheless, they are consistent with poor accuracy.

Applicability of findings to the review question
We did not judge any studies as having high concerns about applicability in 'patient selection' and 'index test' domains.
Participants and the index text in the included studies did not di er from those targeted by the review question.

A U T H O R S ' C O N C L U S I O N S

Implications for practice
Structural magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) in hippocampus or medial temporal lobe, the most studied brain regions, showed low sensitivity and specificity and did not reach the standard required to be a stand-alone, add-on test for an early diagnosis of dementia due to Alzheimer's disease in people with MCI.
This is consistent with international guidelines, which recommend structural MRI to exclude non-degenerative or surgical causes of cognitive impairment but not to diagnose dementia due to Alzheimer's disease.
Medial temporal lobe atrophy or hippocampal volume measured by structural MRI cannot be recommended in clinical practice for an early diagnosis of dementia due to Alzheimer's disease in people with MCI.

Implications for research
Research priorities include the definition of what is considered to be a 'positive' result of volumetric assessment of brain regions measured by structural MRI.
Research is essential for the development of accurate criteria to address a timely diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease dementia.
Frisoni and colleagues proposed a research framework to assess the analytical and clinical validity of biomarkers for Alzheimer's disease and their clinical utility.
To achieve these objectives, research priorities include the standardisation of the readout of biomarker assays and thresholds for normality, the evaluation of their performance in detecting early disease, the development of diagnostic algorithms comprising combinations of biomarkers, and the development of clinical guidelines for the use of biomarkers in qualified memory clinics
Implementation of these proposed research topics are expected to provide useful results over the medium term.
We identified several weaknesses in the included studies using the QUADAS 2 quality assessment tool.
We recommend that future studies consider:
1. including large prospective cohorts of consecutive or random samples of people with a definite diagnosis of MCI; 2. using a diagnostic accuracy study design that adheres to the recommendations of the STARDdem Initiative 'Reporting standards for studies of diagnostic test accuracy in dementia' (Noel-Storr 2014); 3. Incorporating the QUADAS 2 tool into the study design (Whiting 2011); 4. Providing a clear, pre-specified definition of what is a 'positive' result of the index test; 5. Assessing interobserver and intraobserver variability; and 6. evaluating long-term outcomes and cost e ectiveness of the index text implementation.

A C K N O W L E D G E M E N T S
We
Participants were classified as probable MCI when there were no psychiatric, neurologic (e.g.
cerebrovascular disease, history of head trauma encephalopathy, infectious diseases, developmental disabilities), or systemic illnesses that may cause cognitive deficits, or possible when any comorbid condition was present".

C H A R A C T E R I S T I C S O F S T U D I E S

Characteristics of included studies [ordered by study ID]

Flow and timing
Withdrawals and losses to follow-up: 33 MCI.
Participants were divided into amnestic (N = 28) and non-amnestic (N = 28) and only amnestic MCI underwent a yearly follow-up visit from 1-3 years after enrolment.
4 amnestic MCI participants refused to have any follow-up visit and dropped out and 1 participant who converted to FTD was excluded from the analysis.
Uninterpretable MRI results were not reported.

Comparative Key conclusions by the authors
In conclusion, our results suggest that parahippocampal and inferior temporal hypoperfusion in amnestic MCI patients could be considered as a correlate of conversion to AD. Tesla strength: 1.0 or 1.5 T Assessment methods: regarding the manual method, the hippocampal ROI was constructed by manual delineation of hippocampal borders using the software package developed in house, Show_Images 3.7.0 and using criteria according to Van de Pol 2007.
Automated hippocampal volumetry was performed using a multi-atlas segmentation method named "learning embedding for atlas propagation" (LEAP).
Measurements of the lateral ventricle was executed with an extension of SIENAX that is a package for single-time-point ('cross-sectional') analysis of brain change.
After the tissue segmentation, a registered mask was used to exclude the CSF on the outer side of the brain.
The visual rating of MTA was performed using a qualitative scale
Rating was performed on coronal T1-weighted images Description of positive case definition by index test as reported: specified only for the visual method: score ranging from 0 (no atrophy)-4 (severe atrophy).
Diagnostic accuracy based on Youden index (Youden 1950), was used to construct 2 x 2 table; results based on a cut point for a sensitivity of 85% were also available

Conflict of interests
Examiners: 3 trained technicians, blinded to the diagnosis, performed the manual segmentation of the hippocampus.
Scans from the VU University Medical centre were rated using the visual method by a group of 3 trained raters supervised by a neuroradiologist.
Scans from the DESCRIPA study were rated by a single rater from the VU University Medical centre.
The blindness of raters was specified only for the manual method Interobserver variability: the inter-rater coefficient of variation was < 8% and the intra-rater was < 5% for the manual method.
In the VU University Medical centre cohort, the inter-and intra-rater Cohen kappa values were > 0.80, and in the DESCRIPA cohort the intra-rater weighted Cohen kappa value was 0.68 for the visual method Target condition and reference standard(s)

Study characteristics

Patient sampling
Primary objectives: examine whether presymptomatic rates of regional and total brain volume loss distinguish MCI participants that subsequently decline to dementia

Study population: participants with MCI
Selection criteria: all Oregon Brain Aging Study participants who had at least 3 annual neuropsychological examinations and ≥ 2 analysed MRI scans for the time of interest.
MCI defined clinically as CDR = 0.5 on 2 independent examinations separated by at least 6 months and not meeting diagnostic criteria for dementia.
Exclusion criteria: not reported

Study design: longitudinal population study

Patient characteristics and setting
Clinical presentations: MCI defined clinically as CDR = 0.5 on 2 independent examinations separated by at least 6 months and not meeting diagnostic criteria for dementia

Study characteristics

Patient sampling
Primary objectives: investigate which combination of biomarkers best predict a short-term conversion from MCI to AD dementia
Study population: participants from the Dementia Competence Network (DCN), a German multicenter cohort study Selection criteria: patients who sought evaluation at the participating memory clinics, aged ≥ 50 years and in whom organic cognitive impairment was suspected underwent a screening assessment.
The diagnoses of MCI were made on the basis of clinical and neuropsychological data.
A specific MMSE threshold was not applied for diagnosis.
A broader definition of MCI was used, the core features being complaints of cognitive deficit in ADL and objectified decline of cognitive abilities (> 1 SD) in at least 1 of main cognitive domains as evidenced by standardised neuropsychological tests; B-ADL score < 4; no major depressive episode.
The following exclusion criteria were applied: substance abuse or dependence, insufficient German language skills, multimorbidity, comorbid condition with excess mortality, circumstances that make regular attendance at follow-up visits questionable and lack of an informant.
In most centres, a consecutive series of patients was included in the study, nevertheless 115/1071 MCI patients (12%) were included on the basis of biomarkers availability, follow-up length (for at least 12 months) and outcome (MCI stable or progressed to AD only)

Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews

Study characteristics
Patient sampling Primary objectives: examine the contribution of the Addenbrooke's Cognitive Examination (ACE), neuropsychological assessment, and a MRI-based temporal lobe rating scale to the prediction of which patients with questionable dementia will progress to AD Study population: a subgroup of patients with QD was recruited from the memory clinic in Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge, for a longitudinal project.
Included participants had undergone suitable MRI imaging at entry.
Selection criteria: participants unable to undergo MRI for a variety of reasons including claustrophobia or pacemakers were excluded.
Consecutive referrals were approached and screened to exclude extrapyramidal signs or hallucinations, VD, current cancer treatment, uncontrolled diabetes, and serious head injury.
Patients with cerebrovascular events, epilepsy, and major depression were excluded.
All participants were aged between 50 and 80 years at the time of recruitment.

Study design: prospective longitudinal study

Patient characteristics and setting
Clinical presentations: QD met the following criteria:
1. subjective complaint of memory impairment; 2. normal ADL; and 3. nondemented as evident from a MMSE score of ≥ 23
Such definition corresponded to MCI as defined by some groups of workers using the CDR scale but not by other groups who based the diagnosis of MCI on neuropsychological test performance.
All included participants had a CDR score of 0.5.
Age mean (SD): people with QD who progressed to AD: 71 ± 9; stable QD: 59 ± 8
Gender (% men): QD who progressed to AD: 54.5%; stable QD: 44.4%

Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews

Study characteristics

Patient sampling
Primary objectives: explore the potential of applying the BrainAGE approach in early detection of abnormal brain changes in order to predict the conversion from MCI to AD within a time span of 3 years Study population: data obtained from the ADNI database including all MCI for whom baseline MRI data 1.5 T, at least moderately confident diagnoses, hippocampus volumes calculated by Freesurfer Version 4.3 and test scores in certain cognitive scales were available Selection criteria: inclusion and exclusion criteria according to the ADNI protocol (ADNI 2010; Petersen 2010).
All participants were aged 55-90 and had no evidence of cerebrovascular disease (Modified Hachinski Ischaemia Score ≤ 4), depression (GDS < 6), no significant neurological disease, no visual or hearing impairment, stable medications, good general health, 6 grades of education or equivalent, a study partner, English or Spanish language fluency, and no medical contraindications to MRI

Study characteristics
Patient sampling Primary objectives: investigate the association between the CSF biomarkers and MTA and the ability of these measures to predict AD in MCI

Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews
Age mean (SD): MCI who progressed to AD: 72 ± 5; stable MCI:71 ± 5
Gender (% men): MCI who progressed to AD: 37.5%; stable MCI: 31%

Study characteristics
Patient sampling Primary objectives: to test the hypothesis that the annualised rates of hippocampal atrophy differ as a function of both baseline and change in clinical group membership (control, MCI, or AD)

Study population: amnestic MCI, community and referral patients
Selection criteria: criteria for the diagnosis of MCI were:
1. memory complaint documented by the patient and collateral source 2. normal general cognition 3. normal ADL 4. not demented (DSM-III-R) American Psychiatric Association 1987 5. CDR score of 0.5.
Participants must have had 2 Mayo ADPR/ADRC clinical assessments separated by a minimum of 2 and a maximum of 4 years.
Participants who had symptoms which were clinically felt to be unrelated to AD were excluded.
For example, participants who suffered a stroke or who developed depression before or during the follow-up period were excluded

Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews
Assessment methods: CVRS includes visual scales of hippocampal atrophy, cortical atrophy, subcortical atrophy (ventricular enlargement) and for staging small vessel disease; the rater used a template-based scoring program on a tablet computer that calculated the total score automatically.
Description of positive cases definition by index test as reported: not specified (score ranging from 0-30, a higher score represents more deficits but a threshold was not reported; allocation scores by the CVRS was 8 points for hippocampal atrophy, 9 points for cortical atrophy, 6 points for ventricular atrophy, and 7 points for small vessel disease) Examiners: 3 raters blinded to demographic and clinical information
Interobserver variability: inter-rater and intra-rater reliability with 34 randomly selected MRI scans were 0.941 and 0.936
Target condition and reference standard(s) Tesla strength: 1.5
Assessment methods: a highly automated structural MRI image processing pipeline, which was developed by Fischl and his colleagues was utilised for data analysis
It produced both regional cortical thickness measures from 34 areas and regional volume measures from 24 areas, including the hippocampus Severe MTA was present in some participants who had MCI at baseline and subsequently developed dementia due to AD.
The absence of MTA, however, does not exclude the development of dementia.
Memory impairment was a better predictor for dementia than atrophy of the medial temporal lobe, but the combination of the two increased diagnostic accuracy  Examiners: the manual method for estimation of the hippocampal and parahippocampal gyrus volumes was performed by 1 rater.
The MTA was scored by a neurologist.
All raters were blinded to all clinical information.

Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews
Interobserver variability: regarding the manual method the ICC between the first and second measurement was 0.95 for the hippocampus, 0.92 for the parahippocampal gyrus; regarding the visual method, the intrarater reliability was substantial (kappa = 0.70)
Target condition and reference standard(s)
Target condition: AD Prevalence of AD in the sample: 7/30 (23% of participants included in the analysis)
Stable MCI or converted to other dementia: 23 (77%) non-AD dementia (20 stable MCI and 3 participants converted to non-AD dementia)
Reference standards: NINCDS-ADRDA criteria
Both cognitive performance and hippocampal volume predicted decline of MCI patients.
However, when time-to-conversion was considered as a principal outcome factor, global cognitive performance had greater significant influence on conversion time than hippocampal volume and ApoEϵ4 was not a significant predictive factor for dementia due to AD


....................................................................................................................................................................................................... ABSTRACT..................................................................................................................................................................................................... PLAIN LANGUAGE SUMMARY....................................................................................................................................................................... SUMMARY OF FINDINGS.............................................................................................................................................................................. BACKGROUND.............................................................................................................................................................................................. OBJECTIVES.................................................................................................................................................................................................. METHODS..................................................................................................................................................................................................... RESULTS........................................................................................................................................................................................................ Figure 1.................................................................................................................................................................................................. Figure 2.................................................................................................................................................................................................. Figure 3.................................................................................................................................................................................................. Figure 4.................................................................................................................................................................................................. Figure 5.................................................................................................................................................................................................. Figure 6.................................................................................................................................................................................................. Figure 7.................................................................................................................................................................................................. DISCUSSION.................................................................................................................................................................................................. AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS........................................................................................................................................................................... ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS................................................................................................................................................................................ REFERENCES................................................................................................................................................................................................ CHARACTERISTICS OF STUDIES.................................................................................................................................................................. DATA.............................................................................................................................................................................................................. Test 1. Hippocampus total................................................................................................................................................................... Test 2. Hippocampus le ...................................................................................................................................................................... Test 3. Hippocampus right................................................................................................................................................................... Test 4. Medial temporal lobe total....................................................................................................................................................... Test 5. Medial temporal lobe le ......................................................................................................................................................... Test 6. Medial temporal lobe right....................................................................................................................................................... Test 7. Lateral ventricles....................................................................................................................................................................... Test 8. Enthorinal cortex total.............................................................................................................................................................. Test 9. Enthorinal cortex le ................................................................................................................................................................ Test 10.
Enthorinal cortex right............................................................................................................................................................ Test 11.
Whole brain............................................................................................................................................................................. Test 12. Medial temporal gyrus............................................................................................................................................................ Test 13.
Lateral temporal lobe total.................................................................................................................................................... Test 14. Lateral temporal lobe right.................................................................................................................................................... Test 15.
Amygdala total........................................................................................................................................................................ Test 16.
Amygdala le ........................................................................................................................................................................... Test 17. Amygdala right........................................................................................................................................................................ Test 18. Cortical grey matter................................................................................................................................................................ ADDITIONAL TABLES.................................................................................................................................................................................... APPENDICES................................................................................................................................................................................................. CONTRIBUTIONS OF AUTHORS................................................................................................................................................................... DECLARATIONS OF INTEREST..................................................................................................................................................................... SOURCES OF SUPPORT............................................................................................................................................................................... DIFFERENCES BETWEEN PROTOCOL AND REVIEW.................................................................................................................................... of follow



Figure 1 .Figure 1 .
Figure 1. Figure 1.
Flow of studies identified in literature search for systematic review on structural magnetic resonance imaging for an early diagnosis of dementia due to Alzheimer's disease in people with mild cognitive impairment


]; Frisoni 2010c [pers comm]; Frisoni 2010e [pers comm]; Frisoni 2010h [pers comm]; Frisoni 2010i [pers comm]; Frisoni 2010j [pers comm]; Frisoni 2010l [pers comm]; Frisoni 2010p [pers comm]; Frisoni 2010q [pers comm]; Frisoni 2010r [pers comm]; Frisoni 2010s [pers comm]; Frisoni 2016d [pers comm]; Frisoni 2017b [pers comm]), the authors of 12 included studies sent us the data needed to complete 2 x 2 tables (Carmichael 2007; Caroli 2007; deToledo-Morell 2004; Devanand 2007; Eckerstrom 2008; Erten-Lyons 2006; Herukka 2008; Jack 2000; Prestia 2013; VanderFlier 2005; Visser 2002; Wang 2006).



Figure 2 .
Figure 2. Risk of bias and applicability concerns summary: review authors' judgements about each domain for each included study


Structural magnetic resonance imaging for the early diagnosis of dementia due to Alzheimer's disease in people with mild cognitive impairment (Review)Copyright © 2020 The Cochrane Collaboration.
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.



Figure 3 .
Figure 3. Forest plot of total hippocampal volume measured by structural magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) for early diagnosis of dementia due to Alzheimer's disease in people with mild cognitive impairment.
Plot shows study-specific estimates of sensitivity and specificity (squares) with 95% confidence interval (black line) and study.
Studies are ordered according to the estimates of sensitivity.
TP: true positive; FP: false positive; FN: false negative; TN: true negative



Figure 4 .
Figure 4. Summary receiver operating characteristic (ROC) plot of total hippocampus volume measured by structural magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) for early diagnosis of dementia due to Alzheimer's disease in people with mild cognitive impairment.
Each point represents the pair of sensitivity and specificity from a study.
The solid black circle represents the pooled sensitivity and specificity, which is surrounded by a 95% confidence region (dashed line)



Figure 5 .Figure 6 .
Figure 5. Summary receiver operating characteristic curve (ROC) presenting direct comparisons of hippocampus le and hippocampus right



Figure 7 .
Figure 7. Summary receiver operating characteristic (ROC) plot of volume of lateral ventricles measured by structural magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) for early diagnosis of dementia due to Alzheimer's disease in people with mild cognitive impairment.
Each point represents the pair of sensitivity and specificity from a study.
The solid black circle represents the pooled sensitivity and specificity, which is surrounded by a 95% confidence region (dashed line)



Study population :
MCI according to Petersen 2001Selection criteria: the substudy included all participants for whom both lumbar puncture and a volumetric MRI scan had been performed.
Exclusion criteria not reported Study design: prospective longitudinal study Patient characteristics and setting Clinical presentations: MCI had an objective impairment in at least 1 cognitive domain (performance < 1.5 SD below age-adjusted values) and a CDR score of 0.5 Herukka 2008 Structural magnetic resonance imaging for the early diagnosis of dementia due to Alzheimer's disease in people with mild cognitive impairment (Review) Copyright © 2020 The Cochrane Collaboration.
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.


0 mmoL/L (N = 5), smoking (N = 6), angina pectoris (N = 1), transient ischaemic attack (N = 2), and lacunar infarction on MRI (N = 2)Number enrolled: 31Number available for analysis: 30 for the MTA estimation, 29 for the hippocampal volume estimation MRI manual method for estimation of hippocampal and parahippocampal gyrus volumes, MRI visual method for estimation of MTAManufacturer: Gyroscan ACS-II, PhilipsTesla strength:1.5    Assessment methods: data were transferred to a SUN workstation and the ROI were measured with ShowImage (developed at the Department of Clinical Physics and Informatics, Vrije Universiteit, Amsterdam, The Netherlands).
The brain structures were manually traced with a mouse-driven cursor.
Measurements were done with reference to an anatomical atlas(Duvernoy 1988).
Visual method according to Scheltens 1992.Description of positive cases definition by index test as reported: volumes and MTA rating were classified on the basis of the zeta score in tertiles; tertiles are based on a reference population of healthy participants.
A low tertile score was indicative of a small volume.
A cut-o was not specified.


Structural magnetic resonance imaging for the early diagnosis of dementia due to Alzheimer's disease in people with mild cognitive impairment (Review)Copyright © 2020 The Cochrane Collaboration.
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.


imaging for the early diagnosis of dementia due to Alzheimer's disease in people with mild cognitive impairment (Review) Copyright © 2020 The Cochrane Collaboration.
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.



Structural magnetic resonance imaging for the early diagnosis of dementia due to Alzheimer's disease in people with mild cognitive impairment (Review)
Copyright © 2020 The Cochrane Collaboration.
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.


]; Frisoni 2010d [pers comm]; Frisoni 2010f [pers comm]; Frisoni 2010g [pers comm]; Frisoni 2010k [pers comm]; Frisoni 2010m [pers comm]; Frisoni 2010n [pers comm]; Frisoni 2010o [pers comm]; Frisoni 2016a [pers comm]; Frisoni 2016b [pers comm]; Frisoni 2016c [pers comm]; Frisoni 2016e [pers comm]; Frisoni 2016f [pers comm]) or answered but provided no information



Cochrane Library Trusted evidence. Informed decisions. Better health. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews



Structural magnetic resonance imaging for the early diagnosis of dementia due to Alzheimer's disease in people with mild cognitive impairment (Review)
Copyright © 2020 The Cochrane Collaboration.
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.



Cochrane Library Trusted evidence. Informed decisions. Better health.



Structural magnetic resonance imaging for the early diagnosis of dementia due to Alzheimer's disease in people with mild cognitive impairment (Review) Copyright



Cochrane Library Trusted evidence. Informed decisions. Better health. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews



Structural magnetic resonance imaging for the early diagnosis of dementia due to Alzheimer's disease in people with mild cognitive impairment (Review)
Copyright © 2020 The Cochrane Collaboration.
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.



Cochrane Library Trusted evidence. Informed decisions. Better health.



Structural magnetic resonance imaging for the early diagnosis of dementia due to Alzheimer's disease in people with mild cognitive impairment (Review) Copyright



Cochrane Library Trusted evidence. Informed decisions. Better health. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews



total of Structural magnetic resonance imaging for the early diagnosis of dementia due to Alzheimer's disease in people with mild cognitive impairment (Review)
Copyright © 2020 The Cochrane Collaboration.
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.



Cochrane Library Trusted evidence. Informed decisions. Better health.



Medial temporal gyrus, lateral temporal lobe, amygdala, cortical grey matter


Three studies presented unclear concern for the 'reference standard' domain and the remaining 30 studies demonstrated low concern.
Structural imaging techniques and expertise needed to measure volume of brain areas, although potentially applicable, are not widely used in routine clinical practice.
In an Italian study, the choice of neuroimaging technique (CT, MRI, or PET) in the clinical pathway of dementia was driven as much by test availability, physicians' familiarity with the technology, and waiting time for patients



Suppl 1:S91-S102. Rana 2017 {published data only}
are grateful to Deirde Beecher, the former Information Specialist of Cochrane Multiple Sclerosis and Rare Diseases of the CNS for help in designing and conducting the literature search and to Anna Noel-Storr, Cochrane Dementia and Cognitive Improvement's Den Heijer T, Geerlings MI, Hoebeek FE, Hofman A, Koudstaal PJ, Breteler MM.
Use of hippocampal and amygdala volumes on magnetic resonance imaging to predict dementia in cognitively intact elderly people.
Archives of General Psychiatry 2006;63(1):57-62.
Duchesne S, Caroli A, Geroldi C, Collins DL, Frisoni GB.
Relating one-year cognitive change in mild cognitive impairment to baseline MRI features.
NeuroImage 2009;47(4):1363-70.
Eskildsen SF, Coupé P, García-Lorenzo D, Fonov V, Pruessner JC, Collins DL, Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.
Prediction of Alzheimer's disease in subjects with mild cognitive impairment from the ADNI cohort using patterns of cortical thinning.
NeuroImage 2013;65:511-21.
Grundman M, Sencakova D, Jack CR Jr, Petersen RC, Kim HT, Schultz A, et al.
Brain MRI hippocampal volume and prediction of clinical status in a mild cognitive impairment trial.
Journal of Molecular Neuroscience 2002;19(1-2):23-7.
Jacobs HI, Van Boxtel MP, Van der Elst W, Burgmans S, Smeets F, Gronenschild EH, et al.
Increasing the diagnostic accuracy of medial temporal lobe atrophy in Alzheimer's disease.
Journal of Alzheimer's Disease 2011;25(3):477-90.
Lan MJ, Ogden RT, Kumar D, Stern Y, Parsey RV, Pelton GH, et al.
Utility of molecular and structural brain imaging to predict progression from mild cognitive impairment to dementia.
Journal of Alzheimer's Disease 2017;60(3):939-47.
Minhas S, Khanum A, Riaz F, Alvi A, Khan SA.
A nonparametric approach for mild cognitive impairment to AD conversion prediction: results on longitudinal data.
IEEE Journal of Biomedical and Health Informatics 2017;21(5):1403-10.
Petersen RC, Aisen PS, Beckett LA, Donohue MC, Gamst AC, Harvey DJ, et al.
Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI): clinical characterization.
Neurology 2010;74(3):201-9.
Prins ND, Van der Flier WM, Brashear HR, Knol DL, Van de Pol LA, Barkhof F, et al.
Predictors of progression from mild cognitive impairment to dementia in the placebo-arm of a clinical trial population.
Journal of Alzheimer's Disease 2013;36(1):79-85.
Risacher SL, Shen L, West JD, Kim S, McDonald BC, Beckett LA, et al.
Longitudinal MRI atrophy biomarkers: relationship to conversion in the ADNI cohort.
Neurobiology of Aging 2010;31(8):1401-18.
[PUBMED: 20620664] Sluimer JD, Van der Flier WM, Karas GB, Van Schijndel R, Barnes J, Boyes RG, et al.
Accelerating regional atrophy rates in the progression from normal aging to Alzheimer's disease.
European Radiology 2009;19(12):2826-33. [PUBMED: 19618189] Sohn BK, Yi D, Seo EH, Choe YM, Kim JW, Kim SG, et al.
Comparison of regional gray matter atrophy, white matter alteration, and glucose metabolism as a predictor of the conversion to Alzheimer's disease in mild cognitive impairment.
Journal of Korean Medical Science 2015;30(6):779-87.
Relation between subcortical grey matter atrophy and conversion from mild cognitive impairment to Alzheimer's disease.
Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery, and Psychiatry 2016;87(4):425-32.
Zhou H, Jiang J, Lu J, Wang M, Zhang H, Zuo C, Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.
Dual-model radiomic biomarkers predict development of mild cognitive impairment progression to Alzheimer's disease.
Frontiers in Neuroscience 2019;12:1045.



Mean clinical follow-up: 2 years Flow and timing Withdrawals and losses to follow-up: none reported



Structural magnetic resonance imaging for the early diagnosis of dementia due to Alzheimer's disease in people with mild cognitive impairment



Clinical stroke excluded: yes deToledo-Morell 2004 Structural magnetic resonance imaging for the early diagnosis of dementia due to Alzheimer's disease in people with mild cognitive impairment



Description of positive cases definition by index test as reported



Mean clinical follow-up: 3 years Flow and timing Withdrawals and losses to follow-up: none reported



Structural magnetic resonance imaging for the early diagnosis of dementia due to Alzheimer's disease in people with mild cognitive impairment
the inclusion/exclusion criteria aimed at enrolling a broad sample of cognitively impaired outpatients who presented with memory complaints and were found to have cognitive impairment without dementia based on comprehensive evaluation, but without a specific cause for the cognitive impairment.
Exclusion criteria: diagnosis of dementia, schizophrenia, current major affective disorder, alcohol or substance dependence, history of stroke, cortical stroke or infarct 2 cm in diameter based on MRI, cognitive impairment entirely caused by medications, or other major neurologic illness, e.g.
Parkinson disease



Clinical stroke excluded: yes Co-morbidities: not reported Number enrolled: 141 Number available for analysis: 139
for estimation of the hippocampal volume, 138 for estimation of the entorhinal cortex volume Setting: tertiary university hospitals; the Memory Disorders Center at New York State Psychiatric Institute and Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center.
The majority (52%) were physician referred, 25% were self-referred, and 23% were referred by family or friends or other sources



Structural magnetic resonance imaging for the early diagnosis of dementia due to Alzheimer's disease in people with mild cognitive impairment



of positive cases definition by index test as reported: not specified



Structural magnetic resonance imaging for the early diagnosis of dementia due to Alzheimer's disease in people with mild cognitive impairment



Structural magnetic resonance imaging for the early diagnosis of dementia due to Alzheimer's disease in people with mild cognitive impairment
to validate the hypothesis that hippocampal atrophy predicts conversion from MCI to dementia, to relate baseline hippocampal volume to different forms of dementia, and to investigate the role of hippocampal side differences and rate of volume loss over time



Co-morbidities: not reported Number enrolled: 42 Number available for analysis: 42



Eckerstrom 2008 Structural magnetic resonance imaging for the early diagnosis of dementia due to Alzheimer's disease in people with mild cognitive impairment



Structural magnetic resonance imaging for the early diagnosis of dementia due to Alzheimer's disease in people with mild cognitive impairment



Structural magnetic resonance imaging for the early diagnosis of dementia due to Alzheimer's disease in people with mild cognitive impairment



Structural magnetic resonance imaging for the early diagnosis of dementia due to Alzheimer's disease in people with mild cognitive impairment



Erten-Lyons 2006 Structural magnetic resonance imaging for the early diagnosis of dementia due to Alzheimer's disease in people with mild cognitive impairment



Target condition: probable AD Prevalence of AD in the sample: 22



Structural magnetic resonance imaging for the early diagnosis of dementia due to Alzheimer's disease in people with mild cognitive impairment



Structural magnetic resonance imaging for the early diagnosis of dementia due to Alzheimer's disease in people with mild cognitive impairment



Frolich 2017 Structural magnetic resonance imaging for the early diagnosis of dementia due to Alzheimer's disease in people with mild cognitive impairment
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews sor proteins in CSF as biomarkers of AD (EP000002068151A1); Immunoglobulinbound Aβ and immunoglobulins-binding Aβ peptides in diagnosis and therapy of AD (WO002007082750A1); and Method of diagnosing acute cerebral ischemia (WO002008058764A1).
The remaining study authors declare that they have no competing interests.



Structural magnetic resonance imaging for the early diagnosis of dementia due to Alzheimer's disease in people with mild cognitive impairment



Structural magnetic resonance imaging for the early diagnosis of dementia due to Alzheimer's disease in people with mild cognitive impairment



Clinical stroke excluded: yes Co-morbidities: not reported Number enrolled: 31 Number available for analysis: 29



Galton 2005 Structural magnetic resonance imaging for the early diagnosis of dementia due to Alzheimer's disease in people with mild cognitive impairment



Structural magnetic resonance imaging for the early diagnosis of dementia due to Alzheimer's disease in people with mild cognitive impairment



morbidities: not reported Number enrolled: 195 Number available for analysis: 195
MCI defined according to the ADNI protocol and these criteria: memory complaint verified by study partner; abnormal memory function based on education-adjusted cut-o on the Logical Memory II subscale (delayed paragraph recall) from the WMS-R; MMSE score of24-30 (inclusive); CDR score of 0.5; and cognitive and functional impairment not severe enough to meet criteria for AD or dementia



of positive cases definition by index test as reported: not specified Gaser 2013 Structural magnetic resonance imaging for the early diagnosis of dementia due to Alzheimer's disease in people with mild cognitive impairment



Target condition: AD Prevalence of AD in the sample: 8
Setting: participants examined in Neurological Department of Kuopio University Hospital and participants in an ongoing population-based follow-up study in the University of Kuopio /21 (38% of enrolled participants)The results of the study suggest that cerebrospinal fluid biomarkers and MTA measured by volumetric MRI correlate with each other and are associated with impairment in memory performance.
These findings provide further evidence that both cerebrospinal fluid biomarkers and MRI of the medial temporal lobe structures are useful in the confirmation of early, perhaps even the preclinical diagnosis of AD



Structural magnetic resonance imaging for the early diagnosis of dementia due to Alzheimer's disease in people with mild cognitive impairment



Structural magnetic resonance imaging for the early diagnosis of dementia due to Alzheimer's disease in people with mild cognitive impairment



Number enrolled: 43 Number available for analysis: 43 Jack 2000 Structural magnetic resonance imaging for the early diagnosis of dementia due to Alzheimer's disease in people with mild cognitive impairment



Structural magnetic resonance imaging for the early diagnosis of dementia due to Alzheimer's disease in people with mild cognitive impairment



table: data
from the published article; in order to avoid duplicate, we only used the results of lateral ventricles for the purposes of this review



Structural magnetic resonance imaging for the early diagnosis of dementia due to Alzheimer's disease in people with mild cognitive impairment (Review)
Copyright © 2020 The Cochrane Collaboration.
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.



Structural magnetic resonance imaging for the early diagnosis of dementia due to Alzheimer's disease in people with mild cognitive impairment (Review)
Copyright © 2020 The Cochrane Collaboration.
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.



Structural magnetic resonance imaging for the early diagnosis of dementia due to Alzheimer's disease in people with mild cognitive impairment (Review)
Copyright © 2020 The Cochrane Collaboration.
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
CL, AS and RG conducted this research while being employees of Imperial College London, UK (CL, AS, RG) and IXICO plc, UK (CL, RG).
DR is a co-founder and scientific advisor of IXICO plc, UK, a provider of medical image analysis services.
CL is currently employed by Imagen Technologies, Inc, NY, USA.
This does not alter their adherence to Scientifc Reports policies on sharing data and materials.
European Union's Seventh Framework Programme under grant agreement no.
611005.
RG was funded by an Innovative UK (101685) grant.
Data collection and sharing for this project was funded by the ADNI and Department of Defense ADNI.



DOMAIN 2: Index Test All tests



Structural magnetic resonance imaging for the early diagnosis of dementia due to Alzheimer's disease in people with mild cognitive impairment (Review)
Copyright © 2020 The Cochrane Collaboration.
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.



Liu 2010 Structural magnetic resonance imaging for the early diagnosis of dementia due to Alzheimer's disease in people with mild cognitive impairment (Review)
Copyright © 2020 The Cochrane Collaboration.
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.



Description of positive cases definition by index test as reported: not specified



Structural magnetic resonance imaging for the early diagnosis of dementia due to Alzheimer's disease in people with mild cognitive impairment (Review)
Copyright © 2020 The Cochrane Collaboration.Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.The cortical volumes achieved higher diagnostic accuracy than did cognitive tests or cortical thickness.
Combining the volumes, thickness, and cognitive tests did not improve the test accuracy.
The volume of amygdala and caudate were independent variables in predicting conversion from MCI to dementia due to AD



Structural magnetic resonance imaging for the early diagnosis of dementia due to Alzheimer's disease in people with mild cognitive impairment (Review)
Copyright © 2020 The Cochrane Collaboration.
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.



Monge Argilés 2014 Structural magnetic resonance imaging for the early diagnosis of dementia due to Alzheimer's disease in people with mild cognitive impairment (Review)
Copyright © 2020 The Cochrane Collaboration.
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.



Structural magnetic resonance imaging for the early diagnosis of dementia due to Alzheimer's disease in people with mild cognitive impairment (Review)
Copyright © 2020 The Cochrane Collaboration.Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.Discriminant analysis was conducted in MCI separately for all volumetric measurements, for CSF biomarkers, and for volumetric and CSF biomarkers together.
Classification rate was available for single volumetric regions.
No references to a validation of the classification method NIA-AA criteria (McKhaan 2011).
It was not specified if only the core clinical criteria were used for the diagnosis of AD or if MRI results were also used to support the diagnosis



Methodological quality Item Authors' judgement Risk of bias Applicability concerns DOMAIN 1: Patient Selection



Index Test All tests Nesteruk 2016 (Continued) Structural magnetic resonance imaging for the early diagnosis of dementia due to Alzheimer's disease in people with mild cognitive impairment (Review)
Copyright © 2020 The Cochrane Collaboration.
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.



Ong 2015 Structural magnetic resonance imaging for the early diagnosis of dementia due to Alzheimer's disease in people with mild cognitive impairment (Review)
Copyright © 2020 The Cochrane Collaboration.Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.Selection criteria: entry criteria were MCI with presentation of progressive cognitive decline and at least 1 neuropsychological test score falling 1.5 SDs below published means.
Exclusion criteria not reported



Description of positive cases definition by index test as reported: cut



Structural magnetic resonance imaging for the early diagnosis of dementia due to Alzheimer's disease in people with mild cognitive impairment (Review)
Copyright © 2020 The Cochrane Collaboration.
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.



Index Test All tests



Structural magnetic resonance imaging for the early diagnosis of dementia due to Alzheimer's disease in people with mild cognitive impairment (Review)
Copyright © 2020 The Cochrane Collaboration.Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.Selection criteria: participants with MCI and clinical follow-up at 1 year were included.
Inclusion criteria for both cohorts: MMSE score 24-30, memory complaint reported by the patient, family member or physician, normal ADL, CDR memory score of 0.5 or 1 (total CDR = 0.5), memory loss measured by the WMS Logical Memory II for the ADNI cohort only, GDS score of ≤ 5, age ≥ 65 years, stable medication and good general health.
Exclusion criteria: meeting the DSM-IV and NINCDS-ADRDA criteria for AD, significant neurological or psychiatric illness other than AD and significant unstable systemic illness or organ failure



Pereira 2014 Structural magnetic resonance imaging for the early diagnosis of dementia due to Alzheimer's disease in people with mild cognitive impairment (Review)
Copyright © 2020 The Cochrane Collaboration.
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. study was supported by InnoMed (Innovative Medicines in Europe), an Integrated Project funded by the European Union of the Sixth Framework programme priority FP6-2004-LIFESCIHEALTH-5.
Data collection and sharing for this project was funded by the ADNI NIH Grant U01 AG024904.
This research was also supported by NIH Grants P30 AG010129 and K01 AG030514



Structural magnetic resonance imaging for the early diagnosis of dementia due to Alzheimer's disease in people with mild cognitive impairment



Platero 2019 Structural magnetic resonance imaging for the early diagnosis of dementia due to Alzheimer's disease in people with mild cognitive impairment



Structural magnetic resonance imaging for the early diagnosis of dementia due to Alzheimer's disease in people with mild cognitive impairment



Structural magnetic resonance imaging for the early diagnosis of dementia due to Alzheimer's disease in people with mild cognitive impairment
Selection criteria: patients included in the study were all MCI with prodromal AD taken from ADNI and TOMC databases, with available baseline MRI, FDG-PET and CSF sampling.
MCI who converted to non-AD dementia were excluded from the study.
Stable MCI coming from the same databases were included.
Exclusion criteria according to ADNI protocol for the ADNI cohort, as in Gaser 2013.
For the TOMC cohort all patients were selfreferred or referred by general practitioners or specialists, complaining of memory or other cognitive disturbances unaccountable by focal cerebral, physical, psychiatric, or metabolic diseases.
Patients who converted to non-AD dementia were excluded from the study.
Freesurfer software version 4.5.0 was used in ADNI and TOMC cohort for automated volume estimation, DISPLAY was used in the TOMC cohort for manual volume estimation, Medtronic Surgical Navigation Technologies tool was used in the ADNI cohort for semiautomated volume estimation.
Manual tracing was performed according the protocol of Pruessner 2000.
The semiautomated method was applied basing on fluid imaging transformation according to Christensen 1997



Prestia 2013 (ADNI) Structural magnetic resonance imaging for the early diagnosis of dementia due to Alzheimer's disease in people with mild cognitive impairment



Description of positive cases definition by index test as reported: hippocampal
(McKhann 1984) were computed specifically based on hippocampal volume performance in correctly identifying a group of 287 cognitively healthy elders taken from a reference normative database (manual segmentation) or a group of 66 ADNI cognitively healthy elders (both semi-automated and automated procedures).NINCDS-ADRDA criteria(McKhann 1984).
Baseline biomarker results were at the clinician's disposal; anyway progression to AD was ascertained basing on clinical criteria.



Structural magnetic resonance imaging for the early diagnosis of dementia due to Alzheimer's disease in people with mild cognitive impairment



Structural magnetic resonance imaging for the early diagnosis of dementia due to Alzheimer's disease in people with mild cognitive impairment



Structural magnetic resonance imaging for the early diagnosis of dementia due to Alzheimer's disease in people with mild cognitive impairment



Structural magnetic resonance imaging for the early diagnosis of dementia due to Alzheimer's disease in people with mild cognitive impairment



VanderFlier 2005 Structural magnetic resonance imaging for the early diagnosis of dementia due to Alzheimer's disease in people with mild cognitive impairment



Structural magnetic resonance imaging for the early diagnosis of dementia due to Alzheimer's disease in people with mild cognitive impairment



Structural magnetic resonance imaging for the early diagnosis of dementia due to Alzheimer's disease in people with mild cognitive impairment



Methodological quality Item Authors' judgement Risk of bias Applicability concerns DOMAIN 1: Patient Selection



Structural magnetic resonance imaging for the early diagnosis of dementia due to Alzheimer's disease in people with mild cognitive impairment
Study population: patients with MCI were selected from the Maastricht Memory Clinic, a university affiliated outpatient clinic for patients with cognitive impairments.
Patients were referred to the clinic by a general practitioner, a neurologist, or a psychiatrist Selection criteria: inclusion criteria were a score on the Global Deterioration Scale of 2 or 3. Exclusion criteria were age < 50 years, a baseline diagnosis of dementia according to the DSM-IV criteria, sensory impairment, psychosis, panic disorder, bipolar disorder, a score on the Hamilton depression rating scale-17 items (HDRS) > 22, or cognitive problems in relation to cerebrovascular events, neurodegenerative diseases (for example, Parkinson's disease or Huntington's disease), brain neoplasm, head trauma, drug intoxication, alcohol misuse, hypothyroid or hyperthyroid function, or vitamin deficiency



Methodological quality Item Authors' judgement Risk of bias Applicability concerns DOMAIN 1: Patient Selection
Mean clinical follow-up: 1.9 yearsFlow and timingWithdrawals explained and losses to follow-up: 1/31 cases (3%) for missing Information on the presence or absence of AD. 1 lost for the manual method Uninterpretable MRI results have not been reportedComparativeKey conclusions by the authorsThe ability to detect patients at high risk for AD among those with MCI increases when data on age and memory function are combined with measures of MTA.
Volumetry of the hippocampus is preferred, but qualitative rating of MTA is a good alternative.



Index Test All tests Visser 2002 (Continued) Structural magnetic resonance imaging for the early diagnosis of dementia due to Alzheimer's disease in people with mild cognitive impairment



Structural magnetic resonance imaging for the early diagnosis of dementia due to Alzheimer's disease in people with mild cognitive impairment



table: data
to complete 2 x 2 table provided by the study authors



Methodological quality Item Authors' judgement Risk of bias Applicability concerns DOMAIN 1: Patient Selection



Index Test All tests Wang 2006 (Continued) Structural magnetic resonance imaging for the early diagnosis of dementia due to Alzheimer's disease in people with mild cognitive impairment



Westman 2011 Structural magnetic resonance imaging for the early diagnosis of dementia due to Alzheimer's disease in people with mild cognitive impairment



Structural magnetic resonance imaging for the early diagnosis of dementia due to Alzheimer's disease in people with mild cognitive impairment
test the hypothesis that allocentric spatial memory is predictive of conversion from MCI to dementia due to AD Study population: patients with MCI recruited from the Cognitive Disorders Clinic, Hurstwood Park Neurological Centre, Haywards Heath, West Sussex, and from East Sussex Memory Assessment Service Selection criteria: initial screening blood tests were undertaken to exclude reversible causes of cognitive impairment, such as vitamin B12 deficiency and thyroid dysfunction.
Participants were exclud-



Wood 2016 Structural magnetic resonance imaging for the early diagnosis of dementia due to Alzheimer's disease in people with mild cognitive impairment
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews Uninterpretable MRI results have not been reportedComparativeKey conclusions by the authorsThe study provided the first evidence supporting the hypothesis that testing of allocentric spatial memory (the 4 Mountains test) was predictive of conversion from MCI to AD dementiaConflict of interestsThe study authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest Notes Source of funding: UK National Institute for Health Research (NIHR), Cambridge NIHR Biomedical Research Centre, BBSRC Research Grant (BB/M008975/1).



Structural magnetic resonance imaging for the early diagnosis of dementia due to Alzheimer's disease in people with mild cognitive impairment



Hippocampus total. Test 2. Hippocampus le . Test 3. Hippocampus right. Test 4. Medial temporal lobe total. Test 5. Medial temporal lobe le . Test 6. Medial temporal lobe right. Test 7. Lateral ventricles. Test 8. Enthorinal cortex total. Test 9. Enthorinal cortex le . Structural magnetic resonance imaging for the early diagnosis of dementia due to Alzheimer's disease in people with mild cognitive impairment



Structural magnetic resonance imaging for the early diagnosis of dementia due to Alzheimer's disease in people with mild cognitive impairment (Review)
Copyright © 2020 The Cochrane Collaboration.
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.



a
All studies were conducted at memory clinics or tertiary centres.
b Number of participants reported in this table are those used in the meta-analysis.
c Modified Mini Mental State Examination.
d Cases excluded from the analysis.
e Cases excluded a priori from the study.
f Median value was available instead of mean.



Table 2 . Included and excluded studies assessed for overlapping risk
(Continued)



Structural magnetic resonance imaging for the early diagnosis of dementia due to Alzheimer's disease in people with mild cognitive impairment (Review)
Copyright © 2020 The Cochrane Collaboration.
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative; MMSE: Mini Mental State Examinaation; NR: not reported; SD: standard deviation; VUMC: University Medical Centre, Amsterdam



Table 2 . Included and excluded studies assessed for overlapping risk (
Uncertain risk of overlap between these studies (Khan 2015 did not specify the number of participants in both ADNI and AddNeuroMed studies).



Table 3 . Index test: description and common abbreviations Structural magnetic resonance imaging for the early diagnosis of dementia due to Alzheimer's disease in people with mild cognitive impairment



Table 3 . Index test: description and common abbreviations (Continued) Structural magnetic resonance imaging for the early diagnosis of dementia due to Alzheimer's disease in people with mild cognitive impairment