Tau biomarkers in Alzheimer's disease: towards implementation in clinical practice and trials
Background Deposition of tau aggregates is a pathological hallmark of Alzheimer's disease that is closely linked both spatially and temporally to emergence of neurodegeneration and manifestation of clinical symptoms.
There is an urgent need for accurate PET, CSF, and plasma biomarkers of tau pathology to improve the diagnostic process in clinical practice and the selection of participants and monitoring of treatment effects in trials.
Innovative second-generation tau-PET tracers with high affinity and selectivity to tau pathology in Alzheimer's disease have enabled detection of tau pathology in medial temporal lobe subregions that are affected in the earliest disease stages.
Furthermore, novel but common tau spreading subtypes have been discovered using tau-PET, suggesting much greater interindividual differences in the distribution of tau pathology across the brain than previously assumed.
In the CSF biomarker field, novel phosphorylated tau (p-tau) assays have been introduced that better reflect tau tangle load than established CSF biomarkers of tau pathology.
The advent of cost-effective and accessible bloodbased biomarkers for tau pathophysiology (ie, p-tau181, p-tau217, and p-tau231) might transform the Alzheimer's disease field, as these biomarkers correlate with post-mortem Alzheimer's disease pathology, differentiate Alzheimer's disease from other types of dementia, and predict future progression from normal cognition and mild cognitive impairment to Alzheimer's disease.
In controlled investigational settings, improvements in tau-PET and biofluid p-tau markers have led to earlier disease detection, more accurate diagnostic methods, and refinement of prognosis.
The anti-tau therapy landscape is rapidly evolving, with multiple ongoing phase 1 and 2 trials of post-translational modification of tau, tau immunotherapy, tau aggregation inhibitors, and targeting production of tau and reduction of intracellular tau levels.
Neuroimaging and biofluid tau markers hold potential for optimising such clinical trials by augmenting participant selection, providing evidence of target engagement, and monitoring treatment efficacy.
Where next?
Major challenges to overcome are the high cost of tau-PET, partial sensitivity to detect early-stage Alzheimer's disease pathology, and off-target tracer binding.
Prospective validation studies of biofluid p-tau markers are needed, and assay-related preanalytical and analytical factors need further refinement.
Future studies should focus on demonstrating the diagnostic and prognostic accuracy of tau biomarkers-blood-based markers in particular-in non-tertiary settings, such as primary care, which is characterised by a diverse population with medical comorbidities.
Large-scale head-to-head studies are needed across different stages of Alzheimer's disease to determine which tau biomarker is optimal in various clinical scenarios, such as early diagnosis, differential diagnosis, and prognosis, and for aspects of clinical trial design, such as proving target engagement, optimising participant selection, and refining monitoring of treatment effects.

Introduction
Alzheimer's disease is a gradually progressive neuro degenerative disorder characterised by widespread deposition of amyloid β plaques in early stages, followed by aggregation of tau in the neocortex, neurodegeneration, cognitive decline, and ultimately dementia.
Within this complex pathological interplay of amyloid β, tau, neuroinflammation, and other factors, the aggregation of tau is key in the development of clinical Alzheimer's disease in view of the substantial neurotoxic effects of the protein.
A large postmortem burden of tau tangles is strongly associated with decreased cognitive function.
In vitro studies have shown that tau pathology can induce synaptic loss and decrease the function of neural networks,
Tau pathology is, thus, closely linked both spatially and temporally to emergence of neurodegeneration and manifestation of clinical symptoms.
Hence, accurate biomarkers of tau pathology offer great opportunities to improve diagnosis and prognostication in clinical practice and trial designs.
The protein tau is encoded by the MAPT gene, which is localised at chromosome 17q21.
Tau is predominantly expressed in neurons and has an important role in tubulin polymerisation and stabilisation of microtubules, which, in turn, are integrated parts of the cytoskeleton that support intracellular transport.
However, hyper phos phorylation of tau in Alzheimer's disease initiates the conformational change from natively unfolded tau into paired helical filament tau inclusions and neuro fibrillary tangles.
Currently, several invivo biomarkers are available that reflect different aspects of neurofibrillary tangle development,
The advent of bloodbased

Rapid Review
biomarkers of ptau has substantially changed the Alzheimer's disease landscape, suddenly making available a noninvasive, costeffective, and scalable tau biomarker.
In this Rapid Review, we provide an update on neuroimaging (PET) and biofluid (CSF and plasma) biomarkers of tau pathology in Alzheimer's disease, and discuss whether and how these tau biomarkers can support the clinical diagnostic and prognostic process.
We also describe the antitau drug development pipeline and discuss whether and how tau biomarkers can improve clinical trials of tautargeting agents.

Biomarkers of tau pathology in Alzheimer's disease

Tau-PET
TauPET tracers to measure insoluble tau aggregates that are formed in Alzheimer's disease were introduced in the mid2010s, and the first tauPET tracer, [¹⁸F] flortaucipir, was approved for clinical use by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in May, 2020.
Two important developments in tauPET research since 2020 include the possibility to visualise and quantify the earliest tau pathological changes in medial temporal lobe substructures, and the discovery of novel but common PETbased tau spreading subtypes.
First, informed by the neuropathological literature, two 2021 PET studies identified Brodmann area 35, the perirhinal cortex, as the earliest brain region affected by tau pathology in cognitively unimpaired individuals (figure
Tau load in Brodmann area 35 was associated with reduced functional connectivity to the medial prefrontal cortex and subtle worse memory performance,
Future studies to further investigate this mechanism will possibly benefit from the 2021 introduction of a threedimensional map of neurofibrillary tangle pathology constructed using exvivo MRI and histological imaging,
Second, PET studies conducted in 2021 have contributed to the improved understanding of heterogeneity in spatial tauPET patterns.
On the basis of neuropathological findings, the distribution of neurofibrillary tangle patho logy was initially considered to follow a spreading pattern from transentorhinal and entorhinal regions (Braak I-II), to limbic regions (Braak III-IV), and to neocortical regions (Braak V-VI).
A 2021 study that used an unbiased machinelearning algorithm demonstrated the presence of various PETbased tau spreading subtypes within the typical, memorypredominant, clinical spectrum of Alzheimer's disease, including limbic (33%), medial temporal lobe sparing (17%), posterior (31%), and left temporal (19%) subtypes.
All these tau spreading subtypes were asso ciated with distinct clinical presentations and cognitive trajectories.
This observation goes against the notion of fixed spreading patterns and instead suggests clear interindividual variability in the spreading patterns of tau pathology across the brain.

CSF-based tau biomarkers
It has been possible to detect ptau isoforms in CSF since the mid1990s, and these biomarkers are assumed to reflect the increased production, phos phorylation, and secretion of tau in the brain.
Although CSF ptau is widely used as a diagnostic biomarker in clinical practice nowadays, substantial improvements have been made in at least three different aspects of research (table ).
First, over the past three decades, tau phosphorylated at threonine 181 (ptau181) has been the predominant tau biomarker measured in CSF, but ptau assays produced from 2020 onwards have yielded novel insights into the early changes of tau metabolism.
For example, in individuals with autosomal dominant Alzheimer's disease, CSF ptau217 levels start to increase at the time of amyloid β plaque formation, measured with amyloidPET, while ptau205 levels rise at the first signs of neuronal dysfunction, measured with [¹⁸F] fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG)PET.
Another study showed that CSF ptau217 and ptau231 could differentiate amyloid βpositive from amyloid βnegative individuals at the preclinical stage of Alzheimer's disease.
econd, CSF ptau217 performed somewhat better than did CSF ptau181 in distinguishing Alzheimer's disease from other neurodegenerative disorders in observational studies, and it correlated more strongly to baseline and longitudinal tauPET measures.
These findings suggest that CSF ptau217 might provide the best diagnostic performance during the course of Alzheimer's disease compared with ptau181, ptau231, and other ptau isoforms.
Third, a mass spectrometry study investigated the role of the microtubule binding region (MTBR) domain.
Amounts in CSF of MTBRtau varieties-such as MTBR tau243, MTBRtau299, or MTBRtau354-are promising biomarkers to stage Alzheimer's disease and monitor target engagement in clinical trials.

Blood-based tau biomarkers
The emergence of costeffective and accessible blood based soluble ptau biomarkers-namely, ptau181, ptau217, and ptau231-represents a potential trans form ation for diagnostic and prognostic procedures and for clinical trial design in Alzheimer's disease (table).
]
Furthermore, plasma ptau levels

Rapid Review
progressively rise when approaching the estimated age of symptom onset-predicted by parental age at onset-in familial forms of Alzheimer's disease,
Down syndrome involves trisomy of chromosome 21, on which the APP gene is located.
Accordingly, ptau levels change over time in amyloid βpositive cognitively unimpaired individuals, whereas they remain relatively stable in amyloid βnegative cognitively unimpaired individuals.
]
mportantly, many of the aforementioned findings could be replicated in an ethnically more diverse population.
inally, although some ptau measures can be considered interchangeable,

Tau biomarkers in clinical practice
Regarding early detection of tau tangle pathology, tauPET has shown limited sensitivity,
6]
However, several challenges need to be addressed before large scale clinical implementation, particularly for plasma ptau.
These challenges include assayrelated factors (ie, specificity and selectivity), preanalytical factors (ie, metho dology, sample handling, and storage), and analytical factors (ie, internal and external quality control, development of reference material, and reference methods against which to calibrate the assays).
For the differential diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease versus other neuro degenerative disorders, tauPET has shown excellent discriminative accuracy, with a sensitivity and specificity of more than 90%.
In our opinion, we consider tauPET the best first biomarker investigation for the differential diagnosis of dementia syndromes, for which Alzheimer's disease is among the suspected causes.
Our belief is further supported by the regional information provided by tauPET, which enhances its diagnostic specificity.
Future studies will have to determine whether this advantage outweighs practical considerations, including exposure to radiation, costs, and limited accessibility-and method o logical issues such as offtarget binding to basal ganglia, choroid plexus, substantia nigra, meninges, and skull,
In the past 5 years, several observational and longitudinal studies have shown that increased tauPET signal at baseline is a strong predictor of cognitive decline over time,
Headtohead comparisons between biofluid and neuroimaging biomarkers of tau pathology are needed to establish the optimal prognostic tau biomarker.

Anti-tau drug development
Another area of promise for tau biomarkers is their potential role in development of tautargeting thera peutics.
The first generation of tautargeting interventions focused on either reversing posttranslation modifications that might drive the aggregation of tau, such as hyper phosphorylation, or on preventing the aggregation event directly.
Examples of such approaches include administration of nicotinamide to reduce tau phosphory lation, and use of curcumin, which binds to βsheet structures such as neurofibrillary tangles, to prevent protein aggregation.
Strategies that target post translation modifications or aggregation of tau have been extensively reviewed elsewhere.
wo fastdeveloping clinical strategies are tau im munotherapy and targeting the production of tau.

Rapid Review
Currently, a diverse set of antitau targeting strategies are in the drugdevelopment pipeline for Alzheimer's disease (figure
Tau biomarkers have played a part in the clinical development of these therapies.

Tau immunotherapies
Tau immunotherapy strategies are designed to neutralise tau through antibody binding, with the goal of blocking the propagation of tau across neurons to prevent largescale aggregation.
Most tau immunotherapies currently in development target the Nterminal or MTBR domain.
Several Nterminal targeting immunotherapies, such as semorinemab and gonsuranemab, and MTBRtargeting immunotherapies, such as Aadvac1 and zagotenemab, are currently undergoing or have completed phase 2 clinical trials (figure
7]
However, no effect was observed on other primary and secondary outcome

Table: Selection of relevant studies measuring p-tau levels in CSF or in plasma
Rapid Review measures of cognition in this trial, and semorinemab was not effective in earlier stages of Alzheimer's disease, for example in amyloid+ individuals with mild cognitive impairment.
The absence of clear clinical and biological benefits of tau immunotherapies, to date, has several possible explanations.
Although tau immunotherapy mainly targets extracellular tau to prevent the spread of tau, it probably does not directly target intracellular tau in neurons, where tau is thought to be most pathogenic.
urthermore, the presumed mechanism of action for tau immunotherapy-ie, blocking the transfer of tau between cells-could be imperfect, either because tau might be transported in exosomes, or in tunnelling nanotubes where antibodies cannot bind to tau, or because the dwell time of extracellular tau in the synaptic cleft might be too short for antibodies to efficiently neutralise most of the tau seeds.

Targeting production and degradation of intracellular tau
Targeting intracellular tau levels either by reducing tau production or by enhancing tau degradation might be a viable therapeutic strategy, as an alternative to immuno therapy.
As a rationale for this approach, increased tau production has been reported in people with Alzheimer's disease, which correlated with the level of amyloid β plaques.
ltiple strategies targeting intracellular tau are being pursued.
A potential therapeutic approach, which has yielded clinical benefits in other proteinopathies and neurological diseases,
After encouraging results in mice and cynomolgus monkeys,
The main goal of this study is to assess the safety and pharmacokinetic profile of the agent during a 13week treatment period.
Initial results have been encouraging, with strong reductions in CSF totaltau and ptau, accompanied by good tolerability.
Another tau targeting antisense oligonucleotide in development is NIO752 (NCT04539041) which has started clinical trials in progressive supranuclear palsy, but not yet in Alzheimer's disease.
Besides antisense oligonucleotides, treatments based on small interfering ribonucleic acids (siRNAs) are also being developed for reducing tau production.
Another means to reduce intracellular tau is by enhancing tau degradation.
An approach in earlystage development is proteolysistargeting chimeras, in which small molecules bind tau and target it to achieve protea somal degradation.
Overall proteasomal acti vation by Rapid Review small molecules, for example using PDE4 inhibition,
Novel PDE4 inhibitors are being tested in phase 1 trials (NCT02840279).
Although the biological processes that drive tau accumulation in Alzheimer's disease remain largely unknown, genetic risk factors for Alzheimer's disease, and associated biological changes in cholesterol metabolism, immune function, and endocytosis, can directly contribute to tau accumulation.
Inhibiting these aberrant upstream processes might halt, or revert, intracellular tau accumu lation.
A phase 2 clinical study (INVOKE2; NCT04592874) is ongoing to target one of these upstream processes, TREM2dependent microglial activation, with the aim to evaluate the efficacy of the TREM2activating antibody AL002 in early Alzheimer's disease.
In humaninduced pluripotent stem cell models of Alzheimer's disease, reducing brain cholesterol through the repurposed HIV drug efavirenz was shown to reduce intracellular ptau accumulation
On the basis of these findings, a phase 1b trial with midtohigh doses of efavirenz is currently ongoing for early Alzheimer's disease.
hese direct and indirect tautargeting therapies illustrate the diverse portfolio of tautargeting approaches.
Moreover, they demonstrate that tau biomarkers are increasingly being incorporated into clinical trials of tau targeting interventions.

Tau biomarkers to improve clinical trials
Tau biomarkers have the potential to optimise clinical trials of tautargeting therapeutics by assessing target engagement.
Additionally, tau biomarkers could help to augment participant selection, identify progressors versus nonprogressors, and monitor treatment efficacy.
Several points are important to consider with respect to use of tau biomarkers in clinical trials.
First, plasma ptau biomarkers are costeffective and scalable tools that might serve as a screening method to identify preclinical Alzheimer's disease among cognitively unimpaired individuals (figure
However, depending on the class of antitau treatment under study (due to different mechanisms of action), a positive blood based biomarker result should be confirmed using tauPET or CSF ptau.
Simulations of clinical trials have shown that this screening approach is likely to be cost effective, as the required sample size for showing clinical benefit
Another approach to participant selection might be to use the capability of tauPET to reveal the distribution of tau pathology across the entire brain and only select those individuals with earlystage tau pathology.
For example, in a 2021 phase 2 clinical trial of a monoclonal antibody against amyloid β (donanemab), individuals with high tau load were excluded, and findings showed that efficacy was highest in the tertile of participants with the lowest tauPET retention.

Immunotherapies

Tau production

Post-translational modifications

Aggregation inhibitors
No preclinical Alzheimer's disease Preclinical Alzheimer's disease PET is preferred over CSF or plasma CSF is preferred over plasma; plasma is preferred over PET CSF is preferred over plasma; plasma is preferred over PET PET is preferred over CSF or plasma Plasma pre-screen is followed by PET; PET is preferred over CSF

Target engagement Participant selection
Plasma pre-screen is followed by CSF; CSF is preferred over PET Plasma pre-screen is followed by CSF; CSF is preferred over PET Plasma pre-screen is followed by PET; PET is preferred over CSF The potential role of tau biomarkers in tau-targeted clinical trials regarding screening (A), identifying fast progressors (B), and improving target engagement and participant selection (C).
Progressors=individuals who will show clinical progression of the disease in the coming years.
Non-progressors=those whose disease will not progress.
Note that the people coloured in light blue in (B) represent the people with preclinical Alzheimer's disease from (A).
The balance between performance and feasibility indicates that tau PET is expected to provide the best performance for identifying progressors, whereas plasma biomarkers are expected to provide the highest faesibility.
CSF biomarkers are an intermediary between PET and plasma biomarkers.

Rapid Review
Second, given the relatively slow evolution of Alzheimer's disease from preclinical and amyloid+ mild cognitive impairment stages, it will be important to identify individuals whose disease will progress in the coming years (progressors) versus those who will remain stable (nonprogressors).
This process will ensure clinical trials are enriched with progressors, not only to shorten their duration but also to reduce the required sample size to detect effects of a drug on clinical outcomes.
Both increased tauPET signal and plasma or CSF ptau concentrations have been associated with faster cognitive decline over time.
A key aspect in selecting the optimal tau biomarker for this approach is the balance between biomarker performance and feasibility.
In terms of performance, such as the ability to accurately predict shortterm cognitive decline, current published work suggests a slight advantage of tauPET over the biofluid tau biomarkers, whereas bloodbased biomarkers and CSF markers are more costeffective and timeeffective compared with tauPET (figure
Drugs altering the production or posttranslational modification of tau target the very early stages of tau pathophysiology.
Since tauPET is established for measuring the forms of tau in later stages of development, insoluble tau aggregates,
CSF ptau is probably superior to the more peripheral plasma ptau markers because it more closely reflects brain processes.
By contrast, tauPET is possibly the optimal marker in trials of aggregation and most types of immuno therapies.
For example, some immunotherapies can clear tau from both CSF and the parenchyma.
Thus, reduced tauPET signal, measuring pathological changes in the brain directly, will probably show stronger correspondence with treatment efficacy than will reduced amounts in CSF of ptau, which are a more distant measure of brain pathology.
Another important feature of tauPET is that it shows a gradual increase in tau levels from the early stages of Alzheimer's disease until the advanced stages,
9]

Conclusions and future directions
The advent of costeffective and accessible bloodbased biomarkers for tau pathology represents a substantial transformation in the field of Alzheimer's disease research.
These markers have been shown to correlate with post mortem tau pathology, differentiate Alzheimer's disease from other types of dementia, and track disease progression over time.
Relevant developments in the tauPET field since 2020 include detection of tau pathology in medial temporal lobe subregions that are affected in early Alzheimer's disease, and the discovery of novel but common PETbased tau spreading subtypes.
There are several challenges for moving towards implementation of these biomarkers in clinical practice and trials.
These include high costs, limited accessibility, restricted sen Ωsitivity to detect earlystage Alzheimer's disease pathology, and offtarget binding (for tauPET biomarkers), and stability, reliability, and prospective validation (for biofluid tau biomarkers).
Nevertheless, these biofluid and neuro imaging tau markers hold great potential for improving diagnosis and prognostication in Alzheimer's disease, and for optimising clinical trials by providing evidence of target engagement, augmenting trial participant selection, and accurately tracking treatment effects over time.
Future studies must address current knowledge gaps.
For bloodbased biomarkers, diagnostic and prognostic performance should be assessed in less well controlled settings, such as nontertiary hospitals and primary care, in which access to additional diagnostic testing (eg, extensive cognitive assessment or biomarkers) is scant.
The patient population seeking medical attention at local primary care units differs greatly from people treated at specialised memory clinics, in terms of diversity (ie, ethnicity, socio eco nomic status, and age), medical comorbidities (ie, vascular pathology, coronary heart disease, and other protein opathies), and a lower prevalence of neuro degen erative conditions.
All these factors affect the accuracy of prediction models.
It will also be important for future prospective studies to be undertaken utilising consecutive measurements, reflecting realworld clinical practice, rather than following the approach of academic studies, in which samples are analysed in a single batch with only minor variations in study protocols, storage, and transfer of samples.
Furthermore, future headtohead studies are crucial to determine which tau biomarker is most appropriate in each of the clinical scenarios, such as early diagnosis, differential diagnosis, and prognosis, and across different stages of Alzheimer's disease.
Tau biomarkers should also be compared against biomarkers of amyloid β and neurodegeneration, such as structural MRI or neuro filament light chain in CSF or plasma.
Multiple aspects of Alzheimer's disease pathophysiology can be measured from a single sample of CSF or plasma, and the most parsimonious combination of biomarkers

Search strategy and selection criteria
We searched PubMed and Embase from June 1, 2019, to April 1, 2022, for publications on tau biomarkers in Alzheimer's disease and anti-tau clinical trials, using the terms "Tau-PET", "p-tau", "CSF", "plasma", "Alzheimer", "dementia", "mild cognitive impairment", "controls", "cognitively normal", and "clinical trial".
Only articles in English were reviewed.
The final reference list was generated on the basis of originality and relevance to the scope of this Rapid Review.

Rapid Review
needs to be established to generate the optimal diagnostic or prognostic algorithm, with a focus on individualised diagnostics and prognostics.
This future step would improve personalised medicine for individuals with Alzheimer's disease.
Finally, although substantial progress has been made, more re search is needed to inform tau targeted clinical trial design.

Contributors
All authors contributed to literature review, interpretation of the literature, and writing of the report.

Declaration of interests
OH has acquired research support for Lund University from Avid Radiopharmaceuticals, Biogen, Eli Lilly, Eisai, GE Healthcare, Pfizer, and Roche.
In the past 2 years, he has received consultancy and speaker fees from Roche, Genentech, Siemens, Biogen, Alzpath, and Cerveau.
RO and RVDK declare no competing interests.



Figure 1 :
Figure 1: Tau PET signal in the medial temporal lobe Schematic overview of important medial temporal structures (A) and a tau-PET scan using [¹⁸F]RO948 in a woman aged 60-70 years with subjective cognitive decline, an APOE ε3/ε4 genotype, and a mini-mental state examination (MMSE) score of 29 (B).
The tau-PET pattern indicates a significant tau load in the medial temporal lobe, whereas the neocortex is relatively spared.
Since the medial temporal lobe is among the earliest affected brain regions in Alzheimer's disease and shows a tight association with memory performance, this figure demonstrates the potential of tau-PET to study the early manifestation of tau aggregates in Alzheimer's disease for research purposes or selection of participants.
SUVR=standard uptake value ratio.



Figure 2 :
Figure 2: Tau-targeting drug development pipeline and potential use of tau biomarkers in trialsProposed mode of actions for the different drugs are indicated, and for immunotherapies the antigen site on tau is indicated.
Drugs that target other post-translational modifications of tau, such as acetylation and glycosylation, are currently being tested in trials for tauopathies other than Alzheimer's disease and are, therefore, not shown in this figure.
*Post-hoc analysis identified subgroups of responders, but additional trials are required.
†Phase 2 testing of semorinemab in individuals with amyloid+ mild cognitive impairment and early Alzheimer's disease yielded negative results, whereas another phase 2 study in individuals with moderate Alzheimer's disease showed slowing of decline on one of the two primary cognitive endpoints.



PlasmaAFigure 3 :
Figure 3: The potential role of tau biomarkers in tau-targeting clinical trialsThe potential role of tau biomarkers in tau-targeted clinical trials regarding screening (A), identifying fast progressors (B), and improving target engagement and participant selection (C).
Progressors=individuals who will show clinical progression of the disease in the coming years.
Non-progressors=those whose disease will not progress.
Note that the people coloured in light blue in (B) represent the people with preclinical Alzheimer's disease from (A).
The balance between performance and feasibility indicates that tau PET is expected to provide the best performance for identifying progressors, whereas plasma biomarkers are expected to provide the highest faesibility.
CSF biomarkers are an intermediary between PET and plasma biomarkers.