Locus coeruleus in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease: A systematic review
The locus coeruleus (LC) is a nucleus in the brain stem producing noradrenaline.
While cognitive decline in Alzheimer's disease (AD) has primarily been related to cholinergic depletion, evidence indicates extensive LC degeneration as its earliest pathological marker.
The current study aimed to systematically evaluate current evidence investigating the role of the LC in the pathogenesis of AD.
A systematic search of the literature was performed on electronic databases including PubMed and Web of Science.
Twelve animal, human post mortem, and human imaging studies were included in this review.
Screening, data extraction, and quality assessment were undertaken following Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses guidelines for preferred reporting of systematic reviews.
Significant associations were identified between LC changes and cognitive decline.
Significant reductions in fiber density, neuronal number, and LC volume were seen to correlate with other pathological degenerative markers.
Current evidence indicates an important role of the LC in pathogenesis of AD and suggests its potential in both diagnosis and treatment of AD.
This systematic review advances our understanding of the role of the LC in AD by synthesizing available evidence, identifying research gaps, highlighting methodological challenges, and making recommendations for future work.

Introduction
The locus coeruleus (LC) is located in the posterior area of the pons in the lateral floor of the fourth ventricle.
The name originates from the Latin word for "blue spot," which arises from the pigment in its cells.
The loss of neurons in the LC and thalamic relay nuclei has been demonstrated to be a pathological characteristic of AD.
Another study reported degeneration and enlarged cell bodies, and a significant reduction (50%) in cell number, of LC cells in people with AD compared to those without AD.
Evidence indicates that restoration of NA slows neurodegeneration in animal models.
However, the contribution of the LC and NA to cognitive decline in disease progression in AD has been underappreciated and underinvestigated due to methodological difficulties of directly measuring LC activity.
Recent imaging work suggests that direct visualization of the LC degeneration is possible.
The work of detection of LC degeneration by neuroimaging has important implications for our understanding of the role of the LC in disease progression.
This has potential implications for the development of new treatment for patients with AD targeting the locus coeruleus-noradrenergic (LC-NA) pathway to restore NA, increase NA transmission, and reverse effects on cognition.

1.1.1
The LC-NA system in AD
The LC is the major source of NA, a neuromodulator that has a key role in cognition, mood, and behavior.
While cognitive decline in AD has primarily been related to dysfunction within the cholinergic system in the nucleus basalis, there is considerable research evidence that dysfunction in the LC is important also.
This evidence indicates that there is extensive LC degeneration in AD
It has been reported that as pathological changes in the LC occur early in AD, they may be related to the early cognitive changes in the disorder.
LC degeneration is progressive throughout the course of the illness and there is a positive correlation between the duration of illness and the magnitude of LC neuron loss.
Furthermore, there are positive correlations between the magnitude of LC neuron loss and dementia severity.
Therefore, the early vulnerability of the LC to AD is of considerable clinical significance, as this raises the possibility that the changes of the LC activity may provide early detection markers to assist clinical diagnosis.
Alongside the reduced LC neuron density, mean brain NA concentration is lower in AD than in healthy controls
Experimental research indicates that loss of NA incites a neurotoxic proinflammatory condition, reduces amyloid beta (Aβ) clearance, and negatively impacts cognition-recapitulating key aspects of AD.
Neurofibrillary changes in the LC have also been found to occur in mild cognitive impairment (MCI).
Therefore, the LC-NA pathway could potentially be an early pharmacotherapeutic target for treating AD by modifying tau deposition.

LC and inflammation
A recent Lancet review suggests that AD pathogenesis is not restricted to the neuronal compartment but includes strong interactions with immunological mechanisms in the brain.
Emerging evidence suggests that inflammation has a causal role in disease pathogenesis and understanding the control of interactions between the immune system and the nervous system might be key to the prevention or delay of most late-onset CNS diseases.
In AD, neuroinflammation is not a passive system activated by emerging senile plaques and neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs), but instead contributes as much (or more) to pathogenesis as do plaques and tangles themselves.
The important role of neuroinflammation is supported by published genome-wide association studies (GWAS) of late-onset AD showing that the immune and inflammatory response pathway is the most substantial, accounting for 11 of the 22 genes identified to date with a rare mutation in receptor expression on myeloid cells 2, giving a 3-fold increase in the risk of AD.
NA released from LC projections acts on adrenergic receptors expressed on neurons and glial cells, including microglia and astrocytes.
While the number of cells in the LC and concentration of NA in the brain decrease during normal aging,
Thus, early degeneration of the LC and subsequent loss of NA-mediated innervation could substantially promote the inflammatory response to any stimulus, including Aβ. Experimental loss of NA compromises microglial migration and Aβ phagocytosis in vivo, suggesting that a loss of NA increases not only Aβ deposition, but also inflammation.
Remarkably, restoration of NA reverses these effects and slows neurodegeneration in animal models.
ere has been growing research interest in the role of the LC in the progression of AD.
However, research work has been conducted using different study designs and methodologies; there has been no work which has reviewed and synthesized all available evidence.
This project review aims to address this gap to allow for a more comprehensive understanding of how the LC plays a role in the pathogenesis of AD.
The work followed the standard protocol for a systematic review, in which a systematic method was used to identify, select, and critically appraise available studies investigating the role of the LC in AD, and to collect and analyze data from the studies that are selected in this review.

Results
Overall, the initial search identified 63 relevant papers.
After abstract and title screening and duplicate removal, this was reduced to 41 papers and the subsequent full-text articles were retrieved.
After fulltext screening, a total of 22 papers were further check for eligibility and a total number of 12 papers were included in this review.
Figure

Correlations between LC and other characteristic AD pathologies as observed in animal studies
Table
All four animal studies included in this review comprised a cohort study design using the mice/rat model of AD, with subjects housed under standardized conditions and infused with a human tau protein expresser.
These were analyzed alongside non-infused wild-type (WT) mice controls, to detect significant differences in LC volume, neuronal numbers, network connections, fiber numbers, and axonal density.
In both the Ghosh et al.
Subjects were anaesthetized, brains extracted, and specimens sectioned and cut.
Immunohistochemistry (IHC) was performed with suitable staining technique; for example, stereotaxically injected with 1% toluidine blue.
From the IHC, Ghosh et al. found that the axonal density and neuron number within the LC was significantly reduced due to the presence of tau, shown as the purple specks.
This suggests that Braak's hypothesis that human AD originates from LC pretangle tau stages is plausible.
e cognitive decline shown in odor discrimination tests is similar to human odor deficits seen with aging and preclinical AD.
When initiated in aged rats, pretangle stages were seen to progress rapidly and cause significant LC cell loss and these age-related outcomes are associated with more severe learning impairment consistent with memory decline in Braak stages III and IV when LC neurons are also lost.
Rorabaugh et al.
In these rats, hyperphosphorylated tau was detected in the LC prior to accrual in the entorhinal cortex (EC) or hippocampus, and tau pathology in the LC was negatively correlated with noradrenergic innervation in the EC.
They also displayed progressive loss of hippocampal noradrenaline levels and LC fibers.
These results, alongside the other experimental studies, indicate that there are existing animal models that can suitably and accurately be used to study and predict LC pathology and dysfunction early in AD progression, suggesting a substantial window of opportunity for development of LC/NA-based therapeutics.
Key findings from all four studies support LC loss in AD.
Subjects infused with the tau or amyloid-producing gene presented with significantly reduced axonal/fiber density, neuron number, neural activity, and connectivity compared to WT subjects.
This homogeneity allows a reliable conclusion to be made that there is a strong association between LC degeneration and characteristic AD pathology.

1.2.2
Correlations between LC and other characteristic AD pathologies as observed in human post mortem studies Table
All three post mortem studies used stereological analysis of human brainstems conducted by Theofilas et al.,
Five studies were found from the literature search, which all used neuromelanin-sensitive magnetic resonance imaging (NM-MRI).
Olivieri et al.,
To visualize the LC, high-resolution T1-TSE NM-sensitive images were acquired perpendicular to the posterior border of the brainstem, from the lower part of the pons to the upper part of the midbrain, covering the entire LC.
All neNM-sensitive images were analyzed, and contrast ratios or intensities compared.
This was performed by manually defining regions of interest and use of a reference region for the normalization of the signal between subjects, avoiding any other structure that could be considered "bright" such as the substantia nigra.
This normalization allowed the direct comparison of intensity values between subjects.
Software was used to automatically determine the brightest connected voxels bilaterally, which were considered the LC areas.
The appropriate location of voxels in the LC area was checked visually on each image and data was analyzed using SPSS 24.
Olivieri et al. used the LC signal intensity (LC-I) to assess the LC integrity in AD and controls.
All others averaged the left and right values of the LC signal intensity and LC contrast ratios (LC-CR) were calculated using the following equation: LC-CR = (SI LC -SI PT ) / SI PT , where SI LC is the averaged signal intensity the left and right LC, and SI PT is the signal intensity of the adjacent pons, PT.
LC-CR/LC-I were found to be significantly reduced in patient groups with AD compared to the healthy control group in all six studies.
Takahashi et al. found that there was no significant difference in the LC-CR among the AD and MCI groups, suggesting signal attenuation in the LC of patients with AD or with MCI whose pathology may or may not eventually convert to AD.
A negative association between LC MRI contrast and levels of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) amyloid but not with CSF tau was found.
These results provide first evidence for a direct association between LC MRI contrast using in vivo T to-pons ratio within the LC and results showed that the section located 10 millimeters below the inferior colliculus has the highest potential in differentiating between healthy controls and patients, with the contrast-ratio difference between groups of 12.3% and effect size of 1.577.
This method is a promising tool to aid AD diagnosis workup for clinical application.
Olivieri et al. found that the LC-I was decreased in AD regardless of typical and atypical presentation.
In contrast to Betts et al., LC-I between groups varied independent of amyloid load, and these conflicting findings likely reflect the variations between LC segments and relationships with CSF biomarker status.
Betts et al., for instance, found no significant associations in the lower LC third with amyloid nor tau.
It should also be noted that both studies used different measures of LC and both have a relatively small number of subjects studies, which may also contribute to these different findings.
The LC-I was correlated with memory performance of typical AD.
This supports a critical role the LC plays in the pathogenesis of AD and may thus be a potential therapeutic target to prevent cognitive decline.

Discussion
Preclinical studies suggest the potential for NA-enhancing therapies to reduce neuroinflammation and amyloid burden, and to ameliorate cognitive impairment; clinical observations of AD patients also suggest a potential to impact behavioral symptoms.
It has even been proposed that compensatory mechanisms for NA depletion may in fact produce an elevated NA in some cases of AD.
ese results suggest that AD patients may benefit from therapies that modulate levels of noradrenalin and serotonin, presenting a possible window for effective treatment and the identification of potential therapeutic targets prior to the onset of cognitive decline.
erefore, detection of LC degeneration by neuroimaging has important implications for our understanding of the role of the LC in disease progression and to the development of new pharmatherapeutic targets.
The imaging, inflammatory, and physiological markers can be used for monitoring of these pharmacotherapeutic interventions targeting the LC-NA pathway.
Due to the widespread clinical use of drugs with a NA-based mechanism of action in other medical conditions, immediate opportunities to repurpose existing medications for AD will arise.
Such drugs could be selective noradrenaline reuptake inhibitors,

Conclusions

DETAILED METHODS AND RESULTS

Search strategy
The work followed the standard protocol for a systematic review, in which a systematic method was used to identify, select, and critically appraise available studies investigating the role of the LC in AD, and to collect and analyze data from the studies that are selected in this review.
A 3. Search and review authors known to have conducted research.
One author was contacted in the field to obtain unpublished data, which has since been published.

Inclusion/exclusion criteria
Studies selected in this review included animal, human post mortem, and human imaging studies.
Studies were included based on the following criteria:
Inclusion criteria:
-Study design: longitudinal, cross-sectional, or cohort studies;
-Study populations: animal models of AD or patients with AD and/or controls;
-Reported measures of the LC in AD and/or controls;
-Published in English language;
-Full-text paper accessible.

Exclusion criteria:
-There was no measure of the LC loss/change; -There were no AD models or populations with AD; -Published in languages other than English;
-Only abstracts accessible.



CONTEXT 1 . 2 . 3 .
A number of studies have demonstrated significant correlations between LC neuron loss, decreased cortical NA levels, and severity and duration of dementia in RESEARCH IN Systematic Review: A systematic search of the literature was performed on online databases including PubMed and Web of Science.
This included studies published in English before December 2019.
The Population, Intervention, Comparison, Outcomes and Study framework was used to guide the search strategy.
Studies selected in this review included animal, human post mortem, and human imaging studies.
Studies were included based on the outlined inclusion/exclusion criteria.
Interpretation: To our knowledge, this is the first systematic review to investigate the role of the locus coeruleus (LC) in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease (AD) patients.
Analysis of animal, human post mortem, and human imaging studies strongly indicates a link between LC changes and cognitive decline.
Significant reductions in fiber density, neuronal number, and LC volume were seen to correlate with other pathological degenerative markers.
This leads to the potential implications in the use of the LC in both diagnosis and treatment of AD.
These results suggest that AD patients may benefit from therapies that modulate levels of noradrenalin and serotonin, presenting a possible window for effective treatment and the identification of potential therapeutic targets prior to the onset of cognitive decline.
This systematic review advances our understanding of the role of the LC in AD by synthesizing available evidence, identifying research gaps, highlighting methodological challenges, and making recommendations for future work.
Future Directions: Data from this systematic review can be used to inform future work, in which imaging techniques can be used to collect biological and physiological markers of LC activity, which can then be developed for disease diagnosis, and for monitoring of preventative and therapeutic targets for AD.
Future research directions include clinical trials of noradrenaline (NA) pathway targeting pharmacological therapies to provide proof-of-concept.
Such research explores the potential for future intervention strategies, such as the use of pharmacotherapeutic interventions targeting the locus coeruleus-noradrenergic (LC-NA) pathway to restore NA, increase NA transmission, and reverse effects on cognition, which may lead to changes in treatment approaches for patients with AD.


Ahnaou et al. found robust functional changes in the hippocampus of mice seeded with tau aggregates in the deeper brainstem LC area, with decreased neuronal activity as well as alterations in functional connectivity of specific neural networks.
This suggests the potential impairment in synaptic plasticity.
Findings of these works highlight to the field the relevance of development of tau pathology in the LC in the early stages of AD and understanding the causal factors for functional deterioration.
Liu et al. 27 conducted a randomized, case-controlled study with mice carrying mutant amyloid precursor protein (APP) and presenilin-1 genes (APP/PS1 double transgenic mice).
APP/PS1 mice were assigned to two groups according to age: young mice (5-6 months old) and aged mice (16-17 months old), and age-matched WT mice were used as controls.
IHC for tyrosine hydroxylase (TH), marker of catecholaminergic neurons in the LC, revealed that APP/PS1 mice had 23% fewer cells in F I G U R E 1 PRISMA (Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses) flow diagram of study selection.
AD, Alzheimer's disease; LC, locus coeruleus the LC and more cell bodies of neurons positive for TH compared to aged WT mice.
The pathological alterations observed here reflect those in human brains with AD after death, further suggesting that APP/PS1 double transgenic mice can closely model pathological changes in AD.


Animal studies and human post mortem studies found LC degeneration, marked by significant reductions in fiber density and neuronal number.
Human imaging studies of AD patients indicates a significant correlation between LC-CR and cognitive impairment.
This suggests the potential for NA-enhancing therapies to reduce neuroinflammation and amyloid burden, and to ameliorate cognitive impairment.
All this suggests the possibility that treatments targeting the LC-NA pathway may have the potential to delay or prevent AD-related pathology, proposing a new paradigm for prognosis and therapy.
Detection of LC degeneration by neuroimaging has important implications for our understanding of the role of the LC in disease progression and to the development of new pharmatherapeutic targets.
Data from this systematic review can be used to inform future work, in which imaging techniques can be used to collect biological and physiological markers of LC activity, which can then be developed for disease diagnosis, and for monitoring of preventative and therapeutic targets for AD.
This suggests the potential for future intervention strategies, such as the use of pharmacotherapeutic interventions targeting the LC-NA pathway to restore NA, increase NA transmission, and reverse the effects on cognition, which may lead to changes in treatment approaches for patients with AD.
But recent advances in neuroimaging have offered the opportunity for direct visualisation of LC degeneration.
Detection of the LC by neuroimaging has been used by several imaging studies.
Five studies were found from the literature search, which all used NM-MRI.
All neuromelanin-sensitive images were analyzed, and contrast ratios or intensities compared.
This was performed by manually defining regions of interest and use of a reference region for the normalisation of the signal between subjects.
LC-CR/LC-I were found to be significantly reduced in patient groups with AD compared to the healthy control group in all six studies.
These results provide first evidence for a direct association between LC MRI contrast using in vivo T1-weighted imaging and CSF biomarkers of AD pathology.
These findings mimic what has been observed in post-mortem studies, which show a reduction in LC cell count in AD brains compared to those without cognitive impairment.
Studies also sought to determine the location of the highest LC:pons ratio within the LC demonstrating promise as a tool to aid AD diagnosis.



- 1 . 2 .
systematic search of the literature was performed on online databases including PubMed and Web of Science.
This included studies published in English before December 2019.
The PICOS framework was used to guide the search strategy: Population and comparison: -Individuals who meet diagnostic criteria for AD and/or controls -Animal models of AD and/or controls Outcomes of interest: Observational longitudinal or -Cross-sectional or -Cohort studies.
The search strategy developed from the framework above, is outlined below.
Scope search on Medline and Web of Science for studies including keywords: "locus coeruleus[Title] OR locus ceruleus[Title] AND alzheimer's[Title]" Search reference lists of relevant articles to identify appropriate references and journals.


Predefined data points were entered into a structured data extraction table.
Studies were grouped according to animal studies, human post mortem studies, and human imaging studies.
Key study characteristics-including study design, sample and age range of subjects, and outcome measures used to identify the LC were extracted from each study.
For this review, quantitative measurements of the LC


Data extraction from four selected animal studies Data extraction from three selected post mortem studies



Table 3
Data extraction from five human imaging studies


Until relatively recently, drug discovery in the field of AD has been focused on therapies that reduce the levels of soluble or insoluble Aβ in the brain; however, numerous high-profile late-stage failures in clinical trials have resulted in a shift in focus to reducing the levels of tau in the brain far earlier, in the presymptomatic stage of the disease.