Long-term medical costs of Alzheimer’s disease: matched cohort analysis
Medical costs associated with Alzheimer's Disease (AD) are characterised by uncertainty and often presented in a format unsuitable for decision modelling.
We set out to estimate long-term medical costs attributable to AD compared to the general population for use in decision modelling.
We used multiple logistic regressions to generate propensity scores to match 26,951 incident cases of AD with 26,951 people without AD, identified from Danish hospital and medication registries.
Costs were available for up to 11 years for each individual, representing costs for ten years before and five years after diagnosis.
Generalised estimating equations were employed to investigate the effect of having AD on primary care, medication, hospital and total costs in the matched cohort.
We also explored the impact of other socio-economic and demographic factors on healthcare costs.
We report costs by year to diagnosis, from ten years before to five after.
AD was associated with significantly higher costs, driven by medication and hospital costs, especially around the time of diagnosis.
Mean total medical cost was €4,996 higher for AD than for the control group in year of diagnosis, after which primary and hospital costs decreased to pre-diagnostic levels.
AD had higher attributable primary care costs in years preceding diagnosis.
Reporting AD-attributable costs by year to diagnosis can be useful for use in decision-modelling.
Medical costs attributed to AD are driven by diagnostic procedures and medication, and the impact of AD on medical costs may not be as high or prolonged as previously suggested.

Introduction
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the most common type of dementia, accounting for approximately 60 percent of all people with dementia
It is a chronic condition that disproportionally afflicts the elderly and is characterised by the decline of cognitive functions and affects the person's ability to perform everyday tasks
AD is often associated with high medical costs, and the increase in dementia -and ADprevalence due to ageing populations is expected to put significant pressure on health systems
Efficient allocation of healthcare resources in this area has become a priority for policy makers
Cost estimates of AD vary dramatically, depending on the setting, the perspective and the method used to estimate them.
In a systematic review of AD costs, Schaller et al. report community-based costs vary between US$3,000 and $18,000 per person per year
Another systematic review of AD costs in Europe reported a variation between €6,000 and €64,000
The reason for such variation can be attributed to the setting in which the costs occur, but are also due to a number of methodological issues, which have been previously documented, including classification of costs
Economic evaluation, and in particular decision-analytic modelling, help inform resource allocation decisions, but do require a certain level data accuracy to produce informative results.
While average annual estimates, such as described above, might be useful for indicating the economic burden of AD, they are less helpful in application for economic evaluation, and in particular, decision-analytic modelling
Costs associated with AD/dementia are often collected over a short period of time
In a recent systematic review of 27 studies
Decision modelling often compares healthcare costs between people with and without AD.
A systematic review of 16 cost studies found that only two reported costs for non-dementia controls
Comparison of costs in AD and control groups is also important in order to ascertain that costs are not simply reflecting the effect of ageing on utilisation of health care
Cost estimates also often include societal and informal costs, as well as direct medical costs
Decision modelling often requires inputs specific to the level of care provided (primary, secondary, etc), and presenting associated costs as a total does not provide sufficient detail.
Total costs, inclusive of residential and informal costs, may also be less relevant if economic evaluation takes a health system perspective.
This compromises the suitability of such cost estimates for use in decision modelling.
In this study, we set out to estimate direct medical costs attributable to AD, and to describe progression of these costs over time for use in decision modelling.

Methods

Study population
The study population was extracted by the Statistics Denmark's Research Service
The AD group was identified from hospital and pharmaceutical registries using a previously established algorithm
Patients were included in the AD group from the hospital registry if they were discharged from hospital (or after an outpatient visit) with a primary or secondary ICD-10 code consistent with AD (G30*, F00*).
Patients were included from the pharmaceutical registry if their pattern of prescriptions was consistent with an AD diagnosis (ATC codes N06DA02, N06DA04, N06DX01 and N06DA03, corresponding to 'Donepezil', 'Galantamine', 'Memantine' and 'Rivastigmine').
The date of diagnosis was defined as either the first AD-related hospital admission or date of the first relevant prescription, whichever occurred earlier.
We used a wash-out period of one year to ensure only incident cases of AD were included in the study, thus only including cases diagnosed on or after 01.01.2005.
The control group without any dementia-related diagnoses was obtained through a random sample of 30% of the entire Danish population on 01.01.2004 (AD cases described above were excluded from this sample) by Statistics Denmark [8].
Charlson comorbidity index (CCI) score
We also retrieved individual information on region of residence (one of the five regions of Denmark), type of accommodation (owned or rented), living arrangement (whether living alone or with partner/caregiver), as well as education (primary and lower secondary/upper secondary/bachelor and short tertiary/master or higher), all as of 01.01.2004.
Education information was only available for people born in or after 1920; for those born before 1920 it was coded as 'unclassified'.
All people who migrated to another country during the study period were excluded from analysis.
All people aged less than 50 on 01.01.2004 were excluded due to low prevalence of AD in this age group.

Cost data
All primary, secondary and tertiary healthcare is free of charge to Danish residents
The costs included in the analysis represent a Health System perspective.
The cost data was obtained from the following national registers: primary care reimbursement (all primary care costs, including general practitioner care, laboratory/diagnostic costs, dentistry, and other ancillary care such as physio, ophthalmology, etc.), pharmaceutical (all community-dispensed prescriptions, including both the out-of-pocket co-payment and the government subsidy) and hospital (combining all inand out-patient visits) [8], all for the period from 2000 to 2010.
The costs were categorised into three groups: primary, medication and hospital.
All costs were re-expressed in 2016 Danish Crowns (DKK) using the Consumer Price Index (CPI)

Matching
Using observational data for comparing health care utilisation in groups of people with and without a disease can produce flawed findings, as people who have a condition such as AD are likely to differ significantly from those who do not.
These differences can affect the estimations produced by observational data
This problem can be addressed by reducing any relevant covariates that can predict developing AD to a single propensity score (the likelihood of having AD), and matching an intervention and control group on this score.
Propensity score matching helps reduce bias in observational data, allowing for a more balanced sample and improving the precision of estimates by mimicking randomisation
The probability of having AD (the propensity score) was estimated using multiple logistic regression.
The model consisted of confounders associated with an increased risk of having AD, identified from literature: age
In addition, the region of Denmark where study subjects resided at the beginning of the study period were included (2004) in order to ensure a balanced sample.
Accommodation status (renting or owning) was also recorded at the start of the study as a measure of socio-economic status, in addition to income.
One-to-one nearest-neighbour matching with no replacement was conducted
Data for each incident year (2005 -2010) was then merged.
The distribution of propensity scores, and balance in the confounding factors was compared by AD and control groups before and after matching.
Reduction of bias in the matched sample was tested with chi-squared and ttests, as appropriate, as well as by comparing reduction in standardised differences
All unmatched cases were excluded from further analyses.

Statistical analyses
Once matched, longitudinal data was used to estimate costs according to the time from the year of diagnosis (from ten years before, to five years after).
Persons who died during the observation period were censored.
For controls this was done based on the year of diagnosis for the nearest-neighbour AD case they were matched with.
For the AD group, age at diagnosis was calculated at the first date of AD-related contact with the health system, for controls it was the age on the date of diagnosis for their matched AD pair.
Finally, the mean primary, medication, hospital and total cost by year from diagnosis were estimated for AD and control groups.
The associations of AD and other covariates with primary, medication, hospital and total costs were analysed using Generalised Estimating Equations (GEEs) to reflect the panel structure of the data.
In the GEE models, we controlled for the interaction of having AD with the year of the cost (from 10 years before to 5 years after diagnosis), as well as age at diagnosis, gender, CCI score, income (in tens of thousands of Euro), education, home ownership, living alone or with a partner and region of Denmark.
The applied GEE models with primary, medication, hospital or total costs as the dependent variable were specified with a Gamma distribution and a logit link function.
An independent covariance matrix was selected based on QIC selection criterion
All statistical analyses were conducted using Stata 14

Results
We identified 26,968 incident cases of AD, diagnosed between 01.01.2005 and 31.12.2010, of these 26,951 were successfully matched to an equivalent number of non-AD controls; 17 AD cases could not be matched and had to be excluded from analysis.
Of the matched AD cases, 44%
The matching process successfully reduced the variation in propensity score distribution between the two groups (Supplementary Figure
The differences between AD and controls in all included confounders, which were significantly different before matching, were reduced to statistically insignificant levels after matching (Table
The mean primary, medication, hospital and total costs for people with AD and controls are reported by year of diagnosis in Figure
In the control group, primary care costs increase steadily across the 16 years of observation, almost doubling from €277 in year -10 to €501 in year 5.
A similar increase in primary care costs can also be observed for the AD group until the index year (the year of diagnosis), after which the costs declined.
Overall, the AD group has consistently higher mean primary care costs than the control group until the third year after diagnosis.
The mean medication cost for the control group was €669 in year -10, and increased to €993 in year 0, followed by a slight decline to €953 in year 5.
The AD group had similar, although somewhat higher, costs compared to controls in year -10 (€672), with the difference becoming more pronounced each year until year -1 (€985 for controls, €1,131 for AD).
The mean medication costs for the AD group more than doubled in year 0, reaching €2,466, and further increasing to €3,012 in year after diagnosis, followed by a slight decline to €2,729 in year 5.
Overall, the hospital costs of the control group demonstrate a steady increase over the 16 years of observation, increasing from €1,100 in year -10, to €5,883 in year 5, by an average of €230 a year.
AD group experienced more variation in their hospital costs: costs in years -10, -9 and -8 (€1,227, €1311 and €1371, respectively) were slightly higher than the control group, but were then overtaken by the control group in years -4 to -2, after which the AD group experienced a large increase in years around diagnosis, peaking at €6,413 in year 0 (almost double that of the control group), and falling again to below the mean cost of the control group in year 3 after diagnosis.
As primary care costs comprise a relatively small proportion total cost, the pattern of total healthcare costs across the observation period was mostly driven by the changes in medication and hospital costs.
The total costs rose steadily and consistently for the control group, almost tripling from €2,046 in year -10 to €5,883 in year 5.
Over the 10 years preceding diagnosis, the AD group experienced somewhat higher mean total costs than the control group, with costs for both groups rising steadily each year; total costs rose sharply for the AD group one year before diagnosis, peaking in the year of diagnosis (€9,411 for AD compared to €4,919 for control group), and receding to around €6,500 in years 3 onwards, although remaining higher than the mean total cost for the control group.
The results from GEE models are presented in Table
Being female was associated with a 12% higher (p<0.001)
primary care and 13% (p<0.001) higher medication costs, 14% lower (p<0.001)
hospital, and 4% lower (p<0.001)
total costs than males.
One year increase in the age at diagnosis was associated with a 0.5% (p<0.001) increase in primary, 1.7% increase in secondary and 0.9% increase in total costs over the 16 years of observation (p<0.001).
Higher CCI scores were associated with overall higher costs across all three cost categories.
Individuals with higher levels of education than primary school experienced significantly higher total costs, from 4% for secondary school, to 8% for Bachelor degree and higher (p<0.001).
Income had a small significant effect on primary, secondary and medication costs, but no effect on total costs.
Owning a home was associated with consistently lower costs across all three categories with a 4% reduction in primary (p<0.001),
and 10% reduction in secondary, medication and total costs (p<0.001),
compared to people who resided in rental accommodation.
Living with a partner or caregiver did not have a significant effect on medication or total costs, although those who did live with a partner had 10% higher primary care costs (p<0.001) and 5% lower hospital costs (p<0.001) compared to those who lived alone.
Compared to the Capital region, the other four regions incurred higher medication costs, but lower primary, hospital and total costs.
The difference in total costs was 5% lower than the capital region in Zealand and Southern Denmark (p<0.001),
8% lower in North Denmark (p<0.001) and 11% lower in Central Denmark (p<0.001).
Using the GEE models, health care costs attributable to AD for each cost category and year of follow up were estimated (Supplementary Table
Primary care costs were significantly higher for people with AD than for controls until the year after diagnosis, after which the difference between the two groups became small and not statistically significant.
Medication costs were higher for the AD group for all but the first year of observation, although the attributable costs increased from around €100 in years before diagnosis, to over €2,000 in years after diagnosis.
Hospital costs were somewhat higher for the AD group (between €90 and €193) in years -8 to -5, after which the difference was small and insignificant.
ADattributable costs increased significantly to €911 one year before diagnosis, reaching €3,417 in year of diagnosis, and falling to insignificant levels again two years after diagnosis.
Total costs were significantly different for years -9 to -4, where the AD group accrued higher costs than the control group, with differences ranging between €137 and €313.
The difference between the two groups became insignificant three and two years prior to diagnosis.
Total costs attributable to AD became more pronounced one year prior to diagnosis, reaching €1,114 and further rising to €4,996 in the year of diagnosis, falling to €902 in year 5, with all differences being statistically significant.

Discussion
While there currently is no treatment for AD, the number of interventions, both pharmaceutical
While there is some evidence of effectiveness, the opportunity cost of new interventions needs to be assessed through economic evaluation before investment is made.
Decision modelling is a helpful tool in conducting economic evaluations, as it moves beyond trial-based evaluations by enabling data synthesis, inclusion of multiple comparisons and an appropriate time horizon, and allowing for quantification of uncertainty.
However, to produce valid estimates, decision models require accurate data inputs.
One of the key inputs that creates uncertainty in economic decision models is the cost of treatment.
In this study, we set out to establish the attributable medical costs of Alzheimer's Disease for use in decision modelling.
Like previous studies
Our study estimated, with some precision, the extent to which these costs can be attributed to AD itself, rather than to other differences between people with and without AD.
Overall, our estimates of AD-attributable costs are lower than previously reported: a recent study found the average annual medical costs of €5,800 for AD and €3,250 for controls
Such differences are comparable to our findings around the time of diagnosis.
However, our data show that this difference does not persist, with differences in costs between the two groups dropping to 25% three years after diagnosis and to 15% five years after diagnosis.
This could potentially be due to the fact that in this study, we were unable to account for transition from community to residential setting, where admission to hospital may decline, thus reducing the costs
These differences are the result of viewing costs in a longitudinal way, which allowed us to control for ageing of the cohort, and to isolate the attributable and observed costs.
When controlled for co-morbidities and socio-demographic factors, the GEE model predicts that costs for AD and control groups increase over the observation period (Figure
Attributable costs (Supplementary Table
Unsurprisingly, primary care costs comprise a relatively small proportion of the total costs.
However, the pattern of primary care costs is rather interesting: AD group experience consistently and significantly higher costs than the control group until the year of diagnosis, after which the difference decreases and becomes insignificant.
It is possible, that this reduction is the result of having the healthcare needs met through being diagnosed and receiving treatment.
Alternatively, this could be an artefact of having the AD diagnosis masking any other underlying healthcare needs, or a reflection of unmet medical care needs.
Attributable costs of medication change over the observation period in a more intuitive way: the AD had marginally higher costs which then tripled that of the control group around the time of diagnosis, and remained at a high level until the end of the follow-up period, reflecting the high cost of the anti-dementia and other associated medication.
Overall, our estimates of medication costs for people with AD were comparable with findings of a recent German study
Hospital costs accounted for around half of the total expenditure, similar to some other studies
These had a similar pattern to that of primary care costs: increasing significantly a year before, peaking in the year of diagnosis, and returning to the same level around 3 years after diagnosis.
This peak in attributable hospital expenditure could be ascribed to procedures associated with the diagnosis of AD
Having comorbidities, measured by CCI, was found to be strongly associated with higher expenditure across all three categories.
This is an intuitive finding, and one supported by previous studies, which found that a higher level of comorbidity was associated with a significant increase in expenditure by AD groups
Females had significantly higher (around 12%) primary and medication costs and lower (around 13% hospital costs) than males.
This is in line with previous findings that women utilise less formal care
The study findings suggest that, compared to the Capital Region, people in the other four regions in Denmark accrued significantly lower (between 13 to 15%) primary and hospital costs, and higher (between 3 and 8%) medication costs.
These differences could be explained by higher density of population and closer proximity to primary and hospital care providers in the Capital region compared to the rest of the country.
However, further investigation into these differences could help shed light on these differences.

Strengths and limitations
One of the key strengths of this study are the large sample size and accuracy of the data.
The accuracy of the Danish registries has been found consistently high for dementia/AD diagnoses
The use of registry data also allows for an unprecedented, to the best of our knowledge, 16 years of follow up.
Observational data imposes a number of limitation in terms of imbalances between the intervention and control groups.
While avoiding the effect of unobserved confounders is impossible, the matching procedure employed in our study created a well-balanced group.
Having a large sample sile allowed us to sacrifice additional controls that could be obtained by one-to-many matching approaches to maintain the balance between the two groups
A major challenge of using cost data from published literature is that model data needs to be linked to clinical data using the same disease indicators, which is often difficult, if not impossible
The varied purpose of disease indicators (such as cognitive, behavioural or functional) and the large number of indicators used in trials further exacerbates this issue.
This makes a compelling argument for reporting costs in a more straightforward and easily-applied way, where costs can be mapped on to other indicators.
In our view, years from diagnosis addresses these issues, as it can easily be mapped on to clinical disease indicators, and is not restricted to any single aspect of the disease.
The findings of this study are also subject to some limitations.
The study focused solely on medical costs of community-dwelling people with AD, and the costs of residential and informal care were not captured, partially due to data availability.
It is well documented that residential/nursing home and informal care comprise a significant part of total cost of AD
Another potential limitation of this study is that the included AD population is comprised solely of individuals who have received a formal diagnosis.
It is recognised that AD is significantly underdiagnosed
It is also possible that people with AD were diagnosed, but under a different classification (such as 'generalised dementia', for example), and thus were not included in our study population.
However, there is evidence to suggest that there is little cost difference between diagnosed and undiagnosed people with dementia outside of medication costs
There is also a risk that the non-AD dementia cases were included in the control group due to a lack of clear diagnosis.

Conclusions
In the present study, we estimated longitudinal medical costs attributable to AD, compared to a matched control group.
Total medical costs for people with AD were double that of people without AD around the time of diagnosis, with primary and hospital costs returning to insignificantly different levels three years after diagnosis.
Medication was the main driver of cost after the diagnostic period.
These findings suggest that medical costs attributed to AD are driven by diagnostic procedures and medication, and the impact of AD on medical costs may not be as high or prolonged as previously suggested.



Figure 1 :
Figure 1: Mean primary, medication and hospital costs by year from diagnosis for matched cohort of incident AD cases (n=26,951) and controls (n=26,951).



Figure 2 :
Figure 2: GEE-estimated medical costs for AD and controls over 16 years of observation



Table 1 : Population characteristics, before and after matching



values for t-test for continuous and chi-squared for categorical variables CCI: Charlson Comorbidity Index



Table 2 : Generalised Estimating Equations on medical costs from ten years before to five years after diagnosis