Binding between Prion Protein and Aβ Oligomers Contributes to the Pathogenesis of Alzheimer’s Disease
A plethora of evidence suggests that protein misfolding and aggregation are underlying mechanisms of various neurodegenerative diseases, such as prion diseases and Alzheimer's disease (AD).
Like prion diseases, AD has been considered as an infectious disease in the past decades as it shows strain specificity and transmission potential.
Although it remains elusive how protein aggregation leads to AD, it is becoming clear that cellular prion protein (PrP C ) plays an important role in AD pathogenesis.
Here, we briefly reviewed AD pathogenesis and focused on recent progresses how PrP C contributed to AD development.
In addition, we proposed a potential mechanism to explain why infectious agents, such as viruses, conduce AD pathogenesis.
Microbe infections cause Ab deposition and upregulation of PrP C , which lead to high affinity binding between Ab oligomers and PrP C .
The interaction between PrP C and Ab oligomers in turn activates the Fyn signaling cascade, resulting in neuron death in the central nervous system (CNS).
Thus, silencing PrP C expression may turn out be an effective treatment for PrP C dependent AD.

Introduction
Alzheimer's disease (AD), which was first reported by Dr. Alois Alzheimer in 1906
In 2015, approximately 29.8 million AD patients were diagnosed worldwide, and it has been predicted that there will be more than 113 million AD patients worldwide by 2050
The incidence of AD is particularly high in the elderly; approximately 10% of people older than 60 years shows AD symptoms.
In people older than 85 years, the prevalence is 50%
Typical features of AD include short-term memory loss, visual-spatial perception disorders, and impairment of language and executive function
The pathological features of AD include plaques formed by the deposition of amyloid b protein (Ab) and neurofibrillary tangles formed by hyperphosphorylated tau protein
According to the time of onset, AD is classified as earlyonset AD (EOAD) or late-onset AD (LOAD)
EOAD, in which the age at onset is between 30 and 65 years, accounts for less than 0.1% of all AD cases
LOAD, in which the age at onset is more than 65 years, is the most common form of AD.
Both EOAD and LOAD can occur in people with a positive family history of AD; approximately 60% of patients with EOAD have multiple AD patients in their family, and 13% of these familial EOAD cases are inherited by autosomal dominant inheritance and affect at least three generations
EOAD may also occur in LOAD families
Only 1% to 5% of AD cases can be simply diagnosed genetically, whereas most AD cases are complex and may involve multiple susceptibility genes and their interactions with environmental factors
In this review, we briefly reviewed the pathogenesis of AD with an emphasis on how cellular prion protein (PrP C ) attribute to AD development.
More importantly, we propose the interactions between PrP C and Ab oligomers may be the underline mechanism for AD caused by other infectious agents, such as viruses.
Finally, we point out potential studies to corroborate the role this interaction plays in vivo.

Factors Influencing AD Development
Even after many years of intensive research, the cause of AD is not completely understood.
It is believed that 70% of risk is genetic and involves multiple genes
In addition, other factors such as age and genders are also involved.
Age is one of the most important factors affecting the pathogenesis of AD
The incidence of AD increases significantly with age: 3% of people aged 65-74 years, 17% of people aged 75-84 years, and 32% of people of 85 years or older develop AD
However, ageing perse does not cause AD.
Gender is another important factor determining the risk of AD; more women than men suffer from AD
However, as the average life expectancy of women is longer than that of men and as age is a big risk factor for AD, it is difficult to assign the effect only to gender.
What confounds the effect of gender further is the observation that men aged 45-65 years have higher cardiovascular mortality than women
Because cardiovascular disease is a risk factor for AD
In addition, environmental factors, such as air pollution or aluminum pollution, or personal habits, such as smoking, greatly influence the occurrence of AD

Genes Associated with AD
Various genes associated with AD have been identified to date, including genes encoding amyloid precursor protein (APP), presenilin-1 (PSEN-1), presenilin-2 (PSEN-2), CD2AP, apolipoprotein E (ApoE), clusterin (CLU), complement receptor 1 (CR1), prion protein (PRNP), and tumor necrosis factor (TNF)
ApoE has three alleles, e2, e3, and e4, which encode ApoE2, ApoE3, and ApoE4, respectively.
Among the three alleles, e3 is the most common, whereas e2 is the least common
People with the e4 allele are more likely to develop AD than those with the e2 or e3 allele
It is estimated that people with one e4 allele are three times more likely to develop AD than those with two e3 alleles, whereas people with two e4 alleles have a 8-12 times higher risk of developing AD
Comparing to those individuals having mutation in APP, PSEN-1, or PSEN-2, individuals expressing APOE-e4 have slightly higher risk of developing AD
Only 1% or less of AD cases are caused by mutation of APP, PSEN-1, or PSEN-2, which directly causes more Ab 42 production
People with mutated APP or PSEN-1 will definitely develop AD if the mutations are AD-prone, whereas approximately 95% people with mutated PSEN-2 develop AD

Aggregated Proteins Contribute to AD
Like Ab, a-synuclein, tau, and prion protein are aggregation-prone proteins that are implicated in AD.
a-Synuclein Cross-seeds Tau fibrillization, Contributing to AD Pathogenesis a-Synuclein is the major structural component of Lewy body fibrils, however, it was originally identified in senile plaques as a non-Ab component from AD brain
a-Synuclein pathology has been reported in sporadic and familial cases of AD
The protein was first identified from Torpedo californica
In humans, a-synuclein is encoded by the SNCA gene localized on chromosome 4. a-Synuclein is a 14.5-kDa protein and consists of 140 amino acids
The mRNA of a-synuclein is selectively spliced to produce three isoforms, a-synuclein-140, asynuclein-126, and a-synuclein-112.
The most common is a-synuclein-140, which is the full transcript of the SNCA gene; a-synuclein-126 lacks residues 41-54 due to loss of exon 3; and a-synuclein-112 lacks residues 103-130 due to deletion of exon 5
a-Synuclein is abundant in the brain-it accounts for 1% of total proteins in the cytoplasm of brain cells
In the brain, a-synuclein is mainly present at the tips of nerve cells at the presynaptic terminals
In neurons, approximately 15% of a-synuclein is bound to the membrane, whereas the remainder is cytosolic, without a stable structure
Membrane-bound a-synuclein has amphipathic a-helix structures composed of 11 residues (XKTKEGVXXXX)
a-Synuclein can interact with tubulin
Although cytosolica-synuclein is unstructured and thus soluble, under pathological conditions a-synuclein can aggregate as insoluble fibrils, leading to Parkinson's disease, Lewy body dementia, and multiple system atrophy, the pathological feature of Lewy body
Remarkably, different strains of synthetic a-synuclein fibrils showed significant differences in efficiency in cross-seeding tau aggregation in vitro and in vivo

Hyperphosphorylated Tau Forms Neurofibrillary Tangles, Leading to AD
Identified in 1975, tau protein was first thought to be essential for microtubule assembly
The structure of tau is stabilized when the protein is bound to tubulin.
Binding also hinders its phosphorylation.
Human tau is encoded by the MAPT gene, which is located on chromosome 17q21 and is composed of 14 exons
In the adult brain, tau mRNA is selectively spliced to produce six tau isomers composed of
In neurons in the central nervous system, tau binds to tubulin via the positively charged carboxyl (C)-terminus to form microtubules.
Besides promoting tubulin assembly, thus stabilizing microtubule structure, it also regulates synaptic synthesis and inter synaptic signal transmission
Tau has 79 potential phosphorylation sites, and as much as 31 residues can be phosphorylated in tau protein
In normal adult human brain, tau contains two to three phosphate groups per molecule.
However, in AD, tau is 3-4-fold more phosphorylated than in control brains, leading to hyperphosphorylation containing approximately 8 mol PO 4 /mol tau
The levels of total and phosphorylated tau in the cerebrospinal fluid are elevated in AD and correlate with a decrease in neuropsychological functions.
Increased levels of phosphorylated tau protein threonine (t)181, t231, and total tau in the cerebrospinal fluid can be used to predict progression of mild cognitive impairment to AD
The extent of tau phosphorylation is regulated by protein kinase and phosphatase such as protein kinase A (PKA), protein kinase C (PKC), Ca 2? /calmodulin-dependent kinase (CaM kinase) II, protein phosphatase 1 (PP1) and protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A)
Phosphorylated tau can dimerize in vivo, potentially leading to crosslinking and the formation of pairs of helical filaments.
These pairs of helical filaments can compete with microtubules to bind normal tau and other macromolecular microtubule-associated proteins, leading to cytoskeletal abnormalities and axonal transport disorders, causing
The human tau gene contains 14 exons, selectively spliced to produce six tau isomers composed of
synaptic loss and finally leading to dementia
Hyperphosphorylated tau accumulates to form neurofibrillary tangles, which are an important pathological feature of AD

Amyloid Beta Can Form Aggregates Resulting in Neuron Damage in the Central Nervous System
The gene encoding APP is located on chromosome 21 in the human genome.
APP is a transmembrane protein that can be processed via two pathways (Fig.
In the nonamyloid pathway, APP is cleaved by a-secretase between the 16th and 17th amino acids from the N-terminus to form soluble sAPPa and a-C-terminal fragments (a-CTFs).
The a-CTF is further degraded by c-secretase to produce P3 and incomplete Ab (Ab 17-40 and Ab 17-42 ), which do not form amyloid deposits
In the amyloid pathway, APP is cleaved by b-site amyloid precursor protein-cleaving enzyme 1, a transmembrane aspartyl protease that cleaves APP in the extracellular region to produce the N-terminus of Ab, to form sAPPb and b-Cterminal fragments (b-CTFs).
The b-CTF is further cleaved by c-secretase in the membrane to form the 3-kDa protein p3 and Ab 40 (major component) or Ab 42 (minor component)
Overexpression of APP in the brain of AD patients leads to the production of Ab, which is cleaved by b-and c-secretases
Ab can exist as monomer, soluble oligomer, or insoluble fiber.
Ab monomer and insoluble Ab fibers do not significantly change synaptic plasticity.
However, soluble Ab oligomers, including Ab dimer and especially, OC antibody-positive oligomers from AD brain, can effectively impair synaptic structure and function
With ageing, the rate of Ab production increases, whereas the rate of clearance decreases, resulting in Ab deposition, which activates protein kinase II to hyperphosphorylate tau, resulting in tau aggregation and eventually leading to neurotoxicity and synaptic damage
PrP C -Bound Ab Oligomers Lead to Loss of Neuron Plasticity
Although Ab seems to play a central role in AD pathogenesis, it requires other molecules to cause neurotoxicity.
One of these proteins is PrP C , a GPI-anchored glycoprotein located in lipid rafts in cell membranes
PrP C is highly conserved in mammals
The PRNP gene is a single-copy gene with one exon

Similarities between AD and Prion Disease
Although criteria for the clinical diagnosis of AD have been clearly outlined, there is considerable overlap in the clinicopathological features of AD and prion disease, a rare neurodegenerative disease, which leads to difficulties in diagnosis
In one study, more than half of patients who were diagnosed as having Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease were fully compliant with the criteria of AD
In addition, some subjects with hereditary prion diseases show obvious signs of AD
Especially, patients without a family history of prion diseases can show clinical features similar to those of other neurodegenerative diseases, such as AD, in earlier phases
Like AD, most human prion diseases are sporadic and hereditary; less than 1% is acquired.
Hereditary prion diseases with PRNP mutation account for 10%-15% of all prion diseases

Misfolded Ab Behaves as Prion
Besides clinicopathological similarity, Ab and PrP SC (scrapie prion) share significant similarities at the molecular level.
Like PrP SC , Ab can aggregate to form oligomers, which can form insoluble amyloid fibers that form depositions
A synthetic Ab with distinct morphology and molecular structure reportedly possessed self-propagating capability when seeded to grow fibrils
In addition, Ab aggregates are capable of self-propagation when inoculated into susceptible transgenic mice
Studies have also suggested that some cases of familial AD can be transmitted as prion disease.
After supernatant of superior frontal gyrus or lateral orbital cortex homogenate from four AD patients or two neurologically normal controls was unilaterally injected into the right hippocampus and neocortex of 3-month-old male APP transgenic mice (Tg2576) for 5 months, the cerebral hemispheres injected with the AD supernatant, but not the control supernatant, formed a large number of senile plaques and vascular deposits formed by Ab aggregation.
Although Ab deposits were the most concentrated in the injection area, some deposits appeared in areas far from the injection site, even along the corpus callosum in the contralateral hemisphere in some mice, indicating that Ab had spread among and multiplied in cells, again a character reminiscent of PrP SC
Similarly, 10% of brain extracts from AD patients or brain lysates from Abladen APP23 transgenic mice caused robust b-amyloid deposition in the hippocampus when injected into the hippocampus of young male APP23 mice

Expression of PrP C is Required for AD Pathogenesis in Mice and Drosophila
Similarities in biophysical properties between Ab and PrP SC , together with similarities in clinicopathological features between AD and prion disease suggest that these diseases share certain etiological mechanisms implicated in protein-misfolding diseases
In a transgenic AD mouse model, deletion of PRNP did not alter APP and Ab expression levels, and astrocyte proliferation remained unchanged, with no axonal degeneration and synaptic loss.
In contrast, AD transgenic mice with intact PrP C expression exhibited dysfunction and memory deficits.
Transgenic mice lacking PrP C , but containing Ab plaques showed no dysfunction and memory impairment
Treatment of aged APPswe/ PSen1DE9 transgenic AD mice with anti-PrP C antibody restored synaptic density
In Drosophila, PrP C exacerbates AD pathogenesis
Thus, like prion disease, which requires PrP C to show neurotoxicity, PrP C is required for AD pathogenesis.
These results suggest that PrP C plays an important role in mediating learning and memory deficits in the AD model.

PrP C Binds to Ab
The requirement of PrP C expression in AD pathogenesis in the mouse and Drosophila models suggests a potential interaction between PrP C and Ab.
To investigate the mechanism of Ab-mediated neuron toxicity, synthetic biotin-Ab 42 oligomers were used to screen binding partners on the surface of COS-7 cells expressing cDNAs from an adult mouse brain library
It was found that PrP C expression was required for binding

Ab-affects PrP C -related Signaling Pathway
Binding between soluble Ab 42 oligomers and PrP C requires lipid rafts, the platform for cell signaling regulation
In neuron cells expressing PrP C , addition of Ab oligomers activated synaptic cytoplasmic phospholipase A (2) to translocate into lipid rafts and to form a complex with PrP C and Ab oligomers, leading to synapse damage
The Src tyrosine kinase Fyn has been shown to colocalize with PrP C in lipid rafts, and aggregation of PrP C activates Fyn kinase in some cell lines
When Ab oligomers were added to PrP C -expressing neurons, they bound PrP C with high affinity, and activated Fyn
Overexpression of Fyn enhanced Abinduced toxicity in a transgenic AD mouse model by inducing hyperphosphorylation of tau or neuronal Ca 2?- dyshomeostasis.
Accordingly, when Fyn activity is inhibited, Ab-induced damage can be reduced
Another protein involved in Ab oligomer-PrP C binding is the metabotropic glutamate receptor, mGluR5, a transmembrane protein in the postsynaptic density, which links Ab oligomer-PrP C to Fyn.
The addition of Ab oligomers to neurons expressing PrP C and mGluR5 activates Fyn and calcium signaling to enhance eEF2 phosphorylation, leading to Arc translation and dendritic spine loss

PrP C -mediated Ab Oligomer Inhibits Long-term Potentiation
Maintaining long-term potentiation (LTP) is widely accepted as one of the major cellular mechanisms that underlie learning and memory
Soluble Ab oligomers can inhibit LTP, leading to contraction of dendritic spines from pyramidal cells and causing spatial memory impairment.
Hippocampal slices from PRNP null mice when tested for synaptic reactivity did not show Ab oligomer-induced LTP damage
Similarly, when binding between Ab oligomers and PrP C was prevented by anti-PrP C antibodies, synaptic plasticity was rescued
Remarkably, when administrated intracerebroventricularly, antibodies directed against the putative Ab-binding site on PrP C prevented Ab-mediated inhibition of LTP
In contrast, a Fab fragment directed against the PrP C region not involved in Ab binding did not rescue LTP caused by Ab oligomers

Infectious Agents Activate PrP C Expression Associated with AD
In addition to Ab-PrP C complex, many other factors contribute to AD pathogenesis, among which immune response and inflammation play critical roles
Infectious agents activate immune responses and inflammation; thus, it is not surprising that infectious agents have been suspected to play a role in AD
Herpes simplex virus (HSV) has been investigated extensively in AD
In a HSV-infected mouse model, Ab deposits were detected in the brain as a result of increased levels of b-site amyloid precursor protein-cleaving enzyme 1 in neuronal and glial cells
Although HSV-1 can also be detected in normal aged brain, in AD, infection by HSV-1 is restricted to particular regions, such as frontal and temporal cortices and the hippocampus, which suggests a causal relationship between HSV-1 infection and AD occurrence
In addition, HSV-1 infection causes inflammatory cytokine IL-6 production, which may worsen AD
Finally, the presence of anti-HSV IgM indicates a reactivation of the infection, at which point the risk of developing AD is doubled
However, as the frequency of APOE e4 is higher in AD patients with HSV-1 infection
Recently, human herpes virus-6A and-7 were found to be closely related to AD, possibly by regulating APP metabolism

Concluding Remarks and Perspectives
Multiple receptors for Ab have been identified, among which PrP C shows the highest affinity.
As PrP C itself is prone to oligomerization
Another issue that remains to be investigated is how posttranslational modification of PrP C affects its interaction with Ab on a neuron.
It is known that most PrP C on the cell surface has complex-type N-linked glycans, which prevent its oligomerization
It is unclear whether Ab oligomers prefer non-glycosylated or glycosylated PrP C .
Furthermore, cell-surface glycosaminoglycan (GAG) has been shown to recruit PrP C
Interestingly, Ab oligomers and GAG bind to the same motif on PrP C , but how GAG affects AD pathogenesis via modifying PrP C -Ab interaction warrants further investigation.
By binding to PrP C , Ab oligomers inhibit LTP, leading to cognitive decline in AD.
Furthermore, the Ab-PrP C oligomer complex can interact with the mGluR5 receptor, causing abnormal phosphorylation of eEF2 and resulting in loss of dendritic spines (Fig.
Besides binding to PrP C on neuronal cells, Ab oligomers may also interact with PrP C on glia, which has been shown to be induced by HIV-1 infection.
In the early stage of AD onset, activated microglia gather around Ab plaques, producing neurotoxic molecules, such as NO, ROS, proteases, adhesion molecules, and pro-inflammatory cytokines TNF-a, IL-1b, IL-6
Whether the binding of PrP C to Ab oligomers has any role in generating neurotoxic molecules remains incompletely understood.
Current data suggest that the interaction between Ab and PrP C plays an important role in the pathophysiology of AD and might be a novel therapeutic target for of AD.
Ab plaques occur many years before clinical symptoms can be detected.
This suggests that either Ab-PrP C complex requires a long time to form in vivo, or the threshold for triggering the signaling cascade to initiate AD in vivo is high.
In addition, there is a variety of Ab proteins, including Ab 37 , Ab 38 , Ab 40 , Ab 42 , and Ab 43 , which can be further processed by aminopeptidase, glutaminyl cyclase or isomerase, and kinase
How those modifications affect PrP C -Ab oligomer interaction remains to be investigated.
Since binding between PrP C and Ab oligomers plays an important role in ageing related AD and may also be responsible for infectious agents caused AD, understanding the interaction in vivo is of great importance for AD treatment.



Fig. 1
Fig.1Schematic representation of the human SNCA gene.
SNCA gene contains 6 exons, selectively spliced to produce three isoforms: a-synuclein-140, a-synuclein-126, and a-synuclein-112.



Fig. 2
Fig.2Schematic representation of the human tau gene (modified from
The human tau gene contains 14 exons, selectively spliced to produce six tau isomers composed of352, 381,  383, 410, 412, and 441 amino acids, respectively.



Fig. 3 Fig. 4
Fig. 3 Schematic representation of the process of Tau-induced neurofibrillary degeneration.



Fig. 5
Fig. 5 Signaling cascades mediated by the interaction between PrP C and Ab oligomers.
A Binding between PrP and Ab oligomers activates Fyn, which phosphorylates the NR2B subunit of the Nmethyl-D-aspartate receptor, leading to its degradation.
B An alternative pathway induced by PrP binding to Ab oligomers, recruiting



Fig. 6
Fig. 6 Potential interactions between Ab oligomers and PrP C on neurons.
Left panel: in vivo, GAG might bind PrP C before Ab oligomer formation.
Ab oligomers might replace GAG owing to its higher affinity for PrP C .
Right panel: Ab oligomers may bind PrP C


(Rushworth et al. 2013)s et al. 2014;Kostylev et al. 2015);Younan et al. 2013;Ganzinger et al. 2014 which span residues 23-27 and residues 95-110(Calella et al. 2010;Chen et al. 2010;Fluharty et al. 2013;Younan et al. 2013;Ganzinger et al. 2014).However, it does not bind effectively to Ab monomer and Ab fibrils(Balducci et al. 2010;Chen et al. 2010).In fact, PrP C inhibits Ab fiber formation by promoting Ab oligomer stability(Younan et al. 2018).Unlike binding between recombinant small Ab 42 oligomers and PrP C , larger Ab 42 oligomers from AD brain lysate bind PrP C efficiently(Dohler et al. 2014;Haas et al. 2014;Kostylev et al. 2015), and this binding requires lipid raft integrity(Rushworth et al. 2013).


(Pammer et al. 1998;de Almeida et al. 2005;Tsutsui et al. 2008;Hu et al. 2010;Gourdain et al. 2012;Petit et al. 2012;Ding et al. 2013;Liu et al. 2015;Wu et al. 2017)rek et al. 2005;Dohler et al. 2014), which has been implicated in inflammation(Pammer et al. 1998;de Almeida et al. 2005;Tsutsui et al. 2008;Hu et al. 2010;Gourdain et al. 2012;Petit et al. 2012;Ding et al. 2013;Liu et al. 2015;Wu et al. 2017).