Gantenerumab reduces amyloid-β plaques in patients with prodromal to moderate Alzheimer’s disease: a PET substudy interim analysis
Background: We previously investigated low doses (105 or 225 mg) of gantenerumab, a fully human monoclonal antibody that binds and removes aggregated amyloid-β by Fc receptor-mediated phagocytosis, in the SCarlet RoAD (SR) and Marguerite RoAD (MR) phase 3 trials.
Several lines of evidence suggested that higher doses may be necessary to achieve clinical efficacy.
We therefore designed a positron emission tomography (PET) substudy to evaluate the effect of gantenerumab uptitrated to 1200 mg every 4 weeks on amyloid-β plaques as measured using florbetapir PET in patients with prodromal to moderate Alzheimer's disease (AD).
Methods: A subset of patients enrolled in the SR and MR studies who subsequently entered the open-label extensions (OLEs) were included in this substudy.
Patients were aged 50 to 90 years with a clinical diagnosis of probable prodromal to moderate AD and were included based on a visual read of the original screening scan in the double-blind phase.
Patients were assigned to 1 of 5 titration schedules (ranging from 2 to 10 months) with a target gantenerumab dose of 1200 mg every 4 weeks.
The main endpoint of this substudy was change in amyloidβ plaque burden from OLE baseline to week 52 and week 104, assessed using florbetapir PET.
Florbetapir global cortical signal was calculated using a prespecified standard uptake value ratio method converted to the Centiloid scale.
Results: Sixty-seven of the 89 patients initially enrolled had ≥ 1 follow-up scan by August 15, 2018.
Mean amyloid levels were reduced by 39 Centiloids by the first year and 59 Centiloids by year 2, a 3.5-times greater reduction than was seen after 2 years at 225 mg in SR.
At years 1 and 2, 37% and 51% of patients, respectively, had amyloid-β plaque levels below the amyloid-β positivity threshold.
Conclusion: Results from this exploratory interim analysis of the PET substudy suggest that gantenerumab doses up to 1200 mg resulted in robust amyloid-β plaque removal at 2 years.
PET amyloid levels were consistent with sparse-to-no neuritic amyloid-β plaques in 51% of patients after 2 years of therapy.
Amyloid reductions were similar to those observed in other placebo-controlled studies that have suggested potential clinical benefit.

Background
Approximately 50 million people live with dementia worldwide, and this number is expected to grow to 82 million by 2030 and 152 million by 2050
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the most common form of dementia, accounting for 60 to 70% of cases; together, AD and other types of dementia are the fifth leading cause of death worldwide
Currently, there are no disease-modifying therapies that can delay disease course, prevent progression, or provide a cure
Available pharmacological treatments for AD dementia offer mild symptomatic benefit with no effect on the underlying neuropathology of the disease
AD pathophysiology is characterized by the progressive accumulation of amyloid-β plaques predominantly comprising amyloid-β peptides around neurons and the formation of intracellular neurofibrillary tangles containing pathologic tau protein
Deposition of amyloid-β plaques in the brain parenchyma is likely to occur decades before clinical symptoms manifest
The extent to which different amyloid-β species contribute to the pathophysiology of AD remains uncertain
This hypothesis is being tested in multiple clinical trials evaluating drugs that can attenuate the accumulation and/or promote the removal of amyloid-β in patients with AD
Gantenerumab is a fully human anti-amyloid-β IgG1 monoclonal antibody that binds with high affinity to aggregated amyloid-β species and removes amyloid-β plaques via Fcγ receptor-mediated microglial phagocytosis
Gantenerumab neutralizes the neurotoxic effect of oligomeric amyloid-β 42 in vivo
The effect of low-dose subcutaneous (SC) gantenerumab on cognition and function was investigated in 2 global phase 3 studies in patients with prodromal AD (SCarlet RoAD [SR]; NCT01224106; n = 799) and mild AD (Marguerite RoAD [MR]; NCT02051608; n = 389)
Dosing in SR was suspended after interim futility analyses revealed a low likelihood of meeting the primary endpoint at the doses studied (105 and 225 mg SC every 4 weeks [q4w]).
Recruitment for MR was subsequently stopped, although dosing continued.
Overall, data gathered during the double-blind phase of SR suggest that doses studied were safe and well tolerated
A dose-dependent decrease in brain amyloid-β plaque burden was observed by week 100 (measured by positron emission tomography
Furthermore, dosedependent downstream pharmacodynamic effects were observed, including reductions in the cerebrospinal fluid biomarkers phosphorylated tau, total tau, and neurogranin
A post hoc subgroup analysis of patients determined to be fast progressors in SR (according to Functional Assessment Questionnaire results, normalized hippocampal volume, and Clinical Dementia Rating Scale Sum of Boxes [CDR-SB] score at baseline
These observations suggest that higher doses of gantenerumab may have clinically relevant effects on cognition and function in patients with AD, especially in the early stages of the disease
Accordingly, open-label extension (OLE) phases incorporating PET substudies were initiated for SR and MR to assess the short-and long-term safety and pharmacodynamic effect of gantenerumab SC q4w uptitrated to a maximum dose of 1200 mg.
Interim results of the ongoing, exploratory OLE PET substudies are reported here.

Methods

Study design
Complete study design and methodologic details of the MR and SR studies have been described elsewhere
Patients aged 50 to 90 years with a clinical diagnosis of probable prodromal or mild AD based on the National Institute of Neurological and Communicative Disorders and Stroke/Alzheimer's Disease and Related Disorders Association criteria and a positive visual amyloid PET assessment from the original double-blind screening examinations of the MR and SR studies were eligible to enroll.
Patients in SR who received doubleblind treatment and had ≥ 1 follow-up visit and patients who were currently enrolled in MR were eligible for OLE participation.
All patients entering the OLE at centers already involved in the SR and MR PET substudies of brain amyloid-β imaging were eligible for the OLE PET substudy.
All SR and MR patients (including those previously on placebo) received subcutaneous gantenerumab in the OLE, which was uptitrated to a maximum dose of 1200 mg each month (Additional file 3: Figure
The dosetitration scheme used was based on patients' apolipoprotein E (APOE) genotype (APOEε4 carrier vs non-carrier) and the last double-blind treatment dose (gantenerumab 225 mg, gantenerumab 105 mg, or placebo).
Gradual uptitration schemes were used to reach the target dose of 1200 mg while decreasing the risk of adverse events, particularly amyloid-related imaging abnormalities (ARIA) representative of vasogenic edema (ARIA-E).
The target dose was reached within 6 to 10 months in SR OLE patients and 2 to 6 months in MR OLE patients.
The work described was carried out in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki.
Written informed consent was provided by patients as deemed applicable by institutional review boards and/or independent ethics committees.

Patient subgrouping and data cutoff
At the start of the OLE studies, there were considerable differences between SR and MR patients with respect to prior exposure and stage of AD.
Therefore, for the purposes of this analysis, patients were divided into three groups.
Patients in MR were divided into those who received active drug during the double-blind phase (MR double-blind active [MR-DBA]) and those who received placebo (MR double-blind placebo [MR-DBP]), while patients in SR were pooled together in a single group, regardless of assigned treatment in the double-blind phase, as they were all off treatment for 16 to 19 months prior to OLE higher dosing.
The analyses presented here are based on a clinical data date of August 15, 2018.

Safety and clinical treatment response monitoring
Patients were monitored by one external independent monitoring committee until most patients reached the target dose, after which monitoring was continued by an internal monitoring committee.
Disease severity and cognitive measures included the MMSE, CDR-SB, and ADAS-Cog 11.
Safety was evaluated by adverse event reporting, blood safety testing, vital sign assessments, physical and neurological examinations, electrocardiography, and brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).
Prior gantenerumab studies have shown that the most common safety-related events were ARIA and injectionsite erythema
Interim safety results for the full SR and MR OLE populations have been reported separately and indicate that no new safety signals were identified compared with lower dosing levels
This work will report relations found between amyloid PET data and both ARIA and clinical treatment response in patients included in the PET substudy.

Amyloid-β plaque PET imaging
Amyloid PET scans were scheduled at baseline (defined as prior to OLE day 1 dosing), week 52, and week 104 of OLE treatment.
To minimize patient burden, a new OLE baseline PET scan was not required if the patient had received one during the double-blind phase within 9 to 12 months prior to OLE dosing.
Therefore, for many patients, the duration between OLE baseline and week 52 is considerably longer than 52 weeks.
All PET data were obtained using a target dose of 370 (± 10%) Becquerel (MBq) 18 F-florbetapir injected intravenously.
A 15-min scan was obtained starting at 50 min after 18 F-florbetapir injection.
PET data were checked for quality and uniformly preprocessed; a global cortical signal was then calculated using a prespecified standard uptake value ratio (SUVR) method identical to the method reported for analysis in the SR double-blind study
Briefly, that method computed the volumeweighted, gray matter-masked SUVR of six bilateral cortical regions from the Automated Anatomical Labelling (AAL) template, normalized by a cerebellar cortex reference region
The original screening 3D T1weighted MRI was segmented in the subject's space, then aligned to the AAL template space to perform the gray-matter masking.
To gain further insight and to allow better comparison of results from other studies, SUVR values were converted to Centiloid values.
The Centiloid framework has the useful property of rescaling SUVR values obtained via different reference regions, methodologies, or even tracers to a common scale anchored by Centiloid values of 0 and 100, which correspond to the transformed SUVR mean values of a young control group and AD group, respectively
Briefly, paired florbetapir/PiB scans were downloaded from the GAAIN website (
SUVRs were calculated using the standard method from Klunk et al.
The Klunk SUVR method on level 1 11 C-Pib data (45 AD patients, 34 young control subjects) was replicated via a regression analysis with slope 0.994 and R 2 = 0.99.
A subsequent regression analysis of the level 2 paired florbetapir/ 11 C-PiB allowed calculation of a single linear regression equation relating florbetapir AAL SUVR to Centiloid values.
The linear transformations for this prespecified SUVR method are FBP SUVR = 0.514 × PiB SUVR + 0.749, R 2 = 0.75; Centiloid = FBP SUVR × 184.12 -233.72
Another important anchor for interpreting PET results is the threshold for amyloid positivity, which is the quantitative threshold that best discriminates pathologically verified absence of plaques or sparse plaques from moderate to frequent plaques.
Navitsky et al. showed that a Centiloid value of 24 corresponds to the amyloid positivity threshold for florbetapir
Independently, the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) PET core laboratory has established a positivity threshold of 1.11 by using a FreeSurfer method, whole cerebellum reference, and a corresponding Centiloid value of 24
Using the florbetapir data available on the GAAIN website (13 young controls, 33 elderly subjects) and calculating SUVR using both the ADNI FreeSurfer and AAL SUVR processing pipelines, it is found that the 1.11 ADNI positivity threshold corresponds to a 1.40 value using the AAL method with a cerebellar cortex reference (Additional file 4: Figure
Transformed into Centiloids, the 1.40 SUVR also corresponds to a 24-Centiloid threshold.

Statistical analysis
The analysis population included all study participants receiving ≥ 1 OLE follow-up scan.
All analyses presented here are exploratory in nature.
Descriptive statistics were used to characterize patient demographics as well as change from baseline in PET Centiloid value and CDR-SB, ADAS-Cog 11, and MMSE scores.
PET Centiloid value was also analyzed using a mixed model for repeated measures (MMRM), with visit, treatment group, and the interaction for treatment group by visit as independent variables.
An unstructured covariance matrix was used to capture withinpatient correlation.
For descriptive group comparisons, the MMRM model was also applied to change from baseline in the clinical endpoint, with baseline value, group, and group-by-visit interaction as independent variables.
Joint linear mixed effects (JLME) models were used to evaluate the association between the annual rate of change in PET and that in CDR-SB, ADAS-Cog 11, and MMSE scores while simultaneously controlling the impact of the PET baseline on the rate of change in the latter.
For the ease of model convergence, PET, CDR-SB, ADAS-Cog 11, and MMSE scores were standardized to z-scores using the baseline mean and SD.

Results
Patients A total of 379 patients were dosed in the SR and MR OLE trials; of these, 67 had scans at OLE week 52 and 39 had scans at OLE week 104 as of August 15, 2018 (Additional file 3: Figure
Patient characteristics at OLE baseline are summarized for OLE week 52 completers in Table
Amyloid loads at OLE baseline were 91, 80, and 50 Centiloids in the MR-DBP, MR-DBA, and SR groups, respectively (Table
Mean (SD) MMSE scores were 21.6 (4.5), 19.3 (5.0), and 18.8 (4.8), respectively, and ranged from 11 to 29.
This indicates that although the original patient populations in the double-blind studies were prodromal/mild, some patients' health had declined by the time of OLE baseline, resulting in an overall mild/moderate patient population for this analysis.
All OLE baseline characteristics of week 52 completers were broadly consistent with those of week 104 completers, except for mean baseline Centiloid value in the SR cohort, which was 70 in week 104 completers (not shown) but only 50 in week 52 completers.

Gantenerumab markedly reduced brain amyloid-β plaque levels
The reduction in amyloid PET was significant in all subgroups and at all time points.
Mean (SE) PET Centiloid reductions from baseline were -42 (7.1), -48 (8.0), and -21 (8.3) at week 52 and -71 (7.7), -61 (8.9), and -34 (8.9) at week 104 in the MR-DBP, MR-DBA, and SR groups, respectively (Fig.
Example images from five patients are shown in Fig.
A strong correlation was seen between higher amyloid load at OLE baseline and greater amyloid reduction during the first year of gantenerumab treatment (Additional file 5: Figure
Large regional reductions were seen throughout the brain regions primarily involved in AD, with the greatest reductions observed in the anterior cingulate (Additional file 6: Figure
There were no observed effects of APOE status on PET reduction.

Amyloid reduction and ARIA
In our analysis population of OLE PET week 52 substudy completers, 28 patients experienced ARIA-E, including 7 who reported symptoms.
Global amyloid load at OLE baseline was not significantly different between the ARIA-E and non-ARIA-E groups (Table

Amyloid reduction and clinical results
This open-label, non-placebo-controlled trial was not designed to support analyses of clinical efficacy.
However, exploratory analyses of clinical endpoints were performed.
Baseline and follow-up CDR-SB, ADAS-Cog 11, and MMSE values are summarized in Table
"Higher" and "lower" PET amyloid reduction groups were defined based on the median PET Centiloid change from baseline to week 52 (Fig.
The "higher" versus "lower" dichotomization was performed at two different time points to test the hypothesis that clinical benefit may follow amyloid reduction temporally
At week 104, point estimates for CDR-SB, ADAS-Cog 11, and MMSE showed numerically less decline in the higher vs lower PET amyloid reduction groups, defined at either OLE week 52 or 104.
The differences between the higher and lower PET groups were non-significant with respect to change from baseline on all three clinical endpoints.
When pooled together, results from the JLME analysis indicated a directional but not significant association between the annual reduction in PET and the annual change in CDR-SB, ADAS-Cog 11, and MMSE.
For instance, an annual reduction of 0.54 SD in standardized z-score PET Centiloid would lead to a slowing of 0.55 SD in the standardized z-score ADAS-Cog increase.
However, with the limited sample size and absence of a placebo arm, robust interpretation and conclusion from any such analysis is not possible.

Discussion
This PET substudy of the MR and SR OLE studies investigated the effect of higher-dose gantenerumab on amyloid-β plaques over 104 weeks in patients with prodromal to moderate AD dementia.
Reductions in PET values to below the amyloid-β positivity threshold were achieved in 37% of patients at week 52 and 51% at week 104, suggesting that amyloid-β plaques can be reduced to levels that would not support a neuropathological diagnosis of AD
In addition, amyloid reductions were consistently observed across most patients, indicating that gantenerumab has the potential to reduce amyloid-β plaques as suggested by its proposed mechanism of action of preferential binding to amyloid-β aggregates and consequent plaque removal.
Compared with the PET mean (SD) change observed with the 225-mg dose during the SR 2-year double-blind period (-0.09
[0.14] SUVR, -16.6
Centiloids)
Centiloids.
The 64.8%, 77.3%, and 78.2% amyloid reductions in the SR, MR-P, and MR-NP groups, respectively, were well beyond the 2.4% ± 1.41% test-retest data reported for florbetapir
Since patients in all three OLE cohorts achieved reductions in amyloid load at week 104 to near or below the positivity threshold, the lower mean reductions in the MR-DBA and SR groups compared with the MR-DBP group were most likely due to their lower baseline amyloid loads and not due to a difference in treatment effect among the three groups.
The lower comparative reduction in the SR group at week 52 could also be explained by the shorter time on high dose compared with the MR-DBA and MR-DBP groups.
Regional analyses indicate that amyloid reductions are fairly uniform throughout the regions of the brain known to have amyloid, indicating that sufficient blood-brain barrier penetration of gantenerumab has occurred to effect globally large amyloid reductions.
Regarding PET amyloid reductions and ARIA-E, it was observed that while patients with ARIA-E may have a trend toward slightly higher amyloid reductions compared with patients without ARIA-E, both groups achieved very large amyloid reductions.
Consequently, the gantenerumab data indicate that ARIA-E is not a prerequisite for large amyloid reductions.
This result contrasts the data reported for bapineuzumab, in which there was a lack of change from baseline in the non-ARIA-E groups
Although comparison of PET amyloid reductions with gantenerumab vs the effect seen with other anti-amyloid therapies is challenging
To date, three other compounds have    reported similar levels of amyloid reduction.
The 10-mg/ kg arm of the aducanumab PRIME phase 1b study had a baseline Centiloid value of 96 (SUVR, 1.44) and a reduction of 71 Centiloids at week 110
The highestdose group for BAN2401 had a 70-Centiloid reduction at 18 months from 74.5 Centiloids at baseline
The most representative gantenerumab OLE cohort for comparison is the previously untreated MR-DBP arm, which had a baseline load of 92 Centiloids and a reduction of 69 Centiloids by week 104.
When comparing Centiloid reductions seen here to those in other studies, it is important to note that the rate of reduction appears to be related to baseline levels of amyloid as well as to drug effects.
Earlier anti-amyloid-β studies, including bapineuzumab and solanezumab, as well as BACE-1 studies, such as verubecestat, did not report amyloid values using Centiloid values, but all three of these showed no or modest amyloidβ reductions, < 5% with respect to baseline after treatment
Other studies have reported amyloid decline in placebo groups
There are several limitations to these analyses.
The OLE studies reported here did not have any disease severity-related inclusion or exclusion criteria, and by the start of the OLE, some patients had progressed to a mild-moderate stage.
The studies were neither randomized nor blinded and did not include a placebo arm; furthermore, the studies are still ongoing, with additional subjects expected to reach week 104.
In addition, several measures could be considered to improve the robustness of the results.
Results reported here are from static PET imaging, which may not account for certain drug effects (e.g., changes in blood flow or clearance).
Dynamic imaging may produce slightly more robust results; however, the differences due to perfusion changes are likely to be small compared with the SUVR change seen here
Our use of static PET is consistent with all previously reported findings on amyloid reduction with investigational AD therapies
Brain atrophy progresses over time in AD, potentially even after amyloid aggregates are removed, and application of a partial volume correction (PVC) may be useful for interpreting our findings.
PVC will be considered for future exploratory analysis.
It should be noted, however, that evidence supporting PVC is mixed, with some reporting an improved signal
Furthermore, an analysis of cerebellar gray, pons, and white matter reference region SUVs compared to cortical target region SUVs (see Additional file 2: Table
A key step is to clarify how amyloid reductions, such as those reported here, correspond to any clinical benefit among patients with early symptomatic AD.
Other randomized, parallel-group studies with aducanumab
In addition, a post hoc analysis of the SR trial demonstrated evidence of gantenerumab dose-dependent slowing of decline in some clinical efficacy scales
Whereas two phase III studies of aducanumab were discontinued due to a low likelihood of reaching the primary endpoint
(Full data from these phase III studies have not yet been published at the time of this writing.)
In this study, exploratory results showed a directional trend, whereby patients with higher PET amyloid reduction exhibited numerically less cognitive decline.
Considering the limited sample size, heterogeneity among patients, and other potential confounders, including the observed relationship between baseline amyloid levels and amyloid reduction, caution must be used in the interpretation of clinical outcome data, particularly the comparison to previously published results.
Nevertheless, these data do contribute to an overall body of evidence in the field that amyloid reduction is associated with clinical benefit among patients with early symptomatic AD, as outlined above.
The hypothesis that higherdose gantenerumab treatment contributes to clinical benefit in association with amyloid reduction is currently being tested in the ongoing GRADUATE phase III pivotal studies (NCT03444870, NCT03443973).

Conclusions
We have shown that gantenerumab reduces amyloid-β plaques, one of the main pathological hallmarks of AD.
These data and the favorable safety profile observed at these dose levels provide the rationale for further investigation of the clinical efficacy of gantenerumab, and two pivotal phase III trials in patients with early AD (GRADUATE 1 and 2) are currently ongoing



Fig. 1
Fig. 1 Marked and consistent reduction of amyloid load in patients receiving high-dose gantenerumab.
a Marked reduction of amyloid-β plaques in patients receiving high-dose gantenerumab, and consistent reduction of amyloid-β plaques in all patient groups.
b Reduction of amyloid-β plaque burden to below positivity threshold following high-dose gantenerumab.
a Analyzed using a mixed model for repeated measures


with ≥ 1 ARIA-E event MR-DBP (n = 13) MR-DBA (n = 8) SR (n = 7) Total (n = 28) MR-DBP (n = 6) MR-DBA (n = 3) SR (n = 4) Total (n = 13) Centiloid composite ROI-mean cerebellum gray Baseline value, mean (SD) 90.



Fig. 3
Fig. 3 Association of PET and clinical results.
a, d, g Regression analysis of CDR-SB, ADAS-Cog 11, and MMSE, respectively, shows directional slowing of clinical decline with increasing amyloid reduction.
b, e, h Change in CDR-SB, ADAS-Cog 11, and MMSE for week 104 completers stratified by patients with high and low amyloid reduction at week 104 also shows directional slowing of clinical decline in the group with higher amyloid reduction.
c, f, i Stratification of patients by amyloid reduction at the earlier week 52 time point shows increased clinical benefit in the high PET reduction group, suggesting a temporal lag between amyloid reduction and clinical benefit



Table 1
OLE baseline characteristics of patients with PET scan at OLE week 52



Table 2
Mean change in PET Centiloids from OLE baseline to OLE week 52 and OLE week 104 in patients with and without



Table 3
Mean change in clinical endpoints from OLE baseline to OLE week 52 and OLE week 104