Neuroanatomical and cognitive correlates of domain-specific anosognosia in early Alzheimer's disease
Anosognosia in Alzheimer's disease (AD) is defined as a lack of awareness for cognitive deficits or severity of disease.
Previous studies have highlighted the link between anosognosia and damage to prefrontal functioning, i.e., executive functions.
This study investigated the neuropsychological and neurostructural substrates of domain specific anosognosia in early AD.
Fifty-three patients with a clinical diagnosis of early-AD and a trustworthy informant were administered the Measurement of Anosognosia Instrument, a validated tool to quantify anosognosia.
Linear models were devised to test the association between the patient-informant discrepancy scores in the memory and non-memory domains and clinical profiles inclusive of cognitive scores and maps of grey matter.
Total anosognosia scores were associated with episodic memory, semantic memory, visuoconstructive skills and volume of the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), lingual gyrus, fusiform gyrus and thalamus.
Memory anosognosia was associated with episodic memory and visuoconstructive skills.
Non-memory anosognosia was associated with episodic and semantic memory and with volume of the ACC, precentral gyrus, superior frontal gyrus, postcentral gyrus, fusiform gyrus and lingual gyrus.
Known as a region responsible for self-regulation and monitoring, reduction of grey matter in the frontal lobe was highlighted as crucial for the presence of anosognosia.
Based on our findings, we argue that specific regions based in the frontal lobe could contribute to the functioning of the mnemonic comparator systems postulated by theoretical models of anosognosia.
The cross-domain variability of cognitive correlates indicates that various computational mechanisms are at play in the presence of anosognosia.

Introduction
Introduced more than one century ago
Anosognosic patients are unaware of their neurological impairments or are unable to judge how severe these are
It is a common symptom in Alzheimer's disease (AD), with an onset observable since the mild cognitive impairment stage
In AD patients, anosognosia is associated with the deposition of amyloid peptides in the brain
However, with disease progression, multiple domains may become affected by an anosognosic trait (often in an unpredictable way), resulting into considerable clinical heterogeneity
Notably, the presence of low cognitive awareness has been demonstrated to serve as a potential preclinical marker for AD
Anosognosia in AD can be described according to clinical or theory-informed approaches.
Clinical taxonomies focus on the various domains of clinical relevance that can be affected by an anosognosic trait, i.e., awareness of behavioural problems vs. awareness of cognitive deficits
The latter can be further divided into a memory and an executive subcomponent
It is well-established today that dysfunction of awareness in AD is multidomain
Theory-informed classifications are instead based on computational models that are characterised by modular information processing.
A first framework, the Conscious Awareness System
This information would then be transmitted to an executive system in charge of computing a metacognitive output.
According to this framework, anosognosia would be the result of disruption of one or more modules along the computational pathway that links the outcome of aware processing to the executive unit
A second framework, the Cognitive Awareness Model, focuses instead on the role played by memory and mnemonic comparators of executive nature
The rationale of this model is a continuous evaluative processing of episodic and semantic memories, carried out in constant concomitance with the inflow of sensory input.
Sensory information would be firstly processed by short-term memory (triggering a first episode of awareness) and would then be subsequently transferred to long-term memory systems (triggering a second episode of awareness).
After that, an executive-based mnemonic comparator would compare memory information with a database of personal experiences containing semantic portrayals of individuals' own capacities.
Following such comparison, finally, the information reaches conscious awareness through the Metacognitive Awareness System
Based on the Cognitive Awareness Model, therefore, memory retrieval must be supported by executive resources and anosognosia would be the result of a mismatch between the information stored in the personal knowledge database and that resulting from the processing of newly-received sensory information.
Various theory-informed types of anosognosia have been postulated based on these two theoretical frameworks.
Primary anosognosia would be due to dysfunction of the Conscious Awareness System and would result in severe clinical manifestations affecting multiple cognitive and behavioural domains.
Secondary anosognosia, on the other hand, would be caused by dysfunction of the Cognitive Awareness System and would result in executive anosognosia (when damage is to the comparator system) or memory anosognosia (when damage affects the information updating system)
Other studies, finally, have proposed that anosognosia in AD can also be due to poor/failed recollection and consolidation of semantic knowledge about the self or to an outdated version of an individual's self-recognition
The conceptual elements laid out by both clinical evidence and theoretical models of anosognosia have led to the exploration of the neurological mechanisms responsible for this highly disruptive symptom.
Since AD is a neurodegenerative disease characterised by widespread brain atrophy, the neuroanatomical correlates are of particular interest.
Significant associations have been found between the presence of symptoms of anosognosia and grey matter volumes in a set of regions that include the prefrontal cortex
The majority of these studies highlight an association between anosognosia in AD and the volume of the forebrain (prefrontal and antero-limbic regions).
Accordingly, the cognitive domain most distinctively associated with anosognosia in AD is executive functioning
The evidence emerging from neuroimaging aligns with the theoretical models previously outlined.
Prefrontal regions such as the anterior cingulate and the medial prefrontal cortex may serve as a core hub in support of the executive comparator system and dysfunctional connections in these pathways may result in executive anosognosia
Similarly, other studies postulate that memory anosognosia could find its pathological substrates in regions responsible for autobiographical conceptual memory such as medial temporal lobe structures that are damaged by the characteristic pathophysiology of AD
The clinical manifestations of memory or executive anosognosia are associated with degeneration of densely interconnected fronto-temporal structures which are thought to be responsible for the integrity of the cognitive awareness system
Moreover, since anosognosia in AD can be expressed in multiple clinical domains, it is unknown whether the mechanisms are the same for each domain affected by the trait.
In this respect, the current study explored anosognosia in two clinical domains: memory and non-memory (i.e., including activities of daily living and executive functioning).
Specifically, we studied the association between domain-specific anosognosia and total anosognosia scores with: 1) cognitive profiles and 2) voxel-based volumetric properties of the brain.
Therefore, based on neuroimaging and theoretical frameworks we hypothesised that domain-specific anosognosia would reflect the detrimental effects of grey matter loss in frontal lobe regions that support the mnemonic comparator system performance and associated cognitive functions.

Methods and Materials
We report how we determined our sample size, all data exclusions (if any), all inclusion/exclusion criteria, whether inclusion/exclusion criteria were established prior to data analysis, all manipulations, and all measures in the study.
No part of the study procedures or analyses was pre-registered in an institutional registry prior to the research being conducted.
Longitudinal follow ups for at least four years in patients labelled as MCI showed a clinical course supportive of an AD aetiology.
The set of exclusion criteria included evidence of other significant neurological conditions (e.g., acute or chronic cerebrovascular disease or history of transient ischaemic attacks), uncontrolled brain seizures or history of epilepsy, peripheral neuropathy, presence of significant behavioural symptoms or radiological evidence which could otherwise account for the symptoms, cardiovascular and gastroenterological conditions (e.g., sick-sinus syndrome or peptic ulcer), metabolic disorders (e.g., abnormal levels of vitamin B12, folates or thyroid-stimulating hormone), major pharmacological interventions (e.g., treatment with psychotropic medication other than AD-related drugs, pharmacological components displaying important organic adverse effects or medications used in other research protocols) and presence of major disabilities.
Moreover, since the main predictor (see Section 2.2) was dependent on the score obtained in a questionnaire administered to patient-caregiver dyads, participants were not approached if no reliable informant was available.
Each informant was briefly screened to rule out neurological or psychological factors that would prevent them from answering all study questions in a reliable way.
One dyad was excluded due to incomplete testing, giving a final sample of 53 patients (Table
---Please insert Table
Written informed consent was obtained from all participants.
The conditions of our ethics approval do not permit the sharing of any data supporting this study with any individual outside the author team under any circumstances

Anosognosia and neuropsychological assessment
Levels of self-awareness were measured with the Measurement of Anosognosia Instrument
This questionnaire consists of 15 binary "yes-no" questions assessing cognitive performance in daily-life settings.
All questions need to be answered independently by the patient and by the informant.
By doing so, two scores are obtained: that provided by the informant as a "standard-oftruth" objective assessment of the patient's abilities and that provided by the patient as self-evaluative measure.
The Measurement of Anosognosia Instrument explores two functional domains of awareness: "memory" (9 questions) and "non-memory" (inclusive of executive functioning and activities of daily living; 6 questions).
The informant-based and the patient-based responses were compared to quantify the number of discrepant answers provided by the patient.
Discrepancy scores were used to quantify presence of anosognosia across two cognitive domains: "memory" and "nonmemory", with an additional "total" score (the sum of both domains)
---Please insert Table

MRI acquisition and processing
A three dimensional T1-weighted image was obtained for each participant.
MRI Images were acquired and analysed following a shared protocol with the acquisition and modelling steps set up by the VPH-DARE@IT consortium for Philips scanners (
voxel size: 1 mm 3 , flip angle: 8°, matrix size: 256 × 256, repetition time 7.4 ms; echo delay time 3.4 ms; field of view 250 mm [see
A voxel-based morphometry analysis was carried out using the Statistical Parametric Mapping (SPM) software 12 (Wellcome Centre for Human Neuroimaging, London, UK) on processed MRI T1 weighted scans.
Scans were initially reoriented and segmented into grey matter, white matter and cerebrospinal fluid tissue maps.
These were quantified in volumetric terms (using the get_totals script:
Grey matter maps were then normalised and registered to the Montreal Neurological Institute space.
Finally, spatial smoothing (8 mm full-width half maximum Gaussian kernel) was carried out.

Statistical analyses
Three sets of inferential models were devised to test the association between measures of anosognosia and indices of cognitive functioning and brain structure.
To define these associations, all models were corrected for a series of confounding factors.
First, age was used to control for decrease of grey matter volume due to normal ageing
Second, education levels (in years) were included as a proxy of cognitive reserve
Third, normalised hippocampal volumes
Neuropsychological data were analysed with IBM SPSS Statistics 24 software for Windows (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, USA).
Coefficients of non-linear partial correlation were run between the three indices of anosognosia and the neuropsychological scores (Spearman's ρ).
The statistical threshold to define significance of these associations was set to p < 0.007 to correct for multiple comparisons.
Regression models were carried out to infer the linear association between voxel-byvoxel maps of grey matter and levels of anosognosia in SPM 12.
Total intracranial volumes were included as fourth covariate in these models.
This served to account for the inter-individual variability in head size
An uncorrected p < 0.005 was selected as cluster-forming threshold.
Clusters surviving a Family-Wise Error p < 0.05 were considered significant.
Peak stereotactic coordinates were converted to the Talairach atlas space using the mni2tal Matlab function.
Coordinates in the Talairach space were interpreted using the Daemon Client

Results

Association with neuropsychological functioning
The total anosognosia score was associated with scores on the following tests: delayed recall of the Prose Memory test (ρ = -0.467,
p = 0.002), the copy and recall of the Rey-Osterrieth figure (ρ = -0.424,
p = 0.005; ρ = -0.419,
p = 0.006, respectively), the Category Fluency test (ρ = -0.492,
p = 0.001) and the Mini Mental State Examination (ρ = -0.525,
p = 0.001).
The index of memory anosognosia was associated with the scores achieved on the Prose Memory Test (ρ = -0.429,
p = 0.005) and Category Fluency Test (ρ = -0.449,
p = 0.003) and on the Mini Mental State Examination (ρ = -0.563,
p = 0.001).
Finally, the index of non-memory anosognosia showed no significant associations (Table
---Please insert Table

Association with brain structure
A significant negative association was found between the total anosognosia score and volumes of the bilateral anterior cingulate cortex, left lingual gyrus, left fusiform gyrus and left thalamus.
Likewise, a significant negative association was found between the non-memory anosognosia score and volumes of the bilateral anterior cingulate cortex, bilateral precentral gyrus, bilateral lingual gyrus, bilateral fusiform gyrus, right superior frontal gyrus and right postcentral gyrus (Table
No significant associations were detected between memory anosognosia scores and grey matter volumes.
---Please insert Table

Discussion
The purpose of this study was to characterise the neuropsychological and neurovolumetric correlates of anosognosic profiles in the early stage of AD (prodromal to mild), differentiating between memory and non-memory anosognosia.
Cognitive and anatomical analyses performed in the MCI and mild AD samples separately demonstrated similar patterns of results, although in both groups statistical power was low.
Given the similarity in the pattern of findings, these clinical profiles were, therefore, merged to increase statistical power.

Association between anosognosia and neuropsychological functioning
Total anosognosia scores were associated with a series of measures of episodic memory, semantic memory and visuoconstructive skills.
Overall, we cannot rule out the possibility that these total-anosognosia scores were driven by the distribution of scores on the non-memory section of the test (hence, the similar pattern of findings).
However, the total score was significantly associated with both memory and non-memory subscores (both r scores > 0.8) suggesting equal dependence on both sub-scores.
After splitting the construct into its two components, memory anosognosia showed an association with the Category Fluency Test (a measure of semantic memory) and the Prose Memory Test.
This latter is a test of episodic memory based on the retrieval of material characterised by semantic relatedness
Semanticisation processes are an essential trait for the integration of episodic autobiographical memory
This domain has a significant influence on the representation of the self.
In this respect, patients with anosognosia constantly try to reorganise their selfrepresentation without success, and this leads to a progressive deterioration of their own identity
On the other hand, deficits in episodic memory are central clinical hallmarks in AD and are associated with disease severity
Notably, these results are consistent with those of other studies focusing on anosognosia in AD
In line with our results,
To minimise the likelihood of obtaining spurious results, all of the inferential models involving neuropsychological tests were controlled for normalised hippocampal size, an established measure of neuronal injury in AD
The total anosognosia score was also associated with performance on visuospatial skills.
Visuoconstructive abilities are an essential trait of self-awareness, in that they enable the individual to shift from a first-person to a third-person perspective
These abilities would also serve to update information processing by projecting allocentric (object-to-object) and egocentric (self-to-object) spatial representations, prerequisite components of global awareness
Based on this view, our findings indicate that patients with higher total anosognosia scores would be less able to achieve this "mental frame syncing"; or, in other words, the ability to update properly previously experienced scenarios stored in episodic memory.
Therefore, these patients may not be able to understand the mental scenarios of their first-person orientation, which could lead to unawareness of the perceived space in contrast with the one remembered.
Lastly, overall cognitive severity of disease was associated with the total anosognosia scores and the memory anosognosia scores.
This finding has been reported in the literature
However, the scientific literature indicates that there is no welldefined link between severity of disease and anosognosia, with studies that support a link (such as those referenced in the section above) and studies that do not
The AD pathophysiological progression may impact directly on the severity of the disease, but is not an essential variable for the onset of anosognosia, which explains the heterogeneity between disease stage and the initial symptomatic expression of anosognosia that displays worsening with disease progression characterised initially by memory disconnection

Association between anosognosia and brain structure
The total anosognosia score was associated with volume in the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC).
This region has been associated with disease awareness in other studies involving AD patients
Progressive neuronal loss in the anterior cingulate leads to decline of executive metacognitive processes that involve cognitive regulation
In this study, the ACC was associated with both total anosognosia scores and non-memory domain anosognosia scores, the latter consisting mostly of decreased awareness of activities dependent on executive functions.
Likewise,
Lastly,
The involvement of the ACC can be interpreted as that of a gateway region sustaining conflict resolution within the framework of the Cognitive Awareness Model
The ACC is a region responsible for the integration of cognitive and emotional stimuli
In coherence with the Cognitive Awareness Model, the ACC may provide the executive resources necessary to the mnemonic comparator to verify the authenticity of the processed information.
Total anosognosia scores and non-memory anosognosia scores also showed a significant association in the fusiform gyrus and lingual gyrus.
The involvement of the fusiform gyrus in anosognosia does not come as a novel finding
Dysfunction in this area is linked to awareness deficits for bodily representations.
In fact, hemiplegic patients with lesions extending to the fusiform gyrus show impaired mentalisation of the body
Moreover, the pathway linking the fusiform gyrus with the ACC was found to be abnormally upregulated in patients with amnestic MCI
The lingual gyrus is instead a region essential for visual perception
Moreover, atrophy of a set of regions including the lingual gyrus is linked to faster decline in AD dementia
The non-memory anosognosia domain showed additional significant negative associations with the precentral, postcentral and superior frontal gyrus that runs in parallel with the findings of other studies related to the field of AD.
The precentral gyrus was found to be associated with anosognosia of executive functions in a structural MRI study
In this context,
The postcentral gyrus showed less activation in a comparative analysis of aware vs unaware AD patients based on a response-inhibition go/no-go task
Lastly, the superior frontal gyrus was also associated with anosognosia in another structural study
Therefore, we argue that specific frontal regions could serve as crucial components for the modulation of executivefunction-related awareness processes.
In spite of the importance of executive resources in this process, however, no association was found between indices of anosognosia and measures of executive functioning.
Arguably, however, a dysfunctional comparator may result in subtle executive deficits that will not necessarily emerge with standardised executive tests.
A number of published structural and functional neuroimaging studies found that anosognosia was associated with medial temporal structures (e.g.,
To this end,
Our findings, however, seem not to support this suggestion, since no association was found between hippocampal volume and anosognosia scores.
Associations between anosognosia and semantic and episodic memory were identified in the current study, but these associations did not appear to be mediated by hippocampal volume.
In this respect, the findings by
Therefore, we argue that mediotemporal structures most likely provide a supportive mnemonic input to the structures that provide comparatory resources, and it is possible that this link could be spurious and driven by disease severity, which is known to affect harshly this part of the brain.
Based on our findings, comparatory resources would be more consistently linked with the ACC instead.
A broader neuroimaging-based perspective suggests that damage to frontal-circuitry precedes loss of grey matter, and this would account for how the clinical symptoms present in relation to multi-domain anosognosia
According to this view, reduced connectivity of the default mode network (DMN), seen in the early phases of AD
In fact, the bases of impaired selfawareness and anosognosia have been heavily intertwined to the functionality of the DMN in AD
On these grounds, the DMN could be conceived as a translational construct to justify a routine assessment in the preclinical stage of AD
In turn, damage to the DMN could then hinder other frontal pathways of connectivity that would lead to a dysfunctional use of the central executive comparator and other neuronal systems such as those in charge of attention or emotional processing
The mismatch found between anatomical findings and behavioural outcomes could be due to the inherent relation of unawareness to the functional domain controlled by it.
The consistency of association of visuospatial abilities to the behavioural and neuroimaging outcomes sheds light into the essential role of these functions in global awareness.
Dissecting anosognosia study by domains in the very early stages of the disease could lack of evident association between the broad neuronal anatomical conformation to the specific function mediated by that region.

Limitations
Limitations might arise from the choice of instrument to measure anosognosia.
In fact, failing to acknowledge the presence of symptoms or a poor performance could in part be due to a defensive mechanism of denial, triggered by individual socioemotional factors
This possibility, however, is an intrinsic factor in this type of measurement and would affect any questionnaire/scale.
On this note, it is desirable to confirm each diagnosis of anosognosia with a clinical qualitative judgment.
Secondly, the use of discrepancy scores depends on the answers given by both patient and informant.
Caregiver burden may inadvertently shift the perception of the patient's abilities into an over/underestimation.
To rule out this possibility, we chose to rely on a robust instrument that has undergone methodological validation, but acknowledge that there are other ways to assess anosognosia, such as the discrepancy between estimation and actual performance on a task.
Lastly, although the total anosognosia score was strongly correlated with both the memory (r = 0.895) and nonmemory (r = 0.818) sub-scores, we cannot completely rule out the possibility that one of the two sub-scales may have had a larger impact on the total score than the other.

Conclusions
Our findings highlight the ACC as the main structure associated with total scores and non-memory anosognosia scores in patients with early AD.
Additionally, volumes in the fusiform and lingual gyri were also associated with the total scores and non-memory anosognosia scores.
The precentral gyrus, postcentral gyrus and superior frontal gyrus show further involvement in non-memory anosognosia.
Behavioural findings foregrounded the role played by semantic memory, episodic memory and visuospatial abilities.
All in all, these findings indicate that anosognosia is a complex symptom in which executive resources seem to play a crucial role.
Moreover, and as pointed out by previous research


Study recruitment was carried out as part of the EU-funded Virtual Physiological Human -DementiA Research Enabled by IT (VPH-DARE@IT) initiative, a multicentre project clinically coordinated by the Department of Neuroscience, Royal Hallamshire Hospital in Sheffield, UK (http://www.vph-dare.eu/).
Fifty-four candidate patients were initially enrolled.
All candidates had received either a clinical diagnosis of AD, n = 25 following the National Institute of Aging criteria (McKhann et al., 2011) or a diagnosis of MCI due to AD, n = 29


Figure test) (Table2).



Figure caption Figure 1 .
Figure caption