Identification of a simple and novel cut-point based CSF and MRI signature for predicting Alzheimer’s disease progression that reinforces the 2018 NIA-AA research framework
The 2018 NIA-AA research framework proposes a classification system with beta-Amyloid deposition, pathologic Tau, and neurodegeneration (ATN) for the diagnosis and staging of Alzheimer's Disease (AD).
Data from the ADNI (AD neuroimaging initiative) database can be utilized to identify diagnostic signatures for predicting AD progression, and to determine the utility of this NIA-AA research framework.
Profiles of 320 peptides from baseline cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) samples of 287 normal, mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and AD subjects followed over a 3-10 year period were measured via multiple reaction monitoring (MRM) mass spectrometry.
CSF A42, total-Tau (tTau), phosphorylated-Tau (pTau-181) and hippocampal volume were also measured.
From these candidate markers, optimal diagnostic signatures with decision thresholds to separate AD and normal subjects were first identified via unbiased regression and tree-based algorithms.
The best performing signature determined via crossvalidation was then tested in an independent group of MCI subjects to predict future progression.
This multivariate analysis yielded a simple diagnostic signature comprising CSF pTau-181 to A42 ratio, MRI hippocampal volume and a novel PTPRN peptide, with a decision threshold on each marker.
When applied to a separate MCI group at baseline, subjects meeting this signature criteria experience 4.3-fold faster progression to AD compared to a 2.2-fold faster progression using only conventional markers.
This novel 4-marker signature represents an advance over the current diagnostics based on widely used marker, and is much easier to use in practice than recently published complex signatures.
In addition, this signature reinforces the ATN construct from the 2018 NIA-AA research framework.

Introduction
Tools to provide an early diagnosis and prediction of progression to Alzheimer Disease (AD) are of critical importance.
Early diagnosis allows caregivers to plan for additional needs which will decrease the overall financial burden of the illness
In addition, early diagnosis may help identify common comorbidities such as depression or undernutrition
Finally, identifying individuals who are more likely to progress will help enrich clinical trial populations with subjects with more rapid progression, potentially shortening trial duration.
Early pathological changes of AD are seen years before the clinical diagnosis of AD.
Most studies have shown that individuals with mild cognitive impairment (MCI) carry AD pathological burden and have a substantial risk (~10-15% per year) of development of dementia
Thus, as new therapeutics are developed that target AD-related pathology, MCI may represent a state during which early intervention may change the trajectory of patient outcomes.
However, therapeutics targeting Aβ will likely carry potential risks of significant side-effects, as documented in clinical trials
Therefore, what is needed is an approach to accurately identify MCI patients with the highest risk of conversion to AD.
Multiple potential biomarkers have been identified to aid in the prediction of conversion of MCI to AD.
For example, cognitive and behavioral biomarkers have been proposed to identify individuals at high-risk for conversion
In addition, biomarkers based on brain imaging or measurements in bodily fluids have been identified (for recent reviews see
The latter groups of biomarkers have recently been organized into a generalizable research framework.
This framework, labeled AT(N), describes three classes of biomarkers: 1) "A" or aggregated amyloid-based (e.g., cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) A42 levels, amyloid positron emission tomography (PET)), 2) "T" or aggregated tau-based (e.g., CSF phosphorylated tau [pTau-181], tau PET) and 3) "N" or neuronal degeneration-based (e.g., volumetric magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) PET, CSF total tau (tTau))
Furthermore, Jack et al, 2018, advocate extending this to the ATX(N) framework, where X can include additional markers from the multiarray-omics platforms.
This research framework is intended to form a common approach by which investigators can communicate about and classify novel biomarkers, thereby allowing their more rapid integration into current research.
CSF-based biomarkers have been of interest since they represent an assessment of biochemical changes in the central nervous system.
The most commonly-observed changes in the CSF of AD subjects have been a reduction of A42 and increase in pTau-181
We recently identified a 16-analyte CSF signature which showed higher sensitivity and specificity than any combination of A42, tTau and pTau-181 for the diagnosis of AD vs. controls, and, when applied to an independent dataset of MCI subjects, outperformed traditional biomarkers in prediction of conversion to AD
Unfortunately, a complicated 16-analyte signature is not practical for clinical purposes.
Multi-analyte signatures require quality-control measures for each analyte and do not provide an intuitive understanding of how changes in the biomarker impact the disease.
Therefore, here, using data from only the AD and age-matched Normal (NL) subjects from the ADNI (AD neuroimaging initiative) database, we identify optimal diagnostic signatures with decision thresholds on a few markers that separate AD and NL subjects via unbiased regression and tree-based algorithms
The best performing signatures from the NL and AD subjects were then tested in an independent group of MCI subjects at baseline to determine their ability to predict the future progression.
By developing a simple, yet powerful, signature for prediction of MCI to AD, this work confirms and extends the AT(N) framework and provides a potential new tool for clinicians to use to advise decision making and for researchers to enrich clinical trials with MCI subjects with a higher likelihood of conversion.

Methods
Data used for this research were mostly identical to that used in
For the sake of completeness, we repeat some of the key information pertaining to these data in this paper.
The ADNI database (adni.loni.usc.edu)
utilized in this research was launched in 2003 as a publicprivate partnership, led by Principal Investigator Michael W. Weiner, MD.
The primary goal of ADNI has been to test whether serial MRI, PET, other biological markers, and clinical and neuropsychological assessments can be combined to measure the progression of MCI and early AD.
For up-to-date information, see www.adni-info.org.
This study was conducted across multiple clinical sites and was approved by the Institutional Review Boards of all of the participating institutions.
Informed written consent was obtained from all participants at each site.
Data used for the analyses presented here were accessed on February 24, 2018.
Although the ADNI database continues to be updated on an ongoing basis, most newly added biomarker data are from later time points (i.e., beyond 1 year), in contrast to the baseline data used in this study.

Patient Population
This research was focused on only those subjects in the ADNI database for whom data from both the conventional markers (CSF amyloid/tau and MRI HV) and novel markers (320 peptides from the multiple reaction monitoring (MRM) proteomics panel) were available at baseline.
This included 287 subjects with AD, MCI and NL from the ADNI study that received clinical, neuropsychological, and biomarker assessments which were repeated every six months for a

Imaging:
All participants received 1.5 Tesla (T) structural MRI at baseline and at every six months for the next several years.
In addition, approximately 25% also received 3.0 T MRI.
Cognitive assessments and neuroimaging procedures were carried out within two weeks of each other.
In this research, we utilized only the baseline HV data measured via MRI and computed using the FreeSurfer software at the University of California in San Francisco.
Details regarding this software can be found in the "UCSF FreeSurfer Methods" PDF document under "MR Image Analysis" in the ADNI section of

CSF Samples:
CSF levels of A42, tTau, and pTau-181 were determined using Innogenetics' INNO-BIA AlzBio3 immunoassay on a Luminex xMAP platform (see
These CSF samples were also processed in the Caprion Proteomics platform that uses mass spectrometry to evaluate the ability of a panel of peptides to discriminate between disease states and predict disease progression.
The CSF multiplex MRM panel was developed by Caprion Proteomics in collaboration with the ADNI Biomarker Consortium Project Team.
A total of 320 peptides generated from tryptic digests of 143 proteins were used in this study (see Supplemental Table
Details regarding the technology, quality control and validation of the MRM platform can be found in the Use of Targeted Mass Spectrometry Proteomic Strategies to Identify CSF-Based Biomarkers in Alzheimer's Disease Data Primer (found under Biomarkers Consortium CSF Proteomics MRM Data Primer at ida.loni.usc.edu).
In brief, as described in the data primer and in
The samples were then lyophilized, desalted and analyzed by LC/MRM-MS analysis on a QTRAP 5500 LC-MS/MS system at Caprion Proteomics.
MRM experiments were performed on triple quadrupole (Q) mass spectrometers.
The first (Q1) and third (Q3) mass analyzer were used to isolate a peptide ion and a corresponding fragment ion.
The fragment ions were generated in Q2 by collision induced dissociation.
All peptide levels are presented as normalized and log2transformed intensities as we and others have done previously

Statistical Methods:
Optimal combinatorial signatures with simple decision thresholds on each marker were first identified from the AD and NL subjects.
This was performed in an unbiased, data driven manner via regression and tree-based computational algorithms called Patient Rule Induction Method
Prior to application of these algorithms on the 320-peptide MRM panel, promising peptide candidates were identified using the same algorithm utilized in
The predictive performance of the optimal signature from each algorithm for differentiating the AD and NL subjects was then evaluated via 10 iterations of five-fold cross-validation.
In this procedure, the original data were divided into five random subsets (folds), each fold was left out one at a time, and the remaining four folds were used to derive a signature, which was then used to predict the disease state of each subject in the left-out fold.
This process was carried out for each left-out fold one at a time and the predictions of all the five left-out folds were aggregated.
For better stability and robustness, this cross-validation procedure was repeated 10 times and the median of each these performance measures was calculated.
All steps of the model building and signature derivation process were fully embedded within this cross-validation to further reduce any possible bias
The optimal signature from the best performing algorithm determined via the above crossvalidation procedure (i.e., the signature that best differentiated AD and NL subjects) was then tested on a separate independent group of 135 MCI subjects at baseline, to predict their future progression to AD.
MCI subjects predicted to be AD-like ("Signature Positive" at baseline) were considered as future converters to AD, and those predicted to be NL-like ("Signature Negative" at baseline) were considered as non-converters.
These baseline predictions were then compared to the follow-up clinical data.
Performance metrics such as the PPV, NPV and overall accuracy were calculated by comparing the predictions to the known progression status of the MCI subjects to AD over the next 36 months.
Comparisons of the performance metrics between different signatures were carried out via exact McNemar's test.
The performance of this signature was then evaluated in terms of its ability to differentiate the future time to progression from MCI to AD of these baseline signature-positive and signaturenegative MCI subjects via Kaplan-Meier analysis.
For this evaluation, the progression of MCI subjects to AD over the entire future time course until the last follow-up visit was taken into consideration.
This analysis procedure was carried out separately for the following subsets of markers, along with APOE genetic status, age, gender and education (4 markers):
-MRI brain HV: 5 total markers (the 4 markers above + HV) -CSF Aβ42, tTau, pTau-181, ratios of tTau to Aβ42 & pTau-181 to Aβ42 (AT): 9 total markers -AT + HV: 10 total markers, and -AT + HV + 320 peptides from the CSF MRM panel: 330 total markers This evaluation of the AD versus NL peptide signature on the future progression of a separate group of MCI subjects to AD not only served as an independent verification of the utility of the signature, but also put it to a greater test to see whether it is robust enough to address a different and more important question related to the prediction of future progression of the MCI subjects to AD.
The analysis procedure described here is summarized in Figure
All analyses related to predictive modeling and signature derivation were carried out using R (
version 3.4.1,
with the publicly available package, SubgrpID
The time to progression analysis of the derived signatures and related assessments were carried out using JMP®, version 13.2.

Results:
Disease-state Demographics:
Table
The subjects were balanced across groups in terms of age and education (both p>0.05).
There were significantly more males (59.1%) than females (40.9%) in the study, though similar numbers of male and female MCI subjects converted to AD over a three-year period (44% vs. 54.6%,
p=0.248,
Chi-squared test).
As shown previously
MCI and 24.4% NL, p < 0.0001, Chi-squared test).
In addition, this allele also tracked with MCI to AD progression over a 36month period (37.5% of non-E4 vs. 56.3% of E4 progressed to AD, p=0.029,
Chi-squared test).

Disease state classification:
The distribution of the conventional biomarkers for NL, MCI and AD subjects are shown in Figures
While the means significantly differ across groups (p<0.0001), the considerable overlap of expression levels greatly limits the diagnostic utility of any of these markers on their own.
Multivariate analysis of the various markers using data-driven computational algorithms described above yielded optimal signatures for differentiating the disease states and prediction of disease progression.
These signatures are summarized in Table
Figures

Prediction of MCI to AD progression:
For disease state classification, the signatures derived from all data scenarios have similar levels of overall accuracy, with no discernable advantage of adding novel markers from the MRM panel to the conventional markers.
However, for the prediction of 36-month progression in the independent group of 135 MCI subjects at baseline, the signature derived from the collection of both conventional and novel markers significantly outperforms the signatures based on the conventional markers (p=0.0002), with the NPV increasing from 70.2% to 77.6% (p=0.0032) and the PPV increasing slightly from 60.2% to 61.6% (p=0.0107).
Thus, the addition of a novel PTPRN peptide from the MRM panel to the conventional AD markers substantially improves the prediction of 36-month disease progression in MCI subjects at baseline.
Based on the available 3-10 year follow-up clinical data available on these subjects, the performance of the optimal signatures from all the scenarios was further assessed on this independent group of baseline MCI subjects with respect to their future time to progression.
Table
Based on these results, the optimal combination of conventional markers showed a Hazard Ratio of 2.2 suggesting that the MCI subjects meeting the criteria of this signature experience 2.2-fold faster progression to AD.
However, the MCI subjects that meet the signature criterion from the scenario that includes the PTPRN peptide experience 4.3-fold faster progression to AD, as shown in Figure
To determine if the impact of PTPRN was likely isolated to the particular peptide fragment (PPRN.SELE, the other two PTPRN peptides (AEAPALFSR, referred to as PTPRN.AEAP and LAAVLAGYGVELR, referred to as PTPRN.LAAV) in the MRM panel were also assessed.
The pairwise correlations between these three peptides are all over 87% (data not shown).

Discussion

Summary:
We examined the ability of a simple optimized multivariate signature comprising conventional biomarkers combined with an array of novel CSF peptides from the ADNI database to both classify AD disease state and to predict MCI to AD conversion.
We observed that both conventional AD biomarkers (HV and CSF pTau/Aβ42 ratio) and conventional biomarkers combined with an array of novel CSF peptides performed similarly in terms of classifying disease state (AD vs. NL).
However, when these optimized signatures were applied to an independent group of MCI subjects, the signature combining conventional markers with a novel peptide analyte derived from PTPRN substantially outperformed the conventional biomarkers in predicting MCI to AD conversion by nearly twofold.
In addition, the combined signature contains only four elements: HV, CSF Aβ42, tTau and the PTPRN.SELE peptide, thus making it simple enough to be tractable for clinical and research purposes.
These data may also open new lines of investigation regarding the role of PTPRN in AD as well as confirming and extending the proposed AT(N) framework for AD biomarkers.

PTPRN and AD:
PTPRN is expressed widely in neurons throughout the mouse and human brain, including areas associated with AD neurodegeneration such as hippocampus and neocortex
It is a membrane-spanning protein phosphatase with cytoplasmic and luminal components and is found in the membranes of secretory granules.
The gene for PTPRN is also highly expressed in pancreatic islet cells, and antibodies against this protein are found in type 1 diabetes, hence its alternative name islet-antigen 2
Deficiency in PTPRN is associated with glucose intolerance in animal models
Given the associations between diabetes, insulin resistance and AD
Several previous studies have identified PTPRN as a potential marker of AD.
For example, downregulation of the expression of the PTPRN gene has been observed in the hippocampus of sporadic AD subjects
In addition, when incorporated into a three-gene classifier, PTPRN expression levels have been found to discriminate between patients with AD pathology and no symptoms, and those with only AD pathology
Finally, in a preliminary study of genetic interactions with CSF pTau levels for predicting MCI to AD conversion, PTPRN levels showed differences with respect to CSF pTau levels in MCI to AD converters compared to non-converters

Implications of the prediction of MCI-AD conversion:
Over the years, several groups have examined the ability of multi-modal combination biomarkers (i.e., combinations of imaging, cognitive, body fluid and other markers) to predict the conversion of MCI to AD. Ideally, utilizing an approach such as the AT(N) framework, a combination biomarker should merge several orthogonal measurements reflecting different underlying biological processes.
Larger combinations of biomarkers have the potential to increase the predictive power of the combination biomarker.
The multiplicity of biomarkers is limited by clinical reality such that it is often impractical and costly to obtain multiple studies in individual patients.
Therefore, a challenge in developing combination biomarkers is to develop combinations that provide high predictive MCI to AD accuracy and are clinically feasible.
Here, we have identified a 4-marker signature that combines volumetric MRI and CSF testing, both feasible clinical tests, that outperforms standard biomarkers in the prediction of MCI to AD.
Although other studies have found that combinations of volumetric MRI and CSF measures can predict MCI to AD conversion
In addition, because the 4-marker signature is in the form of simple decision cut-points, it can readily be applied for clinical trial patient enrollment and in clinical practice for physicians without the need for complex calculations.
It will be beneficial in the future to evaluate the performance of this signature in databases containing other neurodegenerative diseases to determine the specificity of these markers against related illnesses.
In addition, further evaluation and validation of PTPRN as a diagnostic and progression marker for patients with early signs of cognitive impairment, in conjunction with the core beta-amyloid and tau markers, in line with the ATN construct proposed in the 2018 NIA-AA consensus paper may provide additional insights about AD pathology.



period of 3
to 10 years.
NL individuals were free of memory complaints or depression and had a Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) score above 25 and a Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR) score of 0. MCI individuals could have MMSE scores of 23 to 30 and required a CDR of 0.5 and an informant-verified memory complaint substantiated by abnormal education-adjusted scores on the Wechsler Memory Scale Revised-Logical Memory II.
AD patients could have MMSE scores of 20 to 27 and a CDR of 0.5 or 1.0.



Figure legends : Figure 1 :Figure 2 :
Figure legends: Figure 1: Statistical analysis flow-scheme



Figure 3 :
Figure 3: Time to progression profiles of the signature positive versus signature negative MCI subjects with the shaded 95% confidence bands are shown here via Kaplan-Meier analysis.
The effect of signature based on only the conventional markers (HV and AT) is illustrated in Figure 4A and the signature with both the conventional markers and the novel PTPRN.SELE peptide from the MRM panel is shown in Figure 3B.
Patients meeting the signature criterion that includes this PTPRN peptide experience 4.3-fold faster progression to AD (hazard ratio = 4.4), relative to the 2.2-fold faster progression without this peptide.



Table 1 :
Disease-state demographics



Table 2 :
Performance of optimal signatures



Table 3 :
Time to progression (T2P) of MCI subjects to AD using optimal signatures



Table 1 .
List of Peptides.
All peptides, proteins and UniProt accession numbers from the peptides measured in this study.