Realâ€world evidence in Alzheimer's disease: The ROADMAP Data Cube
The ROADMAP project aimed to provide an integrated overview of European real-world data on Alzheimer's disease (AD) across the disease spectrum.
Metadata were identified from data sources in catalogs of European AD projects.
Priority outcomes for different stakeholders were identified through systematic literature review, patient and public consultations, and stakeholder surveys.
RESULTS: Information about sixty-six data sources and thirteen outcome domains was integrated into a Data Cube.
Gap analysis identified cognitive ability, functional ability/independence, behavioral/neuropsychiatric symptoms, treatment, comorbidities, and mortality as the outcomes collected most.
Data were most lacking on caregiverrelated outcomes.
In general, electronic health records covered a broader, less detailed data spectrum than research cohorts.
DISCUSSION: This integrated real-world AD data overview provides an intuitive visual model that facilitates initial assessment and identification of gaps in relevant outcomes data to inform future prospective data collection and matching of data sources and outcomes against research protocols.

Research in context
1. Systematic review: Articles containing outcomes of Alzheimer's disease (AD) relevant to different stakeholders across the disease spectrum were identified.
2. Interpretation: Availability of real-world outcomes in a variety of data sources across Europe identified through existing catalogs and previous projects, as well as relevance of the outcomes per disease stage, were represented in a Data Cube.
Our results provide a first step toward understanding the European real-world AD data landscape in an integrated, visual overview of the available data sources across the disease spectrum.
3. Future directions: Better understanding of the AD real-world data landscape for the development of new AD treatments is needed.
The list of AD outcomes considered relevant by all stakeholder groups should be further refined and validated to facilitate the construction of a real-world evidence platform that is both relevant and acceptable to the healthcare community.

Introduction
There is a diverse landscape of real-world data on Alzheimer's disease (AD) in Europe.
Such data are increasingly being used to provide evidence of the effectiveness of new AD treatments
Use of real-world evidence (RWE) in research may help to improve the generalizability of findings by accounting for patient factors such as genetics, comorbidities, medication history, and treatment adherence
Identification and characterization of the different European real-world data sources in AD provides a first step in understanding the European landscape of RWE and identifying data gaps.
Several projects, including the European Medical Information Framework (EMIF) (
have attempted to identify and characterize cohort, electronic health record (EHR), and clinical trial data sources in AD.
However, an integrated overview of the different data types available related to real-world outcomes is lacking.
The Real world Outcomes across the AD spectrum for better care: Multi-modal data Access Platform (ROADMAP) project was a 2-year public-private partnership to assess the feasibility of using AD RWE for the development of new AD disease models and treatments (
Among the key aims were the identification of European AD-relevant real-world data sources and AD-relevant outcomes considered a priority by different stakeholder groups (healthcare professionals [HCPs], patients, and caregivers).
This article describes the integration of this information into a Data Cube to provide a three-dimensional overview of how different types of European data sources capture key AD outcomes and their relevance across the disease stages.
Input from stakeholders was gathered to create an overview of outcome measures that are considered relevant by the different stakeholders.
Thus, the Data Cube provides metadata, which are the characteristics of data sources including the types of collected data, protocol features, and governance information, mapped against stakeholder preferences.
The Data Cube itself does not contain the listed databases, neither partly or as a whole.
Using the Data Cube, a gap analysis was performed to identify missing or partially reported outcomes in the characterized data sources.

Methods

Identification of data sources

Identification of relevant outcomes
Real-world AD outcomes of relevance to the different stakeholders were identified from a systematic literature review (SLR), a series of patient and public involvement (PPI) consultations, and a stakeholder survey.
The SLR included relevant publications regardless of the language the study was published in, the PPI consultations were conducted in English, and the survey was undertaken in English.
The literature review identified studies that answered the following research question: "Which AD outcomes across the spectrum are prioritized by patients, caregivers, and HCPs?" Studies published between 2008 and 2017 inclusive were identified across a range of literature types.
The whole spectrum of AD was considered, from preclinical AD to severe AD dementia
The Nationalities of the different stakeholders varied and included nine European countries and the United States.
Outcomes identified in the literature and selected using a consensus-based decision making approach were incorporated into surveys.
These surveys gathered information on the relative importance of these outcomes to multiple stakeholder groups, including professionals working in dementia, people with dementia, and caregivers.
A mixed-methods analytical approach
Outcomes at the category level were the connecting point for all three methods.
For example, cognitive abilities, an outcome category, is made of many granular outcome sub-categories, such as memory, language & communication, executive functions, etc.
All workstreams raised cognitive abilities as a priority outcome category, however at the granular sub-category level, differences and nuances arose across the workstreams (e.g.
memory loss or language difficulties as sub-category).
These outcome categories were developed through thematic analysis, consensus approaches, previous deliverables within the project, data synthesis meetings, and the use of clinical nosology.
The survey was designed using these specific categories as response options for the questions, and the analysis of the PPI consultations and the SLR was undertaken using the categories as superordinate coding headings.
Outcomes at the subcategory level were derived directly from the data and were allocated to a category through data synthesis meetings.
Outcome prioritization across the workstreams at the category and subcategory for individual stakeholder populations was undertaken for the data cube using an inclusive approach such that if it was prioritized by any of the workstreams for that stakeholder population it was included in the data cube filter for that stakeholder group.
Data was not equally available across the workstreams for filtering the data cube by both stakeholder population and specific stages of disease progression.
Stage specific prioritization for people with dementia and carers is derived from the PPI consultations and the SLR, whereas stage specific prioritization for professionals is derived from the SLR and the survey.

Data integration into a Data Cube
The list of outcomes from the mixed-methods analytical approach was reviewed and refined by ROADMAP consortium members to develop a final consensus-based list consisting of main domain headings together with related outcomes.
To improve userfriendliness and ease of completion of the Data Cube, a final selection of outcome domains and outcomes to be included in the Data Cube was made.
This selection process was supported by the expertise of different Consortium members.
Outcomes excluded from the Data Cube were those indirectly captured by another outcome (e.g.
"life as a whole" was excluded since this cannot be directly captured in most cohort studies, is not registered in EHR databases or clinical trial data, and is indirectly captured by other quality-of-life measures), or those that were difficult to identify and conceptualize and therefore unlikely to be directly captured in any of the data source types.
Information about the identified AD data sources, the prioritized AD outcomes with measurement tools/scales, and information on their relevance in each disease stage were integrated into a three-dimensional Data Cube (Figure
The disease stages considered were mild cognitive impairment (MCI), mild AD, and moderate-to-severe AD.
After the outcomes of interest had been identified, a questionnaire was sent to custodians of the data sources to determine which of the outcomes were assessed in their data source and the measurement tools/scales used.
For most data sources, the ROADMAP team could extract this information directly from the EMIF-AD or DPUK metadata catalogs without contacting the data custodians, since the information in these catalogs was provided or checked by the data custodians.
Data extraction was completed by a ROADMAP Consortium member with expertise in the outcomes assessed in the different studies.
In the questionnaire, data custodians or ROADMAP team members ranked the availability of outcomes in answer to the question: "Are the following AD outcomes reflected by any of the measures available in your database?"
The presence or absence of each outcome for each data source was visualized in the form of a "heat map," which formed the first facet of the Data Cube (Figure
The second facet of the Data Cube included information on the level of importance of each outcome for the different disease stages, derived from HCP ratings.
The importance of each outcome for each disease stage was again visualized as a "heat map."
The third facet consisted of another "heat map" combining the data sources and the different stages of AD.
This facet was used as an indicator of how well a data source collected information for each disease stage.
The user interface for the Data Cube allows the user to zoom in on each facet of the rotating cube to view the twodimensional heat maps in detail.
The Data Cube can be accessed via

Data gap analysis
Gaps in the availability of outcomes across the different data sources were evaluated by calculating the percentage of data sources containing information on at least one of the outcomes within each outcome domain.
This was performed separately for the three different types of data source and for all data sources combined.

Results

Data sources
A total of 300 unique data sources in Europe were identified.
Of these, questionnaire information on outcomes was available from 66 to complete the Data Cube.
The 66

Relevant outcomes and stakeholder priority ratings
A number of outcomes across all three stakeholder groups (HCPs, patients, and caregivers) were identified from the systematic literature review.
A greater variety of outcomes pertaining to caregivers than to HCPs were identified, and there was a significant amount of overlap between outcomes relevant to patients and those relevant to caregivers (Figure
The outcomes considered most important across all stakeholder groups were cognitive ability, functional ability and independence, and patient quality of life.
By disease stage, the most important outcomes as rated by HCPs were cognitive ability, functional ability/independence, and patient quality of life for MCI; patient quality of life, functional ability/independence, cognitive ability, neuropsychiatric symptoms, and quality of caregiver's and family's lives for mild AD; and quality of caregiver's and family's lives, patient quality of life, neuropsychiatric symptoms, and behavioral symptoms for moderate-to-severe AD.
For MCI, cognitive ability was considered very important by a large proportion of respondents, but the importance of this outcome domain decreased as disease severity increased.
Functional ability/independence showed a similar pattern.
Results of medical investigations also declined in importance with disease severity.
Conversely, behavioral and neuropsychiatric symptoms and quality of caregiver's and family's lives increased in importance with disease progression.
Patient quality of life and significant disease-related life events received a large share of votes at all disease stages.
There was little evidence addressing the opinions of patients and caregivers about important outcomes in the later stages of AD.

Data gap analysis
In general, most of the data sources had at least some information on the different outcome domains (Figure
When the three types of data source were combined, outcomes collected the most (>80% of the data sources) were cognitive ability, comorbidities, and therapeutic treatment.
Outcomes collected the least (<30% of data sources) were functional and structural neuroimaging biomarkers, caregiver use of health and social care services, and quality of the caregiver's and family's lives.
Among clinical trial placebo data sources, information on all outcomes was available except for quality of the caregiver's and family's lives.
All EHR registries collected information on comorbidities, mortality, significant disease-related life events, treatment, patient use of health and social care, and behavioral and neuropsychiatric symptoms.
Outcomes not collected by the EHR registries were cognitive ability, apolipoprotein E4 genotype, functional and structural neuroimaging biomarkers, physical and neurological examination, and caregiver use of health and social care services.
Among the cohort studies, the outcomes most frequently (>75% of studies) collected were cognitive ability, comorbidities, treatment, and physical examination.
Outcomes collected the least (<25% of studies) were quality of the caregiver's and family's lives, caregiver use of health and social care services, and functional and structural neuroimaging biomarkers.
The percentage of data sources with data available for the different outcomes identified is presented in Appendix C.

Discussion
Overall, the outcome domains most commonly captured were cognitive ability, functional ability and independence, behavioral and neuropsychiatric symptoms, treatment, and comorbidities and mortality.
Fewer data sources collected information on significant disease-related life events, medical investigations, use of health and social care, and patient quality of life.
Data were most lacking on caregiver-oriented outcomes, particularly those related to the quality of caregiver's and family's lives.

Data sources
Different data sources capture different types of information to varying degrees of richness and coverage, and no single data source type contains information on all of the outcomes across the full AD spectrum.
Evidence generation should therefore cover several different types of data sources to provide a more complete picture of the data landscape.
In general, the four included EHR databases captured a broad spectrum of data and documented actual clinical care, but this information often lacked detail specifically for AD and was less suitable for investigation of the causes of AD.
By contrast, cohort data were well structured and detailed, focusing on disease-relevant items; however, they covered a limited proportion of the AD patient population.
Clinical trial placebo data covered most outcome domains, possibly because these studies are usually designed to cover outcomes considered important for evaluation of the efficacy and safety of a drug.
In our work, which covered approximately 25% of over 300 identified data sources, the number of clinical trial placebo data sources and EHR databases was lower than the number of cohort studies.
Mapping of broad EHR databases to the ADoutcomes questionnaire required a deep knowledge of the data in order to identify outcomes present in less obvious measures than the established scales and tests used in research cohorts and randomized controlled trials (RCTs).
This limited the number of mapped EHRs in our project.
Nevertheless, we believe that our work provides a good reflection of the availability of outcomes in the different data sources.

Outcomes
The outcomes considered most important across stakeholder groups were cognitive ability, functional ability and independence, and patient quality of life.
These outcomes were assessed to some degree in the four clinical trial data sources included in our analysis, but mapping of additional clinical trial data sources is needed to verify this.
In a recent review by Webster et al.
Data capture of these priority outcomes should therefore be encouraged.
Several of the identified priority outcomes from a stakeholder perspective were qualitative in nature (e.g.
emotional issues) and therefore differed from those captured in research studies and registry databases.
Although our work has produced a comprehensive list of AD-related outcomes, this is only the first step towards understanding these outcomes in the context of different stages of the disease for patients, caregivers, and HCPs.
Future studies should consider the differences between stakeholder-reported priority outcomes and outcomes captured in previous studies when choosing tools for outcome assessment.
Coordinated national and regional efforts may be needed to change the reporting of outcomes in routine clinical care to ensure that missing outcomes are documented in EHRs and registries, and international collaboration is needed to identify opportunities for harmonization.

Data Cube and data gap analysis
The Data Cube was developed to create a visual, comprehensive overview of the European RWE landscape in AD and to provide a first step towards an integrated overview of the AD data environment.
The evolution from a two-dimensional data source catalog to a third dimension addressing the relevance of outcomes across the disease spectrum should facilitate research studies that are more relevant to those impacted by AD.
By combining information from different data sources, we were able to identify gaps in the current collection of AD outcomes.
The identification of data gaps that are relevant to the various stakeholders and further evaluation of the Data Cube heat maps form an important part of data landscape evaluation and should help to inform plans to develop supplementary data collection platforms and prospective research protocols to collect missing data in the future.
Currently, data on outcomes relating to the caregiver and family are often lacking and should be assessed in future research.
The analysis of outcomes available across the different data sources showed that most of the data sources had at least some information on the different outcomes.
However, data sources differ in their suitability for answering specific research questions, and it is important to understand the limitations of each type of data source as described above in terms of level of detail and specificity.
Since it is unlikely that a single data source will cover the full spectrum of AD, from pre-symptomatic disease to severe dementia, the combining of different data sources may be necessary.

Strengths and limitations
An important strength of the work reported here was the starting base of an evidencebased outcomes list that incorporated multiple stakeholder perspectives.
In addition,
the Data Cube combined disparate information from a wide range of European data sources.
A limitation of the Data Cube is that it does not include patient-level data, a feature that would bridge the gap between the current metadata overview and a future RWE data platform.
Another limitation is the reliance on indirect methods to reflect the availability of outcomes per disease stage, and further reiterations of the Data Cube should consider whether each data source actually records data from individuals in specific disease stages.
With regards to data sources, the main limitation was the under-representation of EHR registries and clinical trials.
Thus, current data do not provide a representative sample of these data sources.
However, the few EHR registries included in the Data Cube represent several European countries, and variation between different clinical trial data sources is often limited by the length of follow-up or high-cost outcomes.
A limitation of capturing relevant outcomes was the lack of evidence from patients with severe AD.
Gaining such evidence would be practically and ethically difficult, but it is a gap that should be addressed and could be partly bridged by the use of AD-specific registry data.
Furthermore, although metadata included in the Data Cube were from several countries within Europe, the Data Cube might not be generalizable to the whole of Europe or countries outside of Europe.
However, the Data Cube does provide a clear overview of the data outcomes that are generally available and accessible within Europe.
Challenges of developing the Data Cube were ensuring a balance between compactness and sufficient level of detail, creating a user-friendly interface, and visualizing the Data Cube in a straightforward and concise manner.
Further challenges were uncertainty over the accuracy of the information obtained from metadata catalogs and variability in responses to questionnaires, with some respondents possibly interpreting questions in a slightly different manner.

Future use of the Data Cube
Criteria for what constitutes an outcome or outcome measure will require clarification, and priority outcomes will need to be further investigated in terms of their validity, reliability, and ability to detect meaningful change in the progression of AD.
Three different methods were used to identify these prioritized outcomes: systematic literature review, consultations, and surveys.


Abbreviations


sources consisted of four clinical trials (placebo data), four EHR databases (one each from Denmark and the Netherlands and two from Spain) and 58 cohort studies (Appendix B).
Of the 58 cohort studies, 30 were identified from the EMIF-AD catalog, 25 from the DPUK catalog, and three from Consortium data owners (Registry of Dementias of Girona [ReDeGi; Spain], Memento [France], and the Gothenburg population study H70 [Sweden]).



Fig. 1 .
Fig. 1.The ROADMAP Data Cube, integrating AD data sources, outcomes,



Fig. 2 .
Fig. 2. Heat map showing the availability of outcome domains and selected outcomes in the different data sources.



Fig. 3 .
Fig. 3.Outcomes identified from the systematic literature review, consultations, and surveys in relation to their relevance to stakeholder groups.


Since current outcome prioritization per disease stage was based on HCP ratings only and PPI consultations did not gather information on the MCI stage of AD, this will also need to be addressed.Considerations for further development and future use of the Data Cube include expansion of the number of data sources included, a greater balance between different data source types, more direct integration of disease-stage information, maintenance of the Data Cube so it remains current, consideration of how the Data Cube could be used in future initiatives, exploration of how the Data Cube could be combined with subject-level data into a RWE platform, and making the Data Cube publicly available.To realize further developments and sustainability, a Data Cube Monitoring Committee has been established.We plan to integrate the Data Cube with the existing European data sharing initiatives EMIF-AD and DPUK in order for researchers to obtain access to the individual-level data of data sources of interest to answer potential research questions.These data sharing initiatives have data governance and harmonization structures set in place.More information can be found diverse landscape of real-world data is available across Europe for research into AD.ROADMAP investigated this landscape and provided an integrated overview of the different AD data sources and priority outcomes from the perspectives of different stakeholder groups in relation to the different stages of AD, identifying data gaps with respect to relevant outcomes.This integrated data overview should enable the matching of data sources and relevant outcomes against research protocols, allow the development of research studies that are most relevant to those impacted by AD, and inform prospective data collection to address outcome evidence gaps.Table 1 AD-related outcome domain categories and related outcomes included in the ROADMAP Data Cube.