Obstructive sleep apnea may induce orexinergic system and cerebral β-amyloid metabolism dysregulation: is it a further proof for Alzheimer's disease risk?
Background: Obstructive Sleep Apnea (OSA) is associated with pathological changes of cerebral b-amyloid dynamics.
Orexin has been demonstrated interfering with b-amyloid metabolism in Alzheimer's Disease (AD) pathology.
The present study investigated cerebrospinal-fluid (CSF) b-amyloid 40 (Ab 40 ), bamyloid 42 (Ab 42 ) and orexin levels in OSA patients compared to AD patients and controls.
Methods: OSA and AD patients were included in this study and compared to a group of controls.
Patients and controls underwent lumbar puncture for the assessment of CSF Ab 40 , Ab 42 , tau proteins, orexin levels, and polysomnography to measure nocturnal sleep architecture.
Results: 20 OSA patients, 20 AD patients, and 15 controls were included in our study.
OSA patients showed higher CSF orexin levels than AD patients and controls, and AD patients showed higher CSF orexin levels than controls.
Moreover, CSF Ab 40 and Ab 42 were lower in OSA patients than controls, but higher in OSA patients compared to AD patients.
However, AD patients showed lower CSF Ab 42 levels but comparable CSF Ab 40 levels than controls.
Sleep macrostructure was similarly altered in OSA and AD patients compared to controls.
Finally, the apnea-hypopnea index (AHI) was related to the ratio Ab 42 / Ab 40 and CSF orexin levels in OSA patients.
This study proved the alteration of CSF orexin levels and b-amyloid isoforms 40 and 42 in OSA patients.
We suppose that sleep disruption and intermittent hypoxia, the two core features of OSA, may induce orexinergic system and cerebral b-amyloid metabolism dysregulation.
This evidence further supports the current hypothesis that OSA may possibly start AD neuropathological processes.

Introduction
Sleep impairment may affect cerebral function and recent findings documented that sleep participates in the clearance of brain metabolic products accumulating during wakefulness
Among cerebral catabolic products, b-amyloid is cleared from the brain interstitial space during sleep
It has been hypothesized that following cerebral aggregation and deposition of b-amyloid 42 (Ab 42 ) Alzheimer's Disease (AD) neurodegenerative processes may start
Not only Ab 42 but also b-amyloid 40 (Ab 40 ) is a catabolic product of the amyloid-precursor protein
Reduction of cerebrospinal-fluid (CSF) Ab 40 and Ab 42 levels has been recently documented in cross sectional studies comparing patients affected by obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) to controls
It has been suggested that sleep impairment due to OSA condition may induce preclinical AD biomarkers changes, as the reduction of CSF Ab 42 levels and the increase of brain amyloid plaques deposition
Accordingly, OSA has been identified as a possible risk factor for dementia and AD
However, although the field of sleep and neurodegeneration is still young, these findings raised attention about the possible association between OSA and AD, considering that OSA is a worldwide increasingly common disorder.
Hence, further evidence about this association is currently invoked.
OSA is characterized by the occurrence of repetitive episodes of upper airways obstruction leading to sleep fragmentation and intermittent hypoxia (IH)
Severity of OSA is determined by the sum of all the apneas and hypopneas per hour of sleep, named Apnea-Hypopnea Index (AHI)
Both sleep fragmentation and IH may affect brain structure and function, alter the cerebral b-amyloid dynamics and lower b-amyloid clearance, thus increasing its production and reducing its metabolism
Orexin-A (Hypocretin-1) is a neuropeptide produced by the lateral hypothalamic neurons, and regulates the sleepewake cycle by increasing and maintaining wakefulness
The orexinergic system is altered in AD pathology and its dysregulation has been related to sleep impairment in AD patients from the early stages of the disease [16e19].
Moreover, orexin has been demonstrated influencing b-amyloid metabolism in animal models studies
In the past years, exclusively plasma orexin levels have been measured in OSA patients, and only one study assessed CSF orexin levels in mild OSA patients
Based on the previous observation from our group documenting lower CSF Ab 42 levels in OSA patients
Hence, we investigate in OSA patients compared to AD patients and controls: (i) CSF AD biomarkers (b-amyloid and tau proteins) and orexin levels; (ii) sleep architecture measured via polysomnography (PSG); and (iii) the possible relationships among nocturnal sleep, CSF AD biomarkers and orexin in OSA and AD groups.

Methods

Participants and study design
OSA (AHI!15/h) patients, AD patients and controls were consecutively included in this study between October 2015 and June 2018.
This study followed a previous observation documenting altered CSF AD biomarkers in patients affected by OSA
All patients included in the present study underwent a standard screening at the Neurology Clinic of the University Hospital of Rome "Tor Vergata", including physical and neurological examinations, Mini Mental State Examination (MMSE), laboratory tests, PSG, brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and lumbar puncture (LP) for CSF biomarkers analysis, including Ab 42, Ab 40 , phosphorylated-tau (p-tau), total tau (t-tau), and orexin levels.
In particular, in this study, unlike our previous study
AD diagnosis was based on the currently proposed biomarkers diagnostic criteria for AD, which was based on the clinical recognition of dementia associated with biomarkers consistent with AD pathology.
This implies the pathological reduction of CSF levels of Ab 42 coupled with pathological high CSF levels of t-tau and p-tau, medial temporal lobe atrophy on MRI, and cortical temporoparietal hypometabolism on [18F]FDG positron emission tomography
OSA was determined by nocturnal polysomnographic recording, performed according to American Academy of Sleep Medicine (AASM) criteria
We defined apnea as the reduction >90% of respiratory airflow and hypopnea as the reduction >30% of respiratory airflow associated with an oxygen desaturation !3%.
Both apnea and hypopnea should continue for 10 or more seconds
Severity of OSA was determined by the frequency of apneas and hypopneas, which constitutes the AHI.
OSA and AD patients required to meet the following entry criteria for this study: no concomitant neurologic or psychiatric diseases; no intake of drugs active on the CNS; no use of caffeine, tobacco and/or alcohol at the time of the sleep investigations.
Exclusion criteria were as follows: abnormal cell count (>4 white cells/mcL) at the CSF sample analysis; subclinical seizures and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; and previous diagnosis of sleep disorders based on AASM criteria other than OSA.
Moreover, OSA patients underwent a comprehensive neuropsychological testing in order to exclude mild cognitive impairment.
We also included in this observation a control group constituted by patients admitted for suspected polyneuropathy from October 2015 to June 2018, ruled out after diagnostic investigations.
All patients underwent clinical neurological investigation, brain MRI, PSG and LP at the same Neurology Clinic.
Specific exclusion criteria for controls were as follows: intake of CNS active drugs; intake of melatonin supplements or hypnotics; consumption of caffeine, tobacco and/or alcohol at the time of the sleep laboratory investigation; and previous diagnosis of other neurological and/or psychiatric diseases.
Moreover, since the high prevalence of mild OSA in AD patients and adult-elderly controls based on the current literature, we set the AHI cut-off at 15/h for both groups
Notably, we excluded AD patients and controls who presented OSA syndrome defined according to AASM guidelines
Finally, the Epworth Sleepiness Scale (ESS), a wide used instrument to assess daytime sleepiness, was administered to AD, OSA and controls
Therefore, we compared MMSE, CSF and PSG data among AD, OSA, and control groups.

List of abbreviations

Polysomnographic recording
Patients underwent PSG in order to evaluate their nocturnal sleep (SOMNOscreen, SOMNOmedics GmbH, Randersacker, Germany), as already reported
The following standard parameters were analyzed: total sleep time (TST), sleep efficiency (SE), wakefulness after sleep onset (WASO), stage 1 of non-REM sleep (N1), stage 2 of non-REM sleep (N2), stage 3 of non-REM sleep (N3), REM sleep (REM), and REM sleep latency (LREM).
Sleep stages percentages were calculated during the TST
AHI was defined as mentioned above and used for OSA diagnosis
Blinded researchers (CL, FP, FI) scored PSG recordings on the basis of the international standard criteria of the American Academy of Sleep Medicine

CSF collection and analysis
All CSF samples were obtained the day after the PSG recording by LP performed in the decubitus position between 8:00 and 9:30 AM, within 1e2 h after morning awakening, using an atraumatic needle.
CSF collection was performed as previously reported [17e19].
CSF Ab 40 , Ab 42 , t-tau and p-tau levels were determined according to previously published standard procedures, using commercially available sandwich enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (Innotest b-Amyloid 1e40, Innotest b-Amyloid 1e42, Innotest h-T-tau, Innotest Phospho-T-tau 181; Innogenetics, Ghent, Belgium)
CSF orexin levels were detected according to previously published standard procedures with commercially available radioimmunoassay kit (Orexin A/Hypocretin-1 RIA Kit; Phoenix Pharmaceuticals, Burlingame, CA)
The two researchers (NM, BS) who performed the analysis were blinded to the clinical status of participants.
Ab 42 , t-tau, and p-tau were dichotomized on the basis of previously established literature-based and in-laboratory confirmed cut-off values: <500 pg/mL for Ab 42 , >375 pg/mL for t-tau, and >52 pg/mL for p-tau [27e30].
The t-tau/Ab 42 and Ab 42 /Ab 40 ratios were also calculated, and the cut-off >0.52 and < 0.06 were considered to represent the CSF profile suggestive of AD

Data and statistical analysis
The study protocol was considered as observational by the Independent Ethical Committee of the University Hospital of Rome "Tor Vergata" and was then performed according to the STROBE statement.
Patients and controls provided their informed consent to the study.
Statistical analysis was performed by using the commercial software Statistica 10.0 program; Statsoft Inc, Tulsa, OK, USA.
The KolmogoroveSmirnov test was used to check for normal distribution of the obtained PSG and CSF data.
All demographical, clinical, PSG, and CSF data were then compared among the three groups (OSA vs AD vs controls) using the one-way analysis of variance, body mass index (BMI), age and sex as covariates.
The post-hoc analysis was performed using the Tukey test for honestly significant difference.
P value < 0.05 was considered to be statistically significant.
Pearson correlation test was used to separately correlate CSF biomarkers levels and PSG data in OSA, AD and control groups.
An additional multiple regression analysis was performed.
Data were analyzed with a significant p value of 0.05.

Results

Demographic and clinical data
We included in this study 20 OSA patients, 20 AD patients and 15 controls.
Demographic and clinical data are represented in Table
OSA patients were younger and more frequently male than AD patients and showed a higher BMI than both AD patients and controls.
MMSE was similar in OSA patients and controls, who showed higher scores compared to AD patients (Table
Moreover, the three groups did not differ in terms of frequency of apoE4 genotype (Table

CSF data
Comparing CSF data, we found that AD patients showed lower CSF Ab 42 levels as well as higher t-tau and p-tau CSF levels with respect to both OSA and controls (see Table
Significantly, OSA patients showed lower CSF Ab 42 levels than controls (see Table
In particular, 9/20 OSA patients showed pathologically low CSF Ab 42 levels (<500 pg/mL).
Conversely, CSF levels of t-tau and p-tau did not differ between OSA and control groups (see Table
T-tau/Ab 42 ratio was higher in AD compared to OSA patients and controls, and Ab 42 /Ab 40 ratio was lower in AD compared to OSA patients and controls (see Table
OSA patients showed higher T-tau/Ab 42 ratio and lower Ab 42 /Ab 40 ratio than controls (see Table
Notably, OSA patients showed lower CSF Ab 40 levels compared to both AD patients and controls (see Table
Considering CSF orexin levels, we found higher CSF orexin concentrations in OSA patients compared to both AD patients and controls.
Furthermore, AD patients showed higher CSF orexin levels compared to controls (see Table
All CSF data of AD, OSA and controls are reported in Table

PSG data
Comparing PSG parameters among AD, OSA, and control groups, we found reduced SE in OSA and AD patients with respect to controls (see Table
AD patients showed lower TST than both OSA and controls, but OSA patients showed an higher TST than controls.
Analyzing the macro-structural sleep parameters, we documented similar alterations in OSA and AD patients, since both groups showed higher N1 and N2 and lower N3 compared to controls (see Table
Moreover, AD patients showed lower N3 compared to OSA patients.
LREM was higher and REM was lower in AD and OSA patients compared to controls (see Table
Finally, higher WASO was documented in AD and OSA patients than controls (see Table
As expected, OSA patients showed higher AHI compared to AD and controls.
All PSG data are reported in Table

Correlations between CSF and PSG data
Considering OSA group we firstly correlated CSF data and documented the significant correlation between t-tau/Ab 42 ratio and as well as orexin CSF levels (R ¼ À0.52, p < 0.01), and between CSF Ab 40 levels and as well as both t-tau and p-tau CSF levels (R ¼ 0.57, p < 0.01 and R ¼ 0.61 p < 0.01).
Moreover, considering CSF and PSG data in the OSA group and documented the significant correlation between CSF Ab 40 levels and both WASO (R ¼ 0.51, p < 0.01) and SE (R ¼ À0.53, p < 0.01), and between Ab 42 /Ab 40 ratio and AHI (R ¼ À0.46, p < 0.01; see Fig.
Considering CSF data in AD group, we found that CSF orexin levels significantly correlated with CSF Ab 40 levels (R ¼ 0.67, p < 0.01), Ab 42 /Ab 40 ratio (R ¼ À0.72, p < 0.01), t-tau/Ab 42 ratio (R ¼ 0.81, p < 0.01), CSF t-tau (R ¼ 0.87, p < 0.01) and p-tau (R ¼ 0.84, p < 0.01) levels.
Moreover, Ab 42 /Ab 40 ratio correlated with CSF t-tau and p-tau levels (R ¼ À0.71, p < 0.01 and R ¼ À0.76, p < 0.01).
CSF Ab 40 levels correlated with CSF t-tau and p-tau levels (R ¼ 0.61, p < 0.01 and R ¼ 0.83, p < 0.01).
Correlating CSF and PSG data in the AD group, we documented the significant correlation between CSF orexin levels and both REM and N3 (R ¼ À0.57, p < 0.01 and R ¼ À0.62, p < 0.01).
CSF orexin and Ab 42 levels did not correlate either in the OSA or in the AD group.
Finally, we performed a multiple regression analysis in the OSA group documenting the significant interplay between CSF orexin levels and both AHI and WASO (b ¼ 0.83, p < 0.01 and b ¼ 0.66, p < 0.05) and between Ab 42 /Ab 40 ratio and both AHI and SE (b ¼ À0.63, p < 0.001 and b ¼ 0.46, p < 0.01).

Discussion
Brain beta-amyloid metabolism pathologically changes several years before the appearance of clinical symptoms of AD, which is the most frequent neurodegenerative disorder
AD is neuropathologically featured by the accumulation of extracellular amyloid plaques of Ab 42 aggregated peptides, and intracellular neurofibrillary tangles of tau proteins, both contributing to synaptic and neuronal loss
Therefore, Ab 42 , t-tau and p-tau proteins have been considered the established CSF biomarkers supporting AD diagnosis
Furthermore, the ratios between t-tau and Ab 42 and between Ab 42 and Ab 40 CSF levels actually represent further biomarkers for AD diagnosis
In the present study, we documented the reduction of both Ab 42 and Ab 40 CSF levels in patients affected by moderate to severe OSA, as a possible expression of cerebral b-amyloid metabolism dysregulation.
Moreover, OSA patients showed the alteration of the Finally, we documented that OSA patients, similarly to AD patients, not only showed the increase of CSF orexin concentrations but also the alteration of sleep architecture with the reduction of both REM sleep and SE and the increase of WASO and N2.
It is currently under debate whether OSA may promote AD pathology
Inflammation, sleep fragmentation, glymphatic dysfunction, and IH have been postulated as putative mechanisms triggering the AD neurodegenerative processes
All these mechanisms are present in OSA patients, who show an increased risk for dementia, and in particular AD and vascular dementia
Accordingly, both the reduction of CSF Ab 42 levels and the increase of brain b-amyloid plaques deposition have been already documented in OSA patients
In this study, we have confirmed that OSA patients show the significant reduction of CSF Ab 42 levels.
In addition, we demonstrated that OSA patients also showed the decrease of CSF Ab 40 levels.
Since both the main isoforms of b-amyloid were reduced in the CSF of OSA patients, the pathological modification of cerebral b-amyloid dynamics can be supposed.
However, the candidate mechanisms at the basis of this dysregulation can be exclusively hypothesized.
Following a previous hypothesis drawn from observations achieved in animal models studies, IH has been supposed altering the brain metabolism of b-amyloid
Therefore, sleep impairment and IH may explain the alteration of CSF biomarkers in OSA patients, which are similar to that of AD (reduced Ab 42 CSF levels, increased t-tau/Ab 42 ratio), thus further supporting the hypothesis that OSA may start AD pathology.
Moreover, we documented a quite high percentage of apoE-e4 carriers (40%) in OSA patients (which is similar to that of controls) and not different from AD patients (60%).
This finding may be responsible for the alteration of CSF biomarkers documented in OSA patients, also considering that controls present normal CSF biomarkers levels despite having a similar prevalence of apoE-e4 carriers.
OSA patients also showed reduced CSF Ab 40 levels, which is not a typical finding in AD, since CSF Ab 40 levels in AD patients have been reported as similar to controls
Thus, the changes seen in b-amyloid metabolism in OSA patients may appear quite different than the ones presented by AD patients, and may not be directed to the b-amyloid aggregationprone isoforms.
The more suggestive hypothesis can be related to the reduced production of b-amyloid isoforms, although this supposition has to be completely proved.
The novelty of this study lies in the increase of CSF orexin levels detected in moderate-severe OSA patients.
Orexin is a wake-promoting neurotransmitter and its pathological reduction has been associated with narcolepsy, a neurological disorder characterized by excessive daytime sleepiness
In past years, several studies assessed plasma orexin levels in OSA patients with controversial results, and only a single uncontrolled study measured normal CSF orexin levels in a small group of patients affected predominantly by mild OSA and reporting daytime sleepiness
Furthermore, we confirmed the previous observation that AD patients show higher CSF orexin levels compared to controls.
Increased orexinergic tone has been already demonstrated in AD patients from the early stages of the disease, although a post-mortem study documented the reduction of orexinergic neurons and CSF orexin levels
On one hand, the higher CSF levels of orexin in AD patients has been related to sleep impairment and cognitive decline
Conversely, the higher CSF orexin levels found in moderate-severe OSA patients is a novel finding, and the pathophysiological basis can be speculated.
Since OSA patients present a significant alteration of sleep architecture, characterized by increased WASO and several arousals, we may hypothesize that the increase of CSF orexin levels may be a secondary effect of sleep dysregulation and increased nocturnal wakefulness.
Accordingly, orexin is a neurotransmitter which promotes wakefulness and suppresses sleep
Moreover, OSA patients frequently present with daytime sleepiness, and therefore the higher CSF orexin levels present in OSA patients may be also the possible expression of a compensatory mechanism counteracting daytime somnolence.
Nevertheless, we did not found significant correlations between CSF orexin levels and ESS scores.
In keeping with this observation, sleepiness is a complex phenomenon with different neurobiological causes, not only related to orexinergic neurotransmission.
Since it has been proved that REM sleep suppression increases CSF orexin levels
However, we did not document associations between CSF orexin levels and sleep stages changes in OSA patients, but we documented the relation between higher CSF orexin levels and the increase of both AHI and WASO, thus supporting that nocturnal wakefulness and apnea-hypopnea events may be related to the higher orexinergic tone found in OSA patients.
Consistently, orexin neurons are the most CO2/Hþ sensitive neurons in the brain and they are activated by CO2 in vivo
Concurrently, the weak reduction of Ab 42 /Ab 40 ratio present in OSA patients related to the increased AHI and the reduced SE.
Hence, it is also reasonable that IH and hypercapnia may not only activate orexin neurons, thus increasing CSF orexin levels, but also alter bamyloid metabolism, thus reducing the Ab 42 /Ab 40 ratio.
Considering AD patients, CSF orexin levels significantly correlated with sleep architecture changes (as already proved)
This finding further looks into the previously reported hypothesis that orexin may modulate not only CSF Ab 42 levels but also the other CSF AD biomarkers
OSA actually represents an increasing health problem in the adult population, and it is associated not only with several metabolic and cardio-vascular injuries, but also with the occurrence of cognitive decline and brain functional and morphological changes
Moreover, OSA may negatively modulate cerebral b-amyloid metabolism and increases CSF orexin concentrations, thus possibly representing a risk factor for early AD neuropathological modifications.
Accordingly, increasing literature suggests that OSA is not only a frequent diagnosis in AD patients, but also may cause AD
Following this hypothesis, the reduction of CSF Ab 42 levels and the increase of CSF orexin concentrations found in OSA patients may be explained by the fact that OSA may induce preclinical AD biomarkers changes, such those possibly documented in the early stages of AD.
Yet, the other biomarkers changes documented in OSA patients and not directed at AD pathology invite further research to better address this hypothesis.
In conclusion, our data raise the scientific interest on this topic, which is directed at understanding the effects of sleep disorders with widespread prevalence, such as OSA, and on brain health.
Thus, we propose future research and international collaborations and networks, which have to be organized in order to produce further results including larger populations of patients.



Fig. 1 .
Fig. 1.
Negative significant correlation between Ab 42 /Ab 40 ratio and AHI in the OSA group.



Table 1
Clinic, Demographic and CSF data of OSA, AD, and Control groups.
PSG, polysomnography; OSA, Obstructive Sleep Apnea; AD, Alzheimer's Disease; TST, total sleep time; SE, sleep efficiency; LREM, REM sleep latency; WASO, wakefulness after sleep onset; N1, stage 1 of Non-REM sleep; N2, stage 2 of Non-REM sleep; N3, stage 3 of Non-REM sleep; REM, REM sleep; AHI, Apnea-Hypopnea Index; SD, standard deviation.
ratios indicative of AD pathology (Ab 42 /Ab 40 and t-tau/Ab 42 ).