Therapeutic Targeting of Casein Kinase 1δ/ε in an Alzheimer’s Disease Mouse Model
Sleep disturbances and memory impairment are common symptoms of Alzheimer's disease (AD).
Given that the circadian clock regulates sleep, hippocampal function, and neurodegeneration, it represents a therapeutic target against AD.
Casein kinase 1δ/ε (CK1δ/ε) are clock regulators and overexpressed in AD brains, making them viable targets to improve sleep and cognition.
We assessed the effects of a small molecule CK1δ/ε inhibitor (PF-670462) in a cellular model of circadian clocks and in 3xTg-AD mice.
Mass spectrometry-based proteomic analyses revealed that PF-670462 treatment in vitro upregulated multiple proteins that are downregulated in AD, while administration in 3xTg-AD mice reversed hippocampal proteomic alterations in diverse AD-associated and clock-regulated pathways, including synaptic plasticity and amyloid precursor protein processing.
Furthermore, PF-670462 rescued working memory and normalized behavioural circadian rhythms in 3xTg-AD mice.
Our study provides proof of concept for CK1δ/ε inhibition and direct clock modulation against AD-related proteomic changes, memory impairment, and circadian disturbances.

INTRODUCTION
Alzheimer's disease (AD), the most common type of dementia, is a progressive neurodegenerative disease with cognitive and behavioural symptoms
The molecular pathogenesis of AD is complex and several factors have been implicated in AD initiation and progression, including alterations in neurotransmission, amyloid-β (Aβ) levels, cytoskeletal proteins, mitochondrial function, and oxidative stress
Given the multifactorial etiology of the disease, it is likely that therapies targeting multiple underlying mechanisms will be most effective.
Moreover, disease-modifying approaches may be most beneficial early in the course of AD, before neurodegeneration has progressed and becomes irreversible
Memory impairment and disrupted sleep and circadian rhythms are symptomatic hallmarks of AD
Circadian disturbances, which range from altered sleep timing to severe sleep/wake cycle fragmentation, affect as many as half of people with AD and are a major reason for institutionalization
Several lines of evidence suggest a bidirectional relationship between circadian dysfunction and AD
Disruption of circadian function results from neuropathological changes in the central circadian pacemaker, the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN), and may also directly contribute to neurodegeneration in other brain regions through clock-regulated processes such as oxidative stress, proteostasis, neuronal metabolism, and Aβ dynamics
In addition, the circadian system plays critical roles in hippocampal synaptic plasticity and memory
Given that clock genes throughout the brain have altered expression profiles in AD
Casein kinase 1δ and 1ε (CK1δ/ε) are isoforms of the CK1 family of serine/threonine protein kinases that are implicated in AD and regulation of circadian rhythms
Degradation and subcellular localization of core clock proteins are regulated by CK1δ/ε, and mutations in the CK1δ and CK1ε genes in humans and rodents cause behavioural circadian rhythm disorders
Importantly, CK1δ/ε are highly overexpressed in AD brains, indicating that they are therapeutic targets against AD
A limited number of studies have examined how CK1 inhibition affects Aβ production and tau phosphorylation in vitro, and shown that CK1ε overexpression in mouse hippocampus impairs working memory
However, to our knowledge the global effects of CK1δ/ε inhibition on protein expression have not yet been investigated, and none of these previous reports have addressed whether CK1δ/ε inhibitors can improve cognitive function.
Furthermore, whether circadian disturbances in AD can be normalized by inhibiting CK1δ/ε remains unclear.
Here, we assess the therapeutic potential of CK1δ/ε inhibition in an in vitro model of circadian clocks and in a triple transgenic mouse model of AD (3xTg-AD mice) with PF-670462, a blood-brain barrier permeable small molecule CK1δ/ε inhibitor that can stabilize circadian rhythms in various mouse models of circadian dysfunction
3xTg-AD mice display memory impairment and circadian abnormalities reminiscent of people with AD, allowing for evaluation of PF-670462 effects
Proteomic analyses using liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) revealed that PF-670462 treatment in vitro altered the expression of various ADrelated and clock-regulated proteins, while PF-670462 administration in vivo rescued hippocampal proteomic alterations in diverse AD-relevant pathways.
Moreover, PF-670462 administration restored working memory and normalized behavioural circadian rhythms in 3xTg-AD mice.
Our findings provide proof of concept for pharmacological CK1δ/ε inhibition and, more broadly, for circadian clock modulation against AD-related proteomic alterations, cognitive deficits, and circadian disturbances.

RESULTS

PF-670462 Treatment Alters Expression of AD-Related and Clock-Regulated Proteins In Vitro
To explore the global effects of CK1δ/ε inhibition on protein expression, we first conducted proteomic analysis using LC-MS/MS and Neuro-2a (N2a) mouse neuroblastoma cells, which express multiple clock genes and demonstrate circadian oscillations in gene expression
We treated N2a cells with either PF-670462 (5 μM) or DMSO (as a control) for 24 h prior to harvesting cells for proteomic analysis.
Protein extracts were mixed at a 1:1 ratio with a spike-in standard from heavylabelled SILAC (stable isotope labelling by amino acids in cell culture) N2a cells to allow for accurate relative quantification (STAR Methods).
Using a 1% false discovery rate (FDR), a total of 1,595 proteins were identified, of which 1,173 and 1,169 were quantified in cells treated with PF-670462 and DMSO, respectively (Figure
Of these, 1,079 proteins yielded relative measurements in a minimum of half of samples (Q50).
We used this stringently filtered dataset of accurately quantified proteins for downstream bioinformatic analysis (Table
Comparison of protein abundances (logarithmized L/H ratios) in N2a cells treated with PF-670462 or DMSO showed that the majority (89%, 147 proteins) of differentially expressed proteins were upregulated in response to PF-670462 treatment, with fewer showing downregulation (11%, 19 proteins) (Figure
Among these differentially expressed proteins were several proteins previously shown to be involved in circadian regulation and to exhibit diurnal rhythms in expression, including casein kinase 2
To gain insight into the functions of the set of proteins upregulated in response to PF-670462 treatment (top cluster in Figure
We found that several of the highly represented functional terms were related to AD pathogenesis, notably cytoskeletal and mitochondrial organization
Given that these biological processes are not only pathologically altered in AD but also known to be regulated by the circadian clock
Proteinprotein interaction (PPI) network analysis of differentially abundant proteins in response to PF-670462 treatment revealed that these proteins take part in a wide range of highly interconnected processes and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathways that have been implicated in AD pathogenesis, including proteasomal protein degradation, response to oxidative stress, long-term potentiation (LTP), oxidative phosphorylation, and circadian rhythm
Interestingly, these cellular processes also display circadian regulation in mammals
Indeed, we found that PF-670462 treatment resulted in the upregulation of multiple proteins known to be dysfunctional or downregulated in AD and involved in diverse cellular functions, including protein homeostasis and modification, cytoskeletal organization, mitochondrial respiration, and redox homeostasis (Figure
Together, these findings suggest that CK1δ/ε inhibition might represent an approach to reverse AD-related protein expression changes across several pathways.

PF-670462 Administration In Vivo Normalizes Hippocampal Proteomic Alterations Associated with AD-Like Pathology
Having established that PF-670462 treatment can alter the expression of AD-related proteins involved in a variety of biological processes in vitro, we asked whether PF-670462 administration in vivo would have similar effects on the hippocampus, which plays a critical role in memory and displays circadian rhythms in protein expression
To examine this, we performed MS-based proteomic analyses using hippocampal tissues from 3xTg-AD mice treated with PF-670462 or vehicle, and nontransgenic (NTg) mice treated with vehicle.
Mice were administered daily injections of PF-670462 (30 mg/kg/d) or vehicle for 20 days beginning at 8 months of age, then hippocampal tissues were harvested at two different time points, circadian time (CT) 10 and CT14, on the third day following transfer to constant darkness (DD) (Figure
Samples were processed individually to yield three to five biological replicates per time point for each group, and relative protein abundances were determined by label-free quantification (LFQ).
This MS-based analysis identified a total of 1,929 proteins, of which 1,810, 1,608, and 1,551 were quantified in samples from vehicle-treated NTg mice, vehicle-treated 3xTg-AD mice, and PF-670462treated 3xTg-AD mice, respectively (Figure
Of these, ~1,350 yielded relative measurements in a minimum of half of samples (Q50) at each time point, and we used these filtered datasets for downstream analysis (Tables
On the basis of the expression (logarithmized LFQ intensities) of proteins in these Q50-filtered lists, principal component analysis (PCA) showed that vehicle-treated 3xTg-AD mice can be separated from vehicle-treated NTg mice, while PF-670462 treatment partially reversed (E) First order PPI network ("subnetwork1") of proteins differentially expressed after PF-670462 treatment created using the STRING database (interaction confidence score > 0.9).
GO and KEGG functional annotations were performed using DAVID and network visualization using NetworkAnalyst.
Proteins involved in AD-related and clock-regulated biological processes and pathways shown are represented as coloured nodes.
(F) Relative abundances of proteins associated with AD and significantly upregulated in response to PF-670462 treatment.
C1QBP, complement C1q binding protein; COX, cytochrome c oxidase; MAP, microtubule-associated protein; NAC, nascent polypeptide-associated complex; PP2A, protein phosphatase 2A.
Data are represented as means + SEM.
See also Tables
proteomic changes associated with AD-like pathology and induced a shift in the hippocampal protein expression profile of 3xTg-AD mice towards that of NTg mice at each time point (Figure
Comparison of the 3xTg-AD vehicletreated and PF-670462-treated groups identified 117 proteins that were differentially expressed in response to PF-670462 treatment (53 upregulated and 64 downregulated; Tables
These proteins take part in a variety of biological processes and pathways, including a number involved in synaptic, cytoskeletal, and mitochondrial functions, as well as circadian entrainment and regulation of protein phosphorylation (Figure
Unsupervised hierarchical clustering performed on proteins differentially expressed with PF-670462 administration revealed distinct expression profiles between vehicle-treated 3xTg-AD and NTg mice, reflecting changes associated with AD-like pathology.
Moreover, vehicle-treated NTg mice and PF-670462-treated 3xTg-AD mice clustered together, and apart from the vehicle-treated 3xTg-AD group (Figure
Interestingly, PF-670462 treatment induced changes in protein expression in distinct molecular pathways at each time point examined, suggesting that circadian regulation might underlie some of the hippocampal responses to CK1δ/ε inhibition.
In line with this, we found that differentially expressed proteins were involved in several clock-regulated processes, including cytoskeletal organization and mitochondrial function at CT10, as well as synaptic plasticity and amyloid precursor protein (APP) processing at CT14.
PPI network analysis of differentially expressed proteins in the hippocampus of 3xTg-AD mice in response to PF-670462 treatment confirmed the effects of PF-670462 on multiple AD-related processes seen in our in vitro study, including cytoskeletal and mitochondrial organization, response to oxidative stress, and proteasomal protein degradation (Figure
Administration of PF-670462 in 3xTg-AD mice induced changes in the expression of a greater number of proteins involved in synaptic transmission, regulation of synaptic plasticity, and learning and memory than in vitro treatment, which might reflect differences in experimental models at the molecular level as well as contributions of systemic circadian signals in vivo
To gain further insight into the AD-related proteomic alterations in the hippocampus that were reversed by PF-670462 treatment in 3xTg-AD mice, we compared the lists of
proteins differentially expressed in vehicle-treated versus PF-670462-treated 3xTg-AD mice, and vehicle-treated 3xTg-AD versus NTg mice at each time point.
We found that a substantial proportion of proteins whose abundances were altered with PF-670462 treatment were also differentially expressed with AD-like pathology (39% and 34% at CT10 and CT14, respectively).
Strikingly, for all but one of these proteins, PF-670462 treatment normalized their expression levels in the hippocampus of 3xTg-AD mice towards NTg levels (Figure
To further characterize the effects of PF-670462 on processes implicated in AD pathogenesis, we examined the expression of proteins involved in various functions critical for normal cellular homeostasis and hippocampal function, including cytoskeletal organization, mitochondrial structure and function, synaptic plasticity, and amyloid homeostasis (Figure
Administration of PF-670462 in 3xTg-AD mice upregulated the expression of several cytoskeletonassociated proteins, including drebrin and microtubuleassociated proteins (MAPs) 1A/1B light chain 3B, as was seen in response to PF-670462 treatment in vitro.
Hippocampal expression of drebrin, an actin-binding protein that regulates dendritic spine morphogenesis in neurons, is decreased in AD and associated with cognitive function in APP/PS1 mice
Vehicle-treated 3xTg-AD mice displayed decreased hippocampal levels of drebrin, which were normalized towards NTg levels by PF-670462 treatment.
Cortactin-binding protein 2, another actin regulator that plays a role in dendritic arborization and synaptic plasticity
Moreover, PF-670462 increased the expression of proteins involved in the hippocampal LTP pathway, including calmodulin and AMPA1 receptor (AMPAR) (Figure
PF-670462 administration upregulated the expression of the calcium-buffering protein calmodulin, which was downregulated in the hippocampus of 3xTg-AD mice relative to NTg mice.
Decreased expression of calmodulin in AD brains may contribute to deregulated calcium homeostasis, which can lead to neurodegeneration, impairments in synaptic plasticity, and deficits in learning and memory
PF-670462 treatment also upregulated the levels of AMPAR, the trafficking of which is dysregulated by Aβ and represents a critical mechanism underlying LTP induction in the hippocampus
Furthermore, PF-670462 administration increased the expression of various proteins involved in mitochondrial function (Figure
These included prohibitin-2, which regulates mitophagy and maintenance of mitochondrial structure
In mice, loss of prohibitin-2 results in impaired mitochondrial respiration and defective mitochondrial ultrastructure, and also leads to widespread neurodegeneration, notably in the hippocampus
Furthermore, prohibitin-2 is regulated by CK1δ/ε and in turn modulates circadian gene expression
Together, these results suggest that PF-670462 administration in vivo normalizes hippocampal expression of multiple proteins linked to AD pathogenesis and implicated in cytoskeletal and mitochondrial functions, consistent with our in vitro findings.
We were also interested in examining the effects of PF-670462 treatment on other cellular processes, given that AD-related changes in a variety of processes contribute to neurodegeneration and impaired hippocampal function.
In the hippocampus of 3xTg-AD mice, PF-670462 treatment normalized the expression of several proteins implicated in synaptic dysfunction underlying memory impairment in AD, including neuroplastin and septin-2 (Figure
Neuroplastin plays an essential role in hippocampal LTP, and neuroplastin deficiency results in impaired associative learning and memory in mice
Septin-2, which is increased in AD brains and has been shown to interact with CK1δ
In addition to its effects on proteins involved in synaptic plasticity and transmission, PF-670462 upregulated the expression of microsomal glutathione Stransferase 3 (MGST3) and aldehyde dehydrogenase 1B1, which play neuroprotective roles against oxidative stress
Interestingly, MGST3 is associated with hippocampal size and is downregulated in AD hippocampus
PF-670462 also induced a decrease in the abundance of APP, which has previously been shown to be diurnally regulated
Moreover, PF-670462 altered the expression of other proteins involved in APP processing,
notably reticulon-3 and cathepsin B. Reticulon-3 was upregulated by PF-670462 and has been shown to inhibit the activity of β-site APP cleaving enzyme (BACE1)
Inhibitors of BACE1 and cathepsin B have been suggested as therapeutic approaches in AD given their efficacy in reducing Aβ levels and enhancing memory function in preclinical animal models
Thus, treatment of 3xTg-AD mice with PF-670462 was associated with proteomic changes in hippocampal LTP and APP processing pathways that might be beneficial for AD.
Taken together, these results demonstrate that PF-670462 administration in vivo can rescue diverse protein expression changes associated with AD in the hippocampus of 3xTg-AD mice, and suggest that CK1δ/ε represent promising therapeutic targets against ADrelated hippocampal proteomic alterations.

PF-670462 Administration Rescues Hippocampal-Dependent Working Memory Deficits in 3xTg-AD Mice
Given that PF-670462 treatment normalized hippocampal proteomic alterations in 3xTg-AD mice, and since CK1ε overexpression has previously been shown to impair working memory in mice
Moreover, given the associations between anxiety, working memory, and the circadian clock
To determine whether PF-670462 can reverse AD-associated cognitive deficits, 3xTg-AD and NTg mice were administered daily injections of PF-670462 (20 mg/kg/d) or vehicle starting at 11.5 months of age.
Five days after beginning treatment, mice underwent cognitive testing to evaluate working memory and anxiety-like behaviour, with continued daily treatment over the course of testing (Figure
To study the impact of PF-670462 treatment on hippocampal-dependent working memory, we assessed spontaneous alternation behaviour in the Y-maze test, a widely used cognitive task to evaluate spatial working memory in rodents.
The working memory of 11.5-month-old, vehicle-treated 3xTg-AD mice was significantly impaired compared with age-matched NTg control mice, in line with previous reports
3xTg-AD mice treated with PF-670462 showed enhanced working memory relative to vehicle-treated 3xTg-AD mice, while the performance of NTg mice was unaffected by PF-670462 treatment (Figure
To confirm that the improvement in working memory seen in 3xTg-AD mice treated with PF-670462 was not due to changes in activity levels, we measured the total number of arm entries and found that it was not altered by PF-670462, with 3xTg-AD mice in both treatment groups showing a similar number of arm entries and fewer than NTg controls (Figure
Thus, CK1δ/ε inhibition with PF-670462 rescued hippocampal-dependent working memory deficits in 3xTg-AD mice, and this was associated with normalization of AD-related protein abundance changes in the hippocampus (Figures
To determine whether the enhanced working memory resulting from PF-670462 treatment was associated with changes in anxiety, we also assessed anxiety-like behaviour in the open field test, using the time spent exploring the centre area of the open field as an index of anxiety
As expected, vehicle-treated 3xTg-AD mice spent less time in the centre compared with NTg control mice, indicating that 3xTg-AD mice exhibit increased anxiety
Although the time spent in the centre by 3xTg-AD mice treated with PF-670462 was not significantly different from that of vehicle-treated 3xTg-AD mice or NTg mice, PF-670462 treatment seemed to heighten anxiety levels in NTg mice (Figure
CK1δ/ε inhibition has previously been shown to alter anxiety-like behaviour in ClockΔ19 mice
We also measured the total distance travelled during the open field test and did not find significant differences between any groups (Figure
These results suggest that the beneficial effect of PF-670462 on working memory in 3xTg-AD mice was not the result of altered anxiety levels, but is instead linked to treatment-induced changes in the hippocampal proteome.
Altogether, our findings provide support for a role of CK1δ/ε in regulating working memory and suggest that CK1δ/ε inhibition could represent a feasible approach to reverse AD-related memory impairment.

PF-670462 Administration Normalizes Disrupted Behavioural Circadian Rhythms in 3xTg-AD Mice
Previous studies have shown that CK1δ/ε inhibition can restore defective circadian behaviour in various genetic and environmental mouse models of circadian dysfunction
3xTg-AD mice display loss of vasopressinand vasoactive intestinal polypeptide-expressing neurons in the SCN, resulting in circadian disturbances in patterns of locomotor activity, including a shortened free-running period under DD conditions
To determine whether CK1δ/ε inhibition affects behavioural circadian rhythms in 3xTg-AD mice, we first conducted a preliminary study by administering PF-670462 at 10 and 30 mg/kg/d to allow for assessment of doseresponse.
At ~8 months of age, 3xTg-AD mice entrained to a 12-h light:12-h dark (LD) schedule were transferred to DD and their baseline free-running periods determined by monitoring wheel-running activity prior to beginning treatment.
Mice were then administered daily injections of PF-670462 (10 or 30 mg/kg/d) or vehicle at CT12, where CT was defined by the zeitgeber time (ZT) of the previous LD schedule (Figure
At baseline, 3xTg-AD mice exhibited periods of 23.59 ± 0.1 h as seen on actograms of running wheel activity (Figure
Daily treatment with PF-670462, but not vehicle, resulted in lengthening of the free-running period by 0.5 ± 0.26 h and 1.3 ± 0.18 h in 3xTg-AD mice treated with 10 and 30 mg/kg/d PF-670462, respectively (Figures
Thus, PF-670462 treatment altered circadian locomotor activity patterns in 3xTg-AD mice, suggesting that CK1δ/ε inhibition might be capable of reversing AD-related circadian disturbances.
Next, we tested whether PF-670462 can re-establish normal behavioural circadian rhythms when administered daily at a moderate dose (20 mg/kg/d) in 3xTg-AD mice.
At ~11 months of age, LD-entrained 3xTg-AD and NTg mice were transferred to DD and their baseline free-running periods determined prior to treatment.
Mice were then administered daily injections of PF-670462 (20 mg/kg/d) or vehicle at CT12, as described above (Figure
At baseline, 3xTg-AD mice had shortened free-running periods relative to NTg mice (NTg, 23.96 ± 0.02 h; 3xTg-AD, 23.65 ± 0.07 h; Figures
Middle-aged NTg mice had freerunning periods similar to those seen in aged wild-type mice
Treatment with PF-670462 significantly lengthened the free-running period of NTg mice, as expected
Furthermore, 3xTg-AD mice treated with PF-670462, but not vehicle, exhibited rapid and stable entrainment of locomotor activity, with regular daily activity onset approximately 18 h after dosing time (Figures
Thus, daily treatment with PF-670462 normalized disrupted behavioural circadian rhythms associated with AD-like pathology in 3xTg-AD mice.
Together, our findings suggest that CK1δ/ε inhibition and, more broadly, direct circadian clock modulation represent viable therapeutic approaches to treat AD-related sleep and circadian disturbances.

DISCUSSION
An estimated 44 million people worldwide are living with dementia, the most common cause of which is AD
There is an urgent need for new therapies that address not only cognitive impairment but also behavioural symptoms commonly seen in AD, including sleep disturbances.
However, drug development for AD has proven to be very challenging, evidenced by the fact that there have been no new drugs approved since 2003 for treatment of the disease
The multifactorial basis of AD pathogenesis indicates that therapies targeting multiple causal factors will likely be most effective
Memory, sleep, and neurodegeneration are regulated by the circadian clock
In light of this, CK1δ/ε inhibition represents a feasible potential disease-modifying approach to treat AD, based on evidence that CK1δ/ε are markedly overexpressed in AD brains, play critical roles in regulating the circadian clock, and might also be involved in tau phosphorylation and controlling Aβ production
In the present study, daily administration of the small molecule CK1δ/ε inhibitor PF-670462 rescued hippocampaldependent working memory deficits and normalized disrupted behavioural circadian rhythms in middle-aged 3xTg-AD mice.
Our findings are consistent with recent work showing that CK1ε overexpression in mouse hippocampus impairs working memory
Enhanced working memory in 3xTg-AD mice was associated with significant proteomic reprogramming in the hippocampus, suggesting that PF-670462-induced changes in a number of pathways critical for neuronal function and cellular homeostasis resulted in improvements in hippocampal function.
Additional studies are needed to explore the effects of CK1δ/ε inhibition on long-term memory, which we were unable to evaluate with the cognitive tests used in the present study.
CK1δ/ε inhibition in vitro and in vivo altered the expression of proteins involved in diverse processes implicated in AD pathogenesis and hippocampal function, including synaptic plasticity and transmission, redox homeostasis, and APP processing.
Notably, administration of PF-670462 in 3xTg-AD mice restored the hippocampal expression of multiple proteins involved in these AD-related processes towards NTg levels, thereby partially rescuing protein abundance changes associated with AD-like pathology.
The effects of PF-670462 treatment on the hippocampal proteome are likely in part due to modulation of circadian regulation at the levels of the hippocampal clock as well as central SCN pacemaker
In keeping with this, PF-670462 administration induced changes in distinct clock-regulated processes in the hippocampus of 3xTg-AD mice at different time points.
Moreover, the circadian system is known to regulate hippocampal LTP as well as other processes that affect memory and cognitive function, including hippocampal neurogenesis and epigenetic control of gene expression
Further studies are needed to examine the effects of CK1δ/ε inhibition on circadian regulation of hippocampal neurophysiology in the context of AD, as well as to determine the relative contributions of changes in local hippocampal clock function, systemic circadian control, and clock-independent regulation associated with CK1δ/ε inhibition
There are currently no treatments available that have definitive evidence of effectiveness in treating AD-related sleep disturbances
Given that sleep disturbances are a common symptom and major reason for institutionalization in AD
Multiple lines of evidence suggest that the circadian clock is a feasible therapeutic target to treat sleep disturbances in AD, including the AD-related SCN neurodegeneration linked to circadian and sleep dysfunction
The effectiveness of PF-670462 in normalizing behavioural circadian rhythm disturbances in middle-aged 3xTg-AD mice provides evidence in support of this hypothesis.
Furthermore, administration of PF-670462 has previously been shown to be well-tolerated and produce the same effects on behavioural circadian rhythms in a diurnal non-human primate
Thus, this small molecule CK1δ/ε inhibitor represents a promising approach to normalize AD-related sleep and circadian disturbances in humans and could be further optimized to develop more highly potent, selective, and bioavailable drugs for the treatment of AD.
Several efforts are already underway to synthesize and optimize different small molecule CK1δ/ε inhibitors for various therapeutic applications and use in basic research, including compounds with enhanced discrimination of δ and ε isoforms
Additional preclinical studies are needed to characterize the effects of these newer, more selective and potent CK1δ/ε inhibitors on circadian disturbances, as well as cognitive impairment, in the context of AD.
In summary, treatment of 3xTg-AD mice with the CK1δ/ε inhibitor PF-670462 rescued working memory deficits, normalized behavioural circadian rhythm disturbances, and reversed hippocampal proteomic alterations in diverse ADrelated pathways.
Collectively, our findings suggest that CK1δ/ε inhibition or, more broadly, direct circadian clock modulation has neuroprotective disease-modifying potential and represents a viable therapeutic avenue to treat cognitive impairment and sleep disturbances in people with AD.

STAR METHODS

KEY RESOURCES

METHOD DETAILS
In Vivo CK1δ/ε Inhibition and Tissue Collection 8-month-old female 3xTg-AD and NTg mice group housed by genotype from weaning were administered vehicle (20% [w/v] 2-hydroxypropyl-β-cyclodextrin buffered with 25 mM sodium citrate pH 6.0; MilliporeSigma; Oakville, ON, Canada) or the casein kinase 1δ/ε (CK1δ/ε) inhibitor PF-670462 (30 mg/kg body weight/day; Cayman Chemical; Ann Arbor, MI, USA) subcutaneously (s.c.) daily for 18 days at zeitgeber time (ZT) 11.5 in LD, then transferred to constant darkness (DD) and treated in DD for another two days at circadian time (CT) 11.5, where CT was defined by the ZT of the previous LD schedule.
After two days in constant darkness, mice were sacrificed by cervical dislocation under dim red light at CT10 and CT14 on the third day of DD
The hippocampi were quickly excised, immediately flash frozen in liquid nitrogen, and stored at -80°C until further processing.

Proteomic Analysis of Hippocampal Tissues
Protein extracts from hippocampal tissues of individual mice were obtained by mechanical homogenization in lysis buffer containing 4% (w/v) sodium dodecyl sulphate (SDS) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC; pH 8.2) supplemented with complete protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktails (Roche; Mississauga, ON, Canada), followed by sonication (three 10 s pulses with 30 s on ice between each pulse).
Proteins from the resulting supernatant were precipitated in 50% acetone/50% ethanol (EtOH)/0.1% acetic acid at a ratio of 1:5 volumes at -20°C overnight.
Proteins were pelleted by centrifugation at 16,000 × g for 20 min at 4°C and pellets were washed three times with ice cold acetone.
Proteins were resuspended in 8 M urea in 50 mM ABC (pH 8.2).
Protein concentrations were determined using the DC Protein Assay (Bio-Rad; Mississauga, ON, Canada).
Proteins were reduced by incubating samples with 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT; MilliporeSigma) for 30 min at 56°C with agitation (245 rpm) and subsequently alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide (IAA; MilliporeSigma) for 30 min in darkness at room temperature.
Protein digestion was performed by incubation with 40:1 (w/w, protein:enzyme) trypsin (Worthington Biochemical Corporation; Lakewood, NJ, USA) overnight at 37°C with agitation (245 rpm).
Samples were acidified using 10% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (TFA; MilliporeSigma), then desalted using in-house made C18 desalting cartridges (C18 beads: ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ, 10 μm; Dr. Maisch GmbH; Beim Brückle, Germany) and desiccated using a SpeedVac.
Peptides were resuspended in 0.1% (v/v) formic acid (FA) for liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis.
In Vitro CK1δ/ε Inhibition Light N2a cells (ATCC; Manassas, VA, USA) were grown in DMEM (Gibco) supplemented with 10% (v/v) FBS (Gibco), 1 mM sodium pyruvate (Gibco), 28 μg/mL gentamicin and 5 μg/mL Plasmocin prophylactic (InvivoGen) at 37°C in a 5% CO2 humidified incubator.
For CK1δ/ε inhibition, immediately following a media change for synchronization
Heavy N2a cells were treated for 6 or 24 h with PF-670462 (5 μM) or DMSO prior to being harvested for use as a SILAC spike-in standard.

SILAC-Based Proteomic Analysis of N2a Cells
Protein extracts from light and heavy N2a cells were obtained by homogenization in lysis buffer containing 8 M urea in 50 mM ABC (pH 8.2) supplemented with complete protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktails (Roche), followed by sonication (three 10 s pulses with 30 s on ice between each pulse).
Protein concentrations were determined using the Bradford assay (Bio-Rad).
Lysates from light and heavy N2a cells were mixed at a 1:1 ratio and loaded onto 30-kDa molecular weight cutoff Microcon filters (Millipore; Billerica, MA, USA).
Proteins were reduced by incubating samples with 20 mM DTT for 30 min at 37°C with agitation (245 rpm) and subsequently alkylated with 20 mM IAA for 30 min in darkness at room temperature.
Protein digestion was performed by incubation with 40:1 (w/w, protein:enzyme) trypsin (Worthington Biochemical Corporation) overnight at 37°C with agitation (245 rpm).
Samples were acidified using 10% (v/v) FA, then desalted using inhouse made C18 desalting cartridges (C18 beads: Dr. Maisch GmbH) and desiccated using a SpeedVac prior to being resuspended in 0.1% (v/v) FA for LC-MS/MS analysis.

LC-MS/MS Analysis
4 μL of resuspended peptides (equivalent to 2 μg of proteins) from each sample were analyzed by an online reverse-phase LC-MS/MS platform consisting of an Eksigent NanoLC 425 system (AB SCIEX) coupled with an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific; San Jose, CA, USA) via a nano-electrospray source.
Prior to MS analysis, peptide mixtures were separated by reverse-phase chromatography using an in-house packed ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ column (75 μm internal diameter × 15 cm, 1.9 μm, 200 Å pore size; Dr. Maisch GmbH; Beim Brückle, Germany) over a 240-min gradient of 5-30% buffer B (acetonitrile [ACN] with 0.1% [v/v] FA) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min.
The Orbitrap Elite instrument was operated in the data-dependent mode to simultaneously measure survey scan MS spectra (350-1,800 m/z, R = 60,000 defined at m/z 400).
Up to the 20 most intense peaks were isolated and fragmented with collision-induced dissociation (CID).
System controlling and data collection were carried out using Xcalibur software version 2.2 (Thermo Scientific).

MS Data Processing
MS raw files were processed for each experiment separately with MaxQuant (version 1.5.2.8) using the integrated Andromeda search engine and UniProt FASTA database from mouse (Mus musculus; 2013_05).
The search included variable modifications for methionine oxidation (M) and acetylation (protein N-term) as well as fixed modification for carbamidomethylation (C).
Trypsin/P was set as the cleavage specificity with up to two missed cleavages allowed.
The false discovery rate (FDR) cutoffs were set at 0.01 at the peptide and protein levels and the minimum peptide length was set at 7. Identification across different replicates was achieved by enabling the "match between runs" option with a matching time window of 5 min.

Cognitive Testing
For cognitive function studies, 11.5-month-old female 3xTg-AD and NTg mice were administered vehicle (20% [w/v] 2-hydroxypropyl-β-cyclodextrin buffered with 25 mM sodium citrate pH 6.0; MilliporeSigma) the CK1δ/ε inhibitor PF-670462 (20 mg/kg body weight/day; Cayman Chemical) s.c.
daily at ZT11 in LD.
Light levels during the course of the experiment were confirmed using a light sensor placed inside the housing room.
Five days after the start of injections, mice underwent Y-maze and open field testing on days 6 to 9 of treatment.
Mice were brought into the behavioural facility 30-60 minutes prior to testing for acclimatization to the testing environment.
Y-Maze.
Hippocampal-dependent spatial working memory was assessed using the Y-maze spontaneous alternation behaviour test as previously described with minor modifications
The Y-maze apparatus consisted of three arms (38 cm long, 7.6 cm wide, and 13 cm tall) of opaque black plastic at a 120° angle from each other.
Mice were placed into one of the arms of the maze and arm entries were recorded for 8 minutes as the animal freely explored all three arms.
The maze was wiped clean with 70% EtOH between trials.
An arm entry was defined as having all four paws in an arm.
Spontaneous alternation behaviour was defined as successive entries into three different arms and expressed as a percentage of the maximum number of alternations (total number of arm entries minus 2).
The total number of arm entries was also recorded as a measure of ambulatory activity and mice with fewer than six arm entries were excluded.
Open Field.
Anxiety-like behaviour was assessed using the open field test as previously described with minor modifications
Mice were placed in the centre of an empty open field box (44 cm x 44 cm x 44 cm) made of opaque white plastic and their activity was recorded using Ethovision XT 11.5 video tracking software (Noldus Information Technology; Leesburg, VA, USA) for 5 minutes.
The open field was wiped clean with 70% EtOH between trials.
Time spent exploring the centre zone (24 cm x 24 cm) was recorded as a measure of anxiety level, while total distance travelled was recorded as a measure of ambulatory activity.

Behavioural Circadian Rhythm Testing
Running Wheels.
For behavioural circadian rhythm studies, female 3xTg-AD and NTg mice entrained to a 12-h light:12-h dark schedule from weaning were individually housed with running wheels for two weeks in LD conditions, then released into DD at 10-11 months of age.
Light levels during the course of the experiment were confirmed using a light sensor placed inside each housing room.
After three weeks in DD, mice were administered vehicle (20% [w/v] 2-hydroxypropyl-βcyclodextrin buffered with 25 mM sodium citrate pH 6.0; MilliporeSigma) or PF-670462 (20 mg/kg body weight/day; Cayman Chemical) s.c.
daily for 10 days at CT12, where CT was defined by the ZT of the previous LD schedule.
This time point was chosen to allow all mice to receive injections at a time when it had previously been shown that PF-670462 administration has robust effects on behavioural circadian rhythms in rats
Running wheel activity data were collected using Wheel Manager software version 2.2 (MED Associates, Inc.; Fairfax, VT, USA).
Actograms were generated and chisquare periodogram analysis performed using circadian software available online (www.circadian.org)
Dose-Response Study for PF-670462.
Male 3xTg-AD mice entrained to a 12-h light:12-h dark schedule from weaning were individually housed with running wheels for two weeks in LD conditions, then released into DD at 7-8 months of age.
After 16 days in DD, mice were administered vehicle (20% [w/v] 2-hydroxypropyl-β-cyclodextrin; MilliporeSigma) or PF-670462 (10 or 30 mg/kg body weight/day; Cayman Chemical) s.c.
daily for 9 days at CT12, where CT was defined by the ZT of the previous LD schedule.
Running wheel activity data were collected and analyzed as described above for Figure

QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSES

Bioinformatic Analysis
Initial bioinformatic analysis was performed with Perseus (version 1.5.5.3).
The raw proteomic dataset for each experiment was filtered to include only proteins quantified in at least half of samples (Q50).
Hierarchical clustering analysis, using the median value of logarithmized values for the normalized light-to-heavy (L/H) ratio (for N2a samples) or label-free quantification (LFQ) intensity (for hippocampal samples) of each protein, was performed after z-score normalization of the data within Euclidean distances.
Prior to principal component analysis (PCA) with MetaboAnalyst (version 4.0)
Gene Ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway enrichment analyses were implemented using DAVID (version 6.8; Fisher's exact test p ≤ 0.01 relative to the Q50 backgrounds in our datasets was considered significant)
Protein-protein interaction (PPI) networks were created using the STRING database



Figure 1 .
Figure 1.
PF-670462 Treatment Alters Expression of AD-Related and Clock-Regulated Proteins In Vitro (A) Proteome coverage: Venn diagram displaying the number of proteins quantified in each treatment condition and overlap between conditions.
N2a cells were treated with PF-670462 (5 μM) or DMSO (control) for 24 h and harvested for proteomic analysis.
Protein extracts were mixed at a 1:1 ratio with a SILAC spike-in standard from heavy-labelled N2a cells prior to trypsin digestion and LC-MS/MS analysis.
n = 3 biological replicates per group.
(B) Volcano plot highlighting differentially expressed proteins after PF-670462 treatment (blue = downregulation, red = upregulation; FDR-corrected p < 0.05, two-tailed Student's t-test; s0 = 0.1).
(C) Heatmap of z-score normalized abundances of differentially expressed proteins after PF-670462 treatment, showing unsupervised hierarchical clustering of proteins (rows) and samples (columns).
(D) GO enrichment analysis using DAVID of proteins upregulated with PF-670462 treatment.
A selection of enriched ontology terms associated with AD pathogenesis is shown (p ≤ 0.01, Fisher's exact test relative to Q50 background).(E)
First order PPI network ("subnetwork1") of proteins differentially expressed after PF-670462 treatment created using the STRING database (interaction confidence score > 0.9).
GO and KEGG functional annotations were performed using DAVID and network visualization using NetworkAnalyst.
Proteins involved in AD-related and clock-regulated biological processes and pathways shown are represented as coloured nodes.
(F) Relative abundances of proteins associated with AD and significantly upregulated in response to PF-670462 treatment.
C1QBP, complement C1q binding protein; COX, cytochrome c oxidase; MAP, microtubule-associated protein; NAC, nascent polypeptide-associated complex; PP2A, protein phosphatase 2A.
Data are represented as means + SEM.
See also TablesS1 and S2.



Figure 2 .
Figure 2. PF-670462 Administration Shifts the Hippocampal Proteomic Profile of 3xTg-AD Mice Towards That of NTg Mice (A) Study design and workflow: 8-month-old NTg and 3xTg-AD mice were treated daily with PF-670462 (30 mg/kg/d) or vehicle for 20 days, then hippocampal tissues were collected at two time points for proteomic analysis.
Protein extracts were digested with trypsin and analyzed by LC-MS/MS.
(B) Proteome coverage: Venn diagram displaying the number of proteins quantified in each experimental group and overlap between groups.
For CT10: n = 3 NTg vehicle; n = 4 3xTg-AD vehicle; n = 3 3xTg-AD PF-670462.
For CT14: n = 4 NTg vehicle; n = 5 3xTg-AD vehicle; n = 4 3xTg-AD PF-670462.
(C) PCA of accurately quantified proteins (Q50), showing clustering of samples by experimental group with 95% confidence ellipses.
(D) GO and KEGG functional annotations using DAVID of proteins upregulated or downregulated with PF-670462 administration (p < 0.05, two-tailed Student's t-test; log10 fold change > log101.2 or < -log101.2).
A selection of ontology terms and pathways associated with AD pathogenesis is shown.
(E) Heatmaps of z-score normalized abundances of differentially expressed proteins after PF-670462 administration, showing unsupervised hierarchical clustering of proteins (rows) and samples (columns).
Vehicle-treated NTg and 3xTg-AD mice have distinct hippocampal proteomic profiles, while the profiles of 3xTg-AD mice treated with PF-670462 are similar to those of NTg mice.
See also Figure S1 and TablesS3-S6.



Figure 3 .
Figure 3. PF-670462 Administration Rescues AD-Related Protein Abundance Changes in the Hippocampus of 3xTg-AD Mice (A) First order PPI network ("subnetwork1") of proteins differentially expressed with PF-670462 administration created using the STRING database (interaction confidence score > 0.9) and visualized using NetworkAnalyst (p < 0.05, two-tailed Student's t-test; log10 fold change > log101.2 or < -log101.2).
Proteins involved in AD-associated GO biological processes shown are represented as coloured nodes.
(B) The number of proteins differentially expressed after PF-670462 administration (3xTg-AD PF-670462 versus 3xTg-AD vehicle), as well as the number of these differentially expressed with AD-like pathology (3xTg-AD vehicle versus NTg vehicle).
(C) Relative abundances (mean z-score normalized log10 LFQ intensities) of proteins involved in various AD-related processes.
Proteins differentially expressed with PF-670462: *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001, two-tailed Student's t-test; log10 fold change > log101.2 or < -log101.2.
MAP, microtubule-associated protein.
For CT10: n = 3 NTg vehicle; n = 4 3xTg-AD vehicle; n = 3 3xTg-AD PF-670462.
For CT14: n = 4 NTg vehicle; n = 5 3xTg-AD vehicle; n = 4 3xTg-AD PF-670462.
See also Figure S1 and TablesS5 and S6.



Figure 4 .
Figure 4. PF-670462 Administration Rescues Working Memory Deficits Without Altering Anxiety-Like Behaviour in 3xTg-AD Mice (A) Study design: NTg and 3xTg-AD mice were aged to 11.5 months and treatment was started 5 days prior to the beginning of cognitive testing.
Mice received daily injections of PF-670462 (20 mg/kg/d) or vehicle, and the Y-maze and open field tests were conducted on days 6 to 9 of treatment.
For Y-maze: n = 10 NTg vehicle; n = 11 NTg PF-670462; n = 6 3xTg-AD vehicle; n = 9 3xTg-AD PF-670462.
For open field: n = 11 NTg vehicle; n = 11 NTg PF-670462; n = 9 3xTg-AD vehicle; n = 9 3xTg-AD PF-670462.
(B) Percent spontaneous alternation during the Y-maze test, showing improvement in spatial working memory in 3xTg-AD mice treated with PF-670462 (*p < 0.05, two-tailed Student's t-test).
(C) Number of arm entries during the Y-maze test, showing no changes with PF-670462 treatment (**p < 0.01, two-tailed Student's t-test versus NTg).
(D) Percent time spent in the centre during the open field test, showing no change in anxiety-like behaviour in 3xTg-AD mice treated with PF-670462 (*p < 0.05 versus NTg vehicle, two-tailed Student's t-test).
(E) Distance travelled during the open field test, showing no differences in locomotion between any groups.
Data are represented as means + SEM.
n.s., not significant.



Figure 5 .
Figure 5. PF-670462 Administration Normalizes Disrupted Behavioural Circadian Rhythms in 3xTg-AD Mice (A) Study design: Wheel-running activities of NTg and 3xTg-AD mice were recorded for 2 weeks in LD, then mice were released into DD at ~10.5 months of age.
After 3 weeks in DD, mice received daily injections of PF-670462 (20 mg/kg/d) or vehicle for 10 days in DD. n = 5 NTg vehicle; n = 3 NTg PF-670462; n = 6 3xTg-AD vehicle; n = 5 3xTg-AD PF-670462.
(B) Representative actograms of wheel-running activities under different lighting conditions of ~11-month-old NTg and 3xTg-AD mice treated with PF-670462 (20 mg/kg/d) or vehicle daily.
The timing of treatment is indicated by red bars.
Missing data due to computer failure are indicated by an asterisk.
(C) Baseline free-running period under DD of NTg (n = 8) and 3xTg-AD (n = 11) mice (**p < 0.01, two-tailed unpaired Student's t-test with Welch's correction).
(D) Baseline 24-hour activity profiles under DD of NTg and 3xTg-AD mice.
Profiles reflect the mean daily activity across 11 days in DD prior to beginning treatment.
(E) Free-running period under DD before and during treatment of NTg and 3xTg-AD mice with PF-670462 or vehicle (*p < 0.05 baseline versus during treatment, two-tailed paired Student's t-test; *p < 0.05 vehicle versus PF-670462, two-tailed unpaired Student's t-test with Welch's correction).
(F) Change in free-running period under DD from pre-treatment baseline of NTg and 3xTg-AD mice treated with PF-670462 or vehicle (*p < 0.05, twotailed unpaired Student's t-test with Welch's correction).
(G) Chi-square periodogram analysis of wheel-running activities of 3xTg-AD mice treated with PF-670462 or vehicle.
Representative periodograms of 3xTg-AD mice under DD before and during treatment with vehicle or PF-670462, showing change in period with PF-670462 but not vehicle.
(H) 24-hour activity profiles under DD of 3xTg-AD mice treated with vehicle or PF-670462.
Profiles reflect the mean daily activity across the entire dosing period.
Data are represented as means + SEM.
See also Figure S2.



TABLE REAGENT
Burlington, ON, Canada), 1 mM sodium pyruvate (Gibco), 28 μg/mL gentamicin (Gibco), and 5 μg/mL Plasmocin prophylactic (InvivoGen; San Diego, CA, USA).
Cells were maintained in culture with SILAC media for at least 10 doubling times to allow for complete (>98%) incorporation of the isotopically labelled amino acids into cells.