Recruitment and retention of underrepresented populations in Alzheimer's disease research: A systematic review
Introduction: Alzheimer's disease and related dementias (ADRD) disproportionately impact racial and ethnic minority and socioeconomically disadvantaged adults.
Yet, these populations are significantly underrepresented in research.
Methods: We systematically reviewed the literature for published reports describing recruitment and retention of individuals from underrepresented backgrounds in ADRD research or underrepresented participants' perspectives regarding ADRD research participation.
Relevant evidence was synthesized and evaluated for quality.
Results: We identified 22 eligible studies.
Seven studies focused on recruitment/retention approaches, all of which included multifaceted efforts and at least one community outreach component.
There was considerable heterogeneity in approaches used, specific activities and strategies, outcome measurement, and conclusions regarding effectiveness.
Despite limited use of prospective evaluation strategies, most authors reported improvements in diverse representation in ADRD cohorts.
Studies evaluating participant views focused largely on predetermined explanations of participation including attitudes, barriers/facilitators, education, trust, and religiosity.
Across all studies, the strength of evidence was low.
Discussion: Overall, the quantity and quality of available evidence to inform best practices in recruitment, retention, and inclusion of underrepresented populations in ADRD research are low.
Further efforts to systematically evaluate the success of existing and emergent approaches will require improved methodological standards and uniform measures for evaluating recruitment, participation, and inclusivity.

Introduction
The fundamental goal of the National Plan to Address Alzheimer's disease is to prevent and effectively treat Alzheimer's disease and related dementias (ADRD) by 2025
A central component of the primary strategy for advancing this goal is to expand clinical trials of interventions that target modifiable disease risk factors with the goal of slowing, delaying, or preventing disease onset and progression
Achieving this goal among the populations most affected will be impossible if enrollment in ADRD research is not expanded, particularly among underrepresented populations, such as racial/ethnic minorities and those of lower socioeconomic status, who have traditionally been underincluded in ADRD research
This review focuses on empiric reports of ADRD research recruitment and/ or retention within underrepresented populations and the perspectives of these participants regarding ADRD research participation.
Although underrepresentation has resulted in variable estimates of disease risk and disparity
Dementia-specific health disparities are well documented among several racial/ethnic minority populations, particularly in terms of ADRD incidence, prevalence, diagnosis, disease progression, treatment response, and disease burden
Modifiable rather than genetic factors plausibly account for these disparities, given that racial/ethnic minority status is a risk marker for multiple ADRD risk factors such as poorer quality of early-life education and undermanaged cardiovascular conditions
It has also been challenging to adequately examine the contributions of distinct mechanistic pathways among racially and ethnically diverse populations, although illumination of mechanisms will be key to successful intervention and treatment.
While great progress has been made in advancing our understanding of underlying pathology that contributes to the clinical symptoms of dementia
In addition, while members of racial/ethnic minority groups are more likely to be socioeconomically disadvantaged, emerging evidence suggests that exposure to social disadvantage at both the individual and neighborhood level may increase risk for development of ADRD independent of race and ethnicity markers, highlighting the importance of diverse representation across socioeconomic and geographic strata as well as race/ethnic background in research
There is growing recognition of this "recruitment crisis" and its implications for addressing ADRD as a public health crisis
However, despite the advancement in novel initiatives to improve outreach and recruitment, ADRD research inclusion rates for racial/ethnic minorities and other historically marginalized populations remain low
Theoretical frameworks that contextualize behavior at an individual, network, and/or societal level
However, the availability and applicability of frameworks that inform recruitment or retention strategies and predict engagement with ADRD research remain unclear
The use of developing and disseminating a philosophy, framework, and evidence base for addressing recruitment challenges was endorsed by the National Institute on Aging's recently proposed National Strategy for Research Recruitment and Participation in Alzheimer's and Related Dementias Clinical Research
The strategy identifies core goals toward increasing capacity for improved ADRD research recruitment and highlights the need for an applied science of recruitment to empirically inform the development of best practices for improving recruitment and retention of underrepresented populations in ADRD research.
The current review aims to highlight priorities and next steps required to advance the science of recruitment for ADRD research by determining the breadth and strength of existing evidence.
Specifically, we conducted a systematic review to identify, appraise, and synthesize available evidence for the recruitment and retention of study participants from underrepresented backgrounds, as well as studies reporting these participants' views regarding ADRD research participation.

Methods

Study protocol
We published an a priori study protocol on PROSPERO which details review question, search methodology, and procedures for article screening, review, and synthesis (CRD42019093828).
The protocol followed methodological guidance on mixed evidence synthesis from the Cochrane Collaborative

Search strategy
Following our protocol, we developed a search strategy in collaboration with a health sciences librarian.
We searched MEDLINE (PubMed), CINAHL (EbscoHOST), and PsycINFO (Ovid) using key search terms (Supplementary Appendix B) for relevant studies published after January 1, 2010.
This date was selected in consideration of the considerable changes in ADRD research foci, including a major shift toward biomarkerfocused research
Searches were conducted on March 16, 2018.
Because search and MeSH terms are not well established in the recruitment sciences field, we used multiple search strategies (Supplementary Appendix B).
We also conducted a manual citation search from all included studies, and of all studies identified through the search that discussed recruitment and retention of underrepresented populations in ADRD research, some were excluded because they were not data driven.

Study selection
We included two types of published reports 1) those that examined research recruitment and/or retention of participants from underrepresented backgrounds in ADRD research and 2) studies that reported on these participants' views regarding ADRD research participation.
Studies were screened for inclusion according to the following predetermined eligibility criteria:
Included individuals from underrepresented backgrounds, defined as members of a racial/ethnic minority group and/or individuals from disadvantaged socioeconomic backgrounds.
Because many studies examine minority participant groups in relation to nonminority groups, studies did not have to focus exclusively on participants from underrepresented backgrounds but had to report focusing on these groups in their approach.
Published in a peer-reviewed journal after 1/1/2010 and available in English.
Included primary study data of participant views or evaluation data related to recruitment/retention efforts indicated through systematic reporting of standardized and nonstandardized measures used to characterize success of various recruitment/retention strategies or participant perspectives.
We imported results from each search strategy into EndNote Desktop Software, where duplicate articles were removed.
Article screening was conducted using Covidence Systematic Review Software
Authors A.L.G.-B., Y.J., S.F.-B., L.M.B., and M.Z.
screened articles.
After a title/abstract screen, potentially eligible full-text articles were reviewed to determine eligibility.
A postpublication retraction check was performed on included studies on January 11, 2019, revealing that no studies had been retracted after publication.

Data extraction
Two independent reviewers used standardized dataextraction templates developed from the review protocol, with a third reviewer rectifying areas of disagreement.
For all studies, we extracted information regarding study design, participants, setting, study inclusion/exclusion criteria, participant information and sociodemographics, specific measurement instruments or scales used, and findings.
For studies reporting on recruitment/retention, we also extracted information about the delivery, modality, frequency and duration, fidelity measures, and resource requirements of specified recruitment/retention approaches (Supplementary Appendix C).

Assessment of study quality
Two reviewers independently evaluated study quality using the Quality Assessment Tool for Quantitative Studies, which classifies a study as being strong, moderate, or weak depending on the study's sample and selection strategy, the study design, confounders, data collection methods, and attrition
For qualitative studies, quality was evaluated using the Joanna Briggs Institute Checklist for Qualitative Research
Disagreements were arbitrated by a third reviewer.

Data analysis
Data were analyzed using standardized methods for thematic synthesis of primary study findings outlined by Thomas and Harden
After extraction of primary study data, each study's findings were analyzed and thematically categorized using Excel.
The themes were then collated into tables from which patterns and conclusions were identified through independent, duplicate review.
A metaanalysis was not attempted because of limited evidence base and substantial heterogeneity in study design, populations, and outcome measures.

Results

Database search results
We identified 759 studies through database searches and seven through cross-referencing.
After duplicates were removed, 577 studies remained, of which 538 were excluded by title and abstract screening.
The remaining 39 studies were assessed for eligibility via full-text screening, 22 of which met inclusion criteria (Fig.

Characteristics of included studies
Of the 22 included studies, 15 focused on participant views, attitudes, and willingness to participate in ADRD research and related procedures.
Six of the remaining studies reported on recruitment strategies, with one of the six describing use of a retention strategy but none evaluating retention strategies.
One study examined both participant views and recruitment strategies.
Overall, 18 of the 22 studies reported recruiting participants primarily from community settings, and 12 of 22 reported recruitment through an existing cohort (e.g., an Alzheimer's Disease Center research registry).
Study inclusion criteria most often included participant age (65 years and older), membership in a racial/ethnic minority group (as compared to another dimension of disadvantage), status as a dementia caregiver, and in one study, presence of dementia or mild cognitive impairment diagnosis
Common study exclusion criteria included having dementia
Enrollment and representation of specific targeted populations varied across studies, with some having 100% racial/ethnic minority enrollment and some predominantly sampling racial/ethnic minority groups but also enrolling nonminorities:
Ten studies focused on reaching African-American participants
Two studies focused on recruiting African-American, Chinese, Hispanic/Latinx, and white population in their studies
One study specified targeting a racially diverse population, achieving a 29% non-white sample
Four of 22 studies reported participant income
No studies focused on or included Native American/ Alaskan Native or Pacific Islander populations.
Four of 22 studies described the use of a theory or conceptual framework which included outreach
The remaining 18 studies did not explicitly specify the use of a theoretical framework to inform a design of recruitment/retention approaches, explain the effectiveness of these approaches, or predict participation.

Measurement
Sixteen of the 22 studies used at least one structured measurement tool for data collection and/or outcome measurement.
The remaining six were solely interview-based, and data consisted of qualitative evaluations
Most measurement tools consisted of structured questions and items that focused on concepts such as likelihood to enroll in research, attitudes toward ADRD research, potential barriers and facilitators to participating including participant religiosity/spirituality, beliefs about the body, trust in the health-care system, literacy, knowledge regarding ADRD, perceived ADRD risk, and cognitive abilities.
Across the 16 studies that used a measurement tool, seven
Four of these seven studies using validated tools also used nonvalidated investigator-designed measurement tools or items  [48-50,52], and the remaining nine studies used only nonvalidated investigator-designed measurement tools or reported outcomes of a recruitment study

Studies reporting recruitment and retention approaches
Seven studies described recruitment and/or retention approaches.
We classified recruitment approaches as (1) unsolicited communications/advertisement, (2) community-oriented events and outreach, (3) recruitment in academic or clinic settings from an existing registry of participants who had previously consented to contact for future research opportunities, and (4) use of "other sources" wherein the recruitment source and activities were not specified.
Activities undertaken across these approaches varied considerably and are detailed in Table
All seven described recruitment activities and one of the seven studies discussed approaches specific to retention.
Studies did not consistently specify whether specific activities related to recruitment or retention efforts.
Studies reported adopting various implementation and delivery strategies across recruitment activities, including employing researchers with congruent racial/ethnic identities and/or language abilities
All studies incorporated at least one community-based approach which ranged from distributing flyers to having former participants refer people via word-of mouth and engaging with community liaison, faith-based organizations, senior centers, and support groups
Descriptions of what constituted a community-based approach, the types, amount and distribution of engagement with various entities, and other approaches used varied considerably.
For example, one study described using a "community-engagement approach" consisting of presentations at local health fairs, conferences, and churches; recruitment through active Alzheimer's Disease Research Center studies; use of media and websites; recruitment at health centers; and recruitment via "word of mouth"
Other approaches included recruitment through varying intensities of community lectures, newspaper announcements, "word of mouth," training with clinical recruitment partners, health fairs, radio and faith-based advertisements, and presentations on ADRD
Only one of these seven studies described use of a strategy to bolster both recruitment and retention, specifically through the establishment of community advisory boards to inform their work

General evaluation of recruitment approaches
Just one of the seven studies described retention activities, and these activities were not systematically evaluated.
Across recruitment-focused studies, evaluation methods for recruitment activities varied, including methods for measuring participant exposure to recruitment activities and the outcomes of interest.
The predominant method of evaluating the effectiveness of recruitment activities was to track new enrollments by evaluating total number of new participants
Only one study evaluated more proximal endpoints by capturing total number of new referrals and exposure to recruitment activities (i.e., participants attending workshops)
The duration of recruitment activities varied considerably ranging from four months
All studies had unequal distributions in the intensity of and exposure to various recruitment activities; for example, one compared over 2000 mailings to 23 newspaper advertisements
No study reported attempts to measure or document fidelity of recruitment activities (i.e., ensuring sessions are delivered similarly across sessions or settings).
In all but one study, conclusions were reported without reference to variations in intensity or exposure to specific recruitment events or activities
Among the seven studies evaluating recruitment approaches, only one study clearly delineated a prospective recruitment intervention
Across studies, five clearly delineated a research question or objective
The two providing a hypothesis had specified a goal of identifying which recruitment methods would be most effective
Most authors reported improved representation or growth in research cohorts after their recruitment efforts, with some citing success in recruiting a more diverse research cohorts
Some authors did not draw clear conclusions on the success of recruitment according to venue or activity but highlighted the importance of certain components such as offering clinical services
Two studies reported mailings yielded referrals but that in-person community activities such as community lectures or "partnership with community liaisons" yielded higher percentage of enrollees, particularly among minority groups

Participant views of ADRD research
Our review identified 16 studies that examined underrepresented participant perspectives regarding ADRD research.
Of these studies, 7 focused on participant views around incentives and barriers to joining an ADRD study or registry [32,40-42,48,51,52], and the remaining 9 studies focused on specific related research procedures including brain Flyers and posters achieved recruitment of 6.4% participants (N 5 2311)
Use mailing lists of local, familiar community organizations

Community/public health fairs
Percent yield of total registry participants Health fair 14.17% (N 5 2311)

Community liaison engagement model
Percent yield of enrollees 15 organizations involved; yielded 151 enrollees.
Of referrals, 49% were eligible and 22% were minorities
Recruitment in academic or clinic settings

ADRC-related activities Percent yield of total registry participants
Annual ADRC conference 3.2% (N 5 2311)
Harness annual visits and/or regularly scheduled study visits Employ bilingual and bicultural staff

Percent yield of total ADRC enrollees
Outreach clinics yielded 22 of 125 enrollees

Percent yield of total ADRC enrollees
Campus clinic yielded 23 of 125 enrollees

Not relevant

Percent yield of total ADRC enrollees
Other sources yielded 12 of 125 enrollees
Methodological approach was heterogeneous across these studies, with 7 studies using surveys or questionnaires, 6 using focus groups or interviews, and 3 using a combination of surveys and interviews.
Study questions focused on aspects of religion/spirituality, education, motivation to participate (e.g., altruism), and trust/mistrust in health-care systems that were hypothesized to influence views surrounding participation, particularly in specific research procedures.
Synthesized findings from these studies are detailed in Table
In one study of four ethnic groups, African Americans, in particular, expressed a concern regarding the history of racism in research
Major facilitators of research participation include the building of trust and rapport, race-and ethnicityconcordant researchers, and visit locations and timing that were convenient for participants
Several studies concluded that education regarding ADRD itself, and the importance of ADRD research, may be valuable as a means of increasing minority recruitment
A majority of the 16 studies used guided interviews based on predetermined sets of questions around major constructs such as education, mistrust, religion, and spiritual beliefs.
In those cases, subsequent investigator-identified domains and concepts were necessarily constrained by the prespecified conceptualization (Table

Quality appraisal
The five solely qualitative studies were rated by the Joanna Briggs Institute Checklist for Qualitative Research.
Three met all 10 quality criteria, one met four criteria, and the last met three criteria (Supplementary Appendix E).
All studies were deemed to represent participant voices, present conclusions based on aforementioned data and analysis, and show evidence of ethical approval.
Seventeen studies were evaluated by the Quality Assessment Tool for Quantitative Studies, and this included studies examining recruitment approaches and studies examining views and attitudes via surveys.
All were given a global rating of "weak."
Nearly all studies demonstrated high risk of bias because of a combination of selection bias (n 5 8), poor study design (n 5 15), confounders (n 5 14), data collection (n 5 12), and attrition bias (n 5 12) (Supplementary Appendix F).

Discussion
We found that despite important efforts and contributions toward enhancing the representativeness of ADRD research cohorts, the overall strength of evidence regarding effective strategies for bolstering recruitment and retention of underrepresented populations in ADRD research is both low and limited to specific populations and predominantly large research institutions or Alzheimer's Disease Centers.
We found considerable heterogeneity in recruitment approaches and strategies and in measurement of the delivery of these approaches and their outcomes.
Ultimately, owing to the limited scope of evidence, methodological limitations in study design, and variability in measurement and evaluation across studies, the existing literature cannot be readily used by other investigators or sites to adapt or implement an effective approach to improve recruitment or retention efforts within their own ADRD research programs.
While investigators generally reported that their recruitment efforts were successful, metrics for quantifying effectiveness at this emergent stage are inconsistent, and in some cases, they lack adequate empiric support because of the retrospective nature of much of the current evidence.
Findings from studies investigating participant perspectives highlight shared motivators (i.e., altruism) and barriers (i.e., mistrust, financial, or geographic accessibility) to ADRD research participation.
However, areas of inquiry in data collection in these studies were largely driven by investigators' predetermined explanations of participation, which may have constrained study findings.
Although a few groups have long focused on the science surrounding research access, inclusion, and participation
While the present article presents a systematic review of existing evidence, it is possible that additional relevant reports would have been identified through inclusion of more databases, and because of inconsistent reporting surrounding ethnicity, it is unclear how well included studies characterized heterogeneous racial/ethnic populations.
Yet, findings from this review clarify the scope of existing empiric evidence and, in particular, illustrate limitations inherent in attempts to draw conclusions based on retrospective evaluation of recruitment activities, which highlights how an applied recruitment science for ADRD research will benefit from incorporation of rigorous prospective designs, standardized measurement, and evaluative approaches.

Design and measurement considerations for future research
This review also identifies common design-based limitations that reduced confidence in study findings and limited our ability to identify common patterns and features of effective approach.
Essentially all studies included in this review were subject to considerable sampling bias in that the represented samples are unlikely to provide results that can be generalized to a larger population.
Furthermore, more than half used nonvalidated or nonstandardized instrumentation, thereby increasing the possibility of measurement error.
While the use of standard instrumentation not validated within an underrepresented population can also result in measurement error, its absence hinders the reproducibility of the studies in question.
These limitations suggest a need to develop sampling and measurement quality metrics specific to recruitment science to evaluate the nuances and complexities of answering questions related to research recruitment, retention, and participation.
Measurement-related weaknesses were not limited to instrumentation as this review also identifies variation in measurement of recruitment activity exposure and outcomes.
Most studies included reports of multifaceted and multipronged efforts to enhance outreach, recruitment of specific populations, and nearly all reported improvements in their overall recruitment numbers as a result of their efforts.
However, these studies often failed to measure exposure to recruitment activities and did not distinguish recruitment outcomes based on the type or the quantity of specific recruitment strategies to which participants were exposed.
Furthermore, our review found that many studies report imbalanced use of recruitment approaches, for instance, mailing thousands of letters and additionally offering a few community presentations, and only one study reported considering the imbalances in these techniques in the conclusions that are drawn regarding effectiveness.
While many retrospective studies reported successful recruitment efforts for underrepresented populations
While these data clearly provide strong anecdotal support for the feasibility of launching successful efforts to improve inclusion of individuals from underrepresented backgrounds in ADRD research, what they do not provide is strong empiric support to direct future recruitment and retention resources, inform targeted activities and procedures, and evaluate progress.

Dissemination and reporting considerations for future research
There are other omissions in the dissemination process that could be amended to promote progress.
Synthesized findings from reports of recruitment and retention approaches highlight common strategies: (1) including a diverse study team with a relationship to target communities
What is lacking in many reports is a more comprehensive understanding and/ or description of the local and community contexts within which these efforts took place.
A strong sense of the context in which a given activity was successful, and the rationale for selecting that activity, is central to understanding other situations and contexts within which similar priorities and approaches may be merited.
For example, some scholars have identified racial concordance, termed "symbolic diversity," insufficient to facilitate adequate recruitment, absent other approaches to establish trust and connection
In many instances, these efforts appear to involve not only building teams that are representative of diverse participants but also individuals that represent individual communities
Absent this understanding, scientists may be led to believe that simply adding a racial/ ethnic minority is sufficient to achieve improved inclusion.
Similarly, assumptions that members of the same racial or ethnic group hold homogenous preferences regarding research participation or experience the same barriers and facilitators for participation may exacerbate unintended consequences of "symbolic diversity" as ethnic and cultural identities are often multifaceted and heterogeneous.
More precise and contextualized description of concepts such as racial concordance can help in clarifying this practice and its value.
Another barrier to the adoption of effective recruitment practices is the lack of sufficiently detailed procedures that operationalize how these concepts are translated into actions and behaviors by study teams.
No studies reviewed provided standardized documentation that could be used to guide replication of these activities in their published reports.
Examples of such materials might include engagement manuals, detailed descriptions of the delivery and exposure of recruitment interventions/strategies, specification of sequential procedures, resource requirements, and attempts to characterize or evaluate fidelity to established principles or procedures.
Absent more sophisticated delineation of recruitment interventions or activities, the multifar-ious efforts of scientists endeavoring to bolster inclusivity of ADRD research run the risk of stagnating rather than progressing and collectively building an empirically informed evidence base from which to inform best practices in recruitment and retention.
To some extent, this is reflective of the unfortunate reality that oftentimes recruitment and retention efforts are a supplement or add-on to achieving scientific output rather than a central part of the research process.
While resource and time scarcity undoubtedly contribute to challenges in undertaking more complete documentation of recruitment activities, the lack of an accessible, sufficiently detailed foundation of evidence is a notable limitation to supporting ADRD researchers in improving their own recruitment efforts.

Opportunities for use of theoretical frameworks to guide recruitment science
Many of the design-and dissemination-based limitations described previously reflect a lack of evidence-based recruitment models observed in the reviewed literature.
Only four of the 22 studies explicitly used a conceptual framework/ recruitment model to inform their study design or execution.
Overwhelmingly, studies investigating the views of individuals from underrepresented backgrounds regarding ADRD research participation relied on explanations related to participant's attitudes, willingness, religiosity, education, and trust.
Because most studies had preselected these domains to inform their data collection, findings did largely reflect participant comments and views supporting this theoretical position.
Considerable evidence from other research contexts suggests that trust is of central relevance to understanding research participation among some populations, specifically African-American and American-Indian populations
However, the assumption that individuallevel mistrust, or even participant attitudes toward research more generally, is the largest barrier to participation in ADRD research is not necessarily empirically supported.
Provided the small number of articles explicitly describing the use of a theoretical framework, there is insufficient evidence from the available literature to endorse a specific theoretical perspective for improving recruitment of underrepresented populations in ADRD research.
Experts have proposed that more diverse theoretical perspectives are needed to disentangle complex motivators, barriers, and decision-making processes regarding research enrollment and attrition.
In addition to advocating for broader understanding of societal experiences of discrimination and trust, some researchers have proposed that, as a form of health behavior, research participation can be investigated through the lens of well-developed theories such as the health belief model
In addition, community-based participatory research frameworks, wherein community involvement extends beyond the research subject participant level and take an active role in shaping research questions and process, have been identified as a powerful tool in expanding inclusivity in research particularly among underrepresented populations
Findings from this review suggest that continued reliance on a unidimensional perspective of research participation relating to primarily nonmodifiable demographic/identity characteristics or attitude and willingness is likely inadequate to inform sufficiently robust investigation into ADRD and population-specific research participation frameworks.
As these recruitment efforts continue to improve and the field begins to advance, it is also imperative to consider who is still missing from the partnerships and engage with communities-and individualswhich remain nearly absent from the reviewed reports and often from the discussion at large.

Who is excluded?
We also found that despite substantial inclusivity efforts, there remain significant omissions in population, perspective, and settings represented.
First, our review found that several populations were minimally represented or entirely absent from this literature, including the American Indians/Alaskan Natives and Pacific Islanders, who, according to reported sample characteristics, were not included in any of the available studies.
We also found that few studies focused specifically on persons from lower socioeconomic backgrounds, and inclusion of socioeconomically disadvantaged populations in included studies was low.
We also found that despite substantial inclusivity efforts, there remain significant omissions in population, perspective, and setting.
It is worth noting that 27% (6 out of 22) of studies excluded individuals with dementia.
It is concerning that the intended beneficiaries of ADRD research are so often systematically excluded from studies that relate directly to them
There are undoubtedly many challenges to including people with symptomatic ADRD in research; however, through adaptations and additional protections, it is often feasible to interview and collect data from people with mild to moderate ADRD
The importance of increasing representation of the perspectives of people with ADRD in research has been highlighted as a priority by the National Institute on Aging National Research Summit on Care, Services, and Supports for Persons with Dementia and Their Caregivers and by advocacy organizations
Finally, the vast majority of studies focused recruitment efforts on primary care settings and community settings.
No study facilitated recruitment through settings providing acute illness care, such as urgent care or emergency department settings, despite evidence that many underrepresented populations disproportionately rely on acute illness care to meet basic and primary care needs and are less likely to have and use primary care
While these settings present challenges for recruitment, extensive work from emergency medicine, cancer, and palliative care research demonstrate that recruitment surrounding acute illness care is feasible and, as a result, may represent a missed opportunity for ADRD research recruitment efforts
A final concern related to inclusivity, and generalizability of findings concerns the preponderance of evidence coming from Alzheimer's Disease Center participants.
Much of the evidence reviewed is constrained to the context of established research centers and has, in most cases, been generated with research participants who have already engaged in established longitudinal cohort studies or affiliated with Alzheimer's Disease Centers.
As a result, many of these studies have tended to focus on minority populations of particular relevance to the geographic regions surrounding their research centers.
For several studies, participants were drawn from established cohorts, suggesting that many of these study findings reflect views of individuals who are generally more familiar with the concept of ADRD and research than the general public.

Conclusions
It is imperative that the ADRD field continue to expand research participation through efforts that are inclusive and that ensure accessibility for populations that are historically underincluded despite experiencing disproportionate disease impact.
It is also imperative that inclusive research be scientifically valid and findings generalizable to the target population.
Despite commendable efforts made by scientists to bolster inclusion of members from underrepresented groups in ADRD research, there are considerable scientific gaps that limit the use of these substantial efforts for informing future ADRD recruitment efforts in an evidence-based manner.
Future efforts should generate empirically derived strategies with potential for broad dissemination.
Our findings reveal that important prerequisites to these efforts will include the development of standardized design principles, including thoroughly operationalized outcomes and validated instrumentation that can be prospectively adapted for and used across institutions, settings, and populations, and will be guided by established methodological standards for recruitment science.
Provided the importance of local contexts and diversity in values and norms across cultures and regions, development of locally relevant measures and standards may also be merited.
And finally, while a majority of ADRD research is generated by established Alzheimer's Disease Centers and the foundation of ADRD recruitment science is likely to reflect Alzheimer's Disease Center's cohort characteristics and infrastructure, a national, interdisciplinary effort to address ADRD will require establishing the effectiveness of similar strategies for institutions and communities that are currently unconnected to Alzheimer's Disease Center resources.



Fig. 1 .
Fig. 1.
Study selection process.


(Continued ) A.L. Gilmore-Bykovskyi et al. / Alzheimer's & Dementia: Translational Research & Clinical Interventions 5 (2019) 751-770



Table 1



Table 2
Synthesis of reported recruitment approaches, activities, outcomes, and strategies



Table 2
Synthesis of reported recruitment approaches, activities, outcomes, and strategies (Continued )


year Abbreviations: MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; PIB PET, Pittsburgh compound B positron emission tomography; ADRC, Alzheimer's Disease Research Center.
A.L. Gilmore-Bykovskyi et al. / Alzheimer's & Dementia: Translational Research & Clinical Interventions 5 (2019) 751-770



Table 3
Study-reported themes on research participation