Energy and Protein Intake of Alzheimer's Disease Patients Compared to Cognitively Normal Controls: Systematic Review
Objectives: Protein and energy malnutrition and unintended weight loss are frequently reported in patients with mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and Alzheimer's disease (AD).
Possible underlying mechanisms include increased energy expenditure, altered uptake of nutrients, a reduced nutritional intake, or a combination of these 3.
We aimed at systematically reviewing the literature to examine potential differences in energy and protein intake in patients with MCI and AD compared to controls as a possible mechanism for unintended weight loss.
Design: Systematic review and meta-analysis.
Setting: PubMed and Cochrane Electronic databases were searched from inception to September 2017 for case control studies.
Participants: Patients with MCI or AD compared to cognitive healthy controls, all adhering to a Western dietary pattern.
Measurements: Energy and protein intake.
Results: The search resulted in 7 articles on patients with AD versus controls, and none on patients with MCI.
Four articles found no differences in energy and protein intakes, 1 found higher intakes in patients with AD, and 1 article found lower intakes in patients with AD compared to controls.
One article reported on intakes, but did not test differences.
A meta-analysis of the results indicated no difference between patients with AD and controls in energy [À8 kcal/d, 95% confidence interval (CI): À97, 81; P ¼ .85],
or protein intake (2 g/d, 95% CI: À4, 9; P ¼ .47).
However, heterogeneity was high (I 2 > 70%), and study methodology was generally poor or moderate.
Conclusion: Contrary to frequently reported unintended weight loss, our systematic review does not provide evidence for a lower energy or protein intake in patients with AD compared to controls.
High heterogeneity of the results as well as of participant characteristics, setting, and study methods was observed.
High-quality studies are needed to study energy and protein intake as a possible mechanism for unintended weight loss and malnutrition in both patients with MCI and AD.
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a progressive neurodegenerative disease, characterized by progressive deterioration in cognitive functioning resulting in interference with daily functioning.
In the early stage of the disease, patients experience cognitive complaints in (most often) 1 or 2 functions, while the ability to take care of themselves remains intact.
With progression of the disease, patients become more and more dependent on their caregivers, and in the final stage institutionalization is almost unavoidable.
An estimated number of almost 50 million people worldwide suffer from dementia and the World Health Organization predicts that the number of people will reach 131 million in 2050.
AD is the cause of more than 70% of dementia cases.
Patients with MCI experience a decline in cognition, mostly memory, but their daily functioning is still intact.
atients with MCI and AD often suffer from weight loss and protein and energy malnutrition, with reported prevalence ranging between 20% and 50%, 4e8 depending on the methods used and the severity of the disease stage.
Patients in more advanced stages of AD are more often unable to feed themselves and/or might suffer from dysphagia, hindering adequate intake.
Unintended weight loss and malnutrition have been associated with an accelerated progression of the disease, a higher rate of institutionalization, and increased mortality.
The mechanisms underlying unintended weight loss and increased risk of malnutrition are not yet clear.
Several mechanisms that could contribute to the observed malnutrition and weight loss have been proposed.
The first mechanism could be a disbalance between energy expenditure and energy intake, because of an increased energy expenditure in the patient with AD.
nother study found no differences in physical activity between patients with AD compared to healthy control subjects matched for age, gender, and body mass index (BMI).
An increased energy expenditure as possible mechanism underlying weight loss and malnutrition seems unlikely based on these 2 studies; however, more research is clearly needed.
As a second proposed mechanism, patients with AD might have a less efficient uptake of nutrients, leading to malnutrition.
This mechanism has rarely been studied and is mostly related to deficiencies in vitamins and minerals rather than protein and energy malnutrition.
Lastly, patients with AD might have a lower nutritional intake, caused by reduced appetite, smell, or taste.
Little is known about the nutritional intake of patients with MCI and AD compared to controls.
Therefore, we systematically reviewed the literature for observational studies providing data on the actual energy and protein intake of patients with MCI and AD compared to cognitively normal controls.

Methods

Search Strategy
A systematic literature search was performed in accordance with Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Review and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA).
The bibliographic database PubMed and the Cochrane database were searched from inception to September 5, 2017.
We searched for articles that reported the actual energy and protein intake in patients with MCI or AD compared to controls, using a combination of MeSH and text-based terms.
("Dementia" [MeSH] OR "Alzheimer" [MeSH] OR "mild cognitive impairment" [MeSH]) AND ("energy intake" [Title/Abstract] OR "protein intake" [Title/Abstract] "nutritional intake" [Title/Abstract] OR "nutrition*" [Title/Abstract] OR "dietary intake" [Title/Abstract] OR "food intake" [Title/Abstract] OR "eating habit" [Title/Abstract] OR "diet" [Title/Abstract]) AND ("Adult"[Mesh] OR adult*[Title/Abstract]).
Additionally, reference lists of identified manuscripts and reviews were checked manually.

Criteria for Inclusion
Only articles with a case-control design reporting on energy and/or protein intake in patients with MCI or AD compared with cognitively normal controls were included.
Participants should adhere to a Western dietary pattern, and publications had to be written in English and to be available in full-text.

Criteria for Exclusion
Articles were excluded if they focused on specific subgroups of patients with MCI or AD, for example, those with significant weight loss or those on a semisolid or liquid diet.
Articles that focused on the role of nutrition in the development of dementia were also excluded.

Study Selection Process
The search strategy identified 800 articles, which were screened on title and abstract by 2 authors independently.
Screening resulted in 136 articles eligible for full-text screening.
One additional article was found via the reference list of an included article.
Finally, 7 articles were included based on abstract and full text (Figure

Quality Assessment of the Studies
The Newcastle-Ottawa Scale (NOS) for case-control studies
The following criteria were scored: definition of cases, representativeness of cases, selection of controls, definition of controls, comparability of cases and controls on age and gender, nutritional intake method, and using the same methodology in both groups.
The more criteria were met, the higher the score and the better the methodological quality.
Two authors independently assessed the quality of the studies; disagreements were solved by a third author.
A study was considered to have poor methodological quality when the score of the scale was below 5 of 8 criteria.

Data Extraction
From the selected articles, the following information was extracted: number of participants per group, selection criteria for control group, diagnostic criteria used, study setting, Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE
Of 3 articles using a different unit of energy intake, energy intake was recalculated to kilocalories per day.
Two studies
As we were unable to contact the authors, we recalculated the intake by multiplying the reported intake in kilocalories or grams per kilogram body weight by the mean body weight of the study sample.

Meta-analysis
Random effects meta-analyses were performed to estimate the mean energy and protein intakes across the selected articles.
Results are presented as forest plots.
The Cochrane c 2 was used to test the presence of heterogeneity across the included articles, a P < .05 was considered as indicative of heterogeneity.
The degree of heterogeneity was evaluated using I 2 , with values of 25%, 50% and 75% indicating low, moderate and high degrees of heterogeneity respectively.
The analyses were performed using Review Manager 5 (version 5.3, The Cochrane Collaboration, Copenhagen, Denmark).
Six studies were included in the meta-analysis on energy intake, Spindler
Five studies reported on protein intake and were included in the meta-analysis on protein intake.
The meta-analyses was stratified by disease severity; severe dementia (MMSE score 18) versus mild dementia (MMSE score >18).
Stratification was also performed using 3 groups: severe dementia (MMSE score 0-7), moderate dementia (MMSE score 8-14), and mild dementia (MMSE score 15-23).

Results
Table
Four articles were based on data collected in European countries (United Kingdom,
Four articles were based on data from community-dwelling patients with AD,
Sample size ranged from 40
The mean MMSE score of the cases ranged from 11
The mean age of the participants ranged from 72
In the study population of Franzoni, 21 45% needed total assistance with feeding; in all other articles, cases and controls did not have problems with feeding themselves.
In the study of Jesus,
The patients with AD in the study of Shatenstein
The patients with AD in the study of Dvorak
The other 2 articles
Two articles did not specify the type of dementia.
Controls consisted of spouses,
Four studies used a 3-or 4-day food diary to estimate nutritional intake,
Except for Spindler,

Quality Assessment of the Studies
Table
Two studies had a high methodological quality, scoring 7 of 8 points,
The 3 studies

Quantitative Analysis
Three articles found no difference in energy and protein intake between patients with AD and controls.
Tabet 27 found no differences in total energy and protein intake, but did observe differences in intakes expressed per kilogram of body weight.
One article found a lower energy and protein intake in patients with AD compared to controls,
In patients with or at risk of malnutrition, 1 study found a higher nutritional intake,
Meta-analysis was used to combine study results.
Forest plots (Figure
The overall mean intakes did not differ between patients with AD and controls for energy [6 studies, mean difference (MD): À8 kcal/d, 95% confidence interval (CI): À97, 81; P ¼ .85],
and protein (5 studies, MD: 2 g/d, 95% CI: À4, 9; P ¼ .47).
Heterogeneity was high for both outcome measures (I 2 ¼ 73%, P ¼ .003;
I 2 ¼ 75%, P ¼ .003,
respectively).
Leaving out the 3 studies with poor methodological quality did not significantly change the results of both energy (4 studies, MD: À81 kcal/d, 95% CI: À213, 51; P ¼ .23)
and protein intake (2 studies, MD: À5 g/d, 95% CI: À16, 5; P ¼ .30),
with moderate to high heterogeneity (I 2 of 69% and 58%, respectively).
Stratification of the results by disease severity based on the review of Tombaugh (severe dementia: mean MMSE score 17, 3 studies for energy and protein and moderate dementia: mean MMSE score >18, 3 studies for energy and 2 studies for protein) did not significantly change the results of energy intake (severe dementia: MD: 19 kcal/d, 95% CI: À49, 88; P ¼ .58;
moderate dementia: MD: À20 kcal/d, 95% CI: À195, 155; P ¼ .83)
and protein intake (severe dementia: MD: 6 g/d, 95% CI: À2, 13; P ¼ .12;
moderate dementia: MD: À2 g/d, 95% CI: À17, 13; P ¼ .77).
Stratification of the results by disease severity based on the article of Kreamer [severe dementia (MMSE score 0-7), no studies, moderate dementia (MMSE score 8-14), 2 studies for energy and protein and mild dementia (MMSE score 15-23), 3 studies for energy Fig.

Discussion
We found 7 articles in this literature search reporting energy and/ or protein intake of patients with AD versus controls, but none reporting the intakes of patients with MCI.
The studies varied in participant characteristics, selection of controls, setting and nutritional intake assessment method, and often were of poor or moderate methodological quality.
The main finding of this study is that the available literature does not provide evidence for a lower energy and protein intake of patients with AD versus controls.
The included articles differed in participant characteristics (age, gender, MMSE score), study setting, and nutritional intake assessment method.
For example, the MMSE scores in the patients with AD and controls varied but overlapped between the groups, which may have influenced the results.
The MMSE score of patients with AD ranged from 11 to 24, covering both moderate and severe disease stages.
Stratification of the meta-analyses in 2 subgroups by disease stage did not significantly change the results and suggests there is no difference in nutritional intake between different disease stages.
Stratification of the meta-analyses in 3 subgroups was difficult to interpret because of the limited number of studies in each stratum.
In 2 articles,
As men are likely to eat more energy and protein per day than women,
Because of the high degree of heterogeneity across articles, results of our meta-analysis should be interpreted with caution.
In the studies conducted in institutionalized patients, consumed food was weighed
In the studies conducted in community-dwelling patients, the most commonly used method to assess nutritional intake was a 3or 4-day food diary, or two 24-hour recalls.
These methods rely on the memory of the participant.
It is not known how valid a food diary or two 24-hour recalls are to estimate nutritional intake in populations with dementia.
There is a clear need for validation of nutritional assessment methods in this particular group of patients.
First of all, the high heterogeneity across articles makes it hard to compare studies and to draw conclusions.
Across the articles, different units of energy and protein intake were used.
As the majority of the results was expressed in absolute numbers and not all articles described the mean body weight of their participants, we decided to recalculate nutritional intake by multiplying the reported intake in kilocalories or grams per kilogram body weight by the mean body weight of the study sample.
We are, however, aware of the limitations by reporting data on nutritional intake this way, and adjustment for body weight and/or physical activity level would have been preferred.
Only 1 study reported data on activity level, which made it impossible to consider physical activity level in the comparison of nutritional intakes between patients and controls.
Because of the observational design of the studies, where food intake was measured at one moment in time, we were not able to study a possible decline in food intake or changes in nutritional status or body weight over time.
Furthermore, cases and controls were not always comparable, especially not in the study of Spindler, because cases and controls lived in different settings.
No difference in nutritional intake was found after stratification of the meta-analysis by study setting, that is, institution versus community.
However, the number of studies included per group after stratification was very small.
Only 2 studies scored 7 of 8 points on the Newcastle Ottawa Scale for quality assessment for case-control studies, indicating good methodologic quality.
Both studies, 1 in community-dwelling patients with energy intake expressed in kilocalories per day and 1 in institutionalized patients with energy and protein expressed per kilogram body weight, found no differences in intake between patients and controls.
Other articles scored lower on methodologic quality, most often because the controls were not comparable to the cases.
Summarizing, results of this review based on 7 articles suggest no lower energy and protein intake of patients with AD compared to controls.
No articles comparing the intakes of patients with MCI versus controls were found.
Because of the high degree of heterogeneity across studies, the limited number of included studies, and their poor to moderate methodologic quality, these results should be interpreted with caution.
High-quality research is needed to obtain more insight into the role of low protein and energy intake as a possible mechanism for weight loss and malnutrition in patients with AD.
Furthermore, we recommend studies in patients with MCI, as this might give useful information on the earliest changes in nutritional intake, even before the diagnosis of AD.



Fig. 1 .
Fig. 1.
Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Review and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) flow diagram for the study selection process.



Table 1
Summary of Characteristics and Energy and Protein Intake per Day of Patients With AD and Controls From the 7 Included Articles in This Review



Table 2
Methodological Quality of the 7 Included Articles Assessed Using the Newcastle Ottawa Scale for Case Control Studies 17


quality criterion met; À, quality criterion not met.*Quality of the nutritional intake assessment method used.and 1 study for protein] did not significantly change the results of energy intake (moderate dementia: MD: 8 kcal/d, 95% CI: À106, 122; P ¼ .89;mild
dementia: MD: 54 kcal/d, 95% CI: À54, 161; P ¼ .23)and
protein intake (moderate dementia: MD: 4 g/d, 95% CI: 0, 7; P ¼ .05;mild
dementia not possible, only 1 study).Stratification of the results by study setting did not significantly change the results of either energy (institution, 2 studies, MD: 8 kcal/ d, 95% CI: À106, 122; P ¼ .89;
community, 4 studies, MD: À16 kcal/d, 95% CI: À156, 124; P ¼ .82)
or protein intake (institution, 3 studies, MD: 6 g/d, 95% CI: À2, 13; P ¼ .12;
community, 2 studies, MD: À2 g/d, 95% CI: À17, 13; P ¼ .77).