Increasing participant diversity in AD research: Plans for digital screening, blood testing, and a community‐engaged approach in the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative 4
The Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) aims to validate biomarkers for Alzheimer's disease (AD) clinical trials.
To improve generalizability, ADNI4 aims to enroll 50-60% of its

INTRODUCTION
The Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI), established These studies, documented in a number of successive reviews,
Previous, current, and future ADNI studies are summarized in Table
Despite the successes of ADNI and other AD studies, major challenges remain for AD clinical research and trials, stemming primarily from the heterogeneity of people with dementia and the heterogeneity of the pathologies responsible.
Although AD is characterized by brain extracellular β-amyloid (Aβ) plaques, and intracellular phosphorylated tau (p-tau) protein, and may lead to neuronal loss (i.e., Aβ, tau, neurodegeneration: ATN framework
These include amyloid angiopathy,
In addition, considerable variability exists in AD risk in underrepresented populations (URPs); such as Black/African American, Latinx/Hispanic, Asian American, Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander, and American Indian/Alaska Native individuals, and those from lower socioeconomic backgrounds.
The prevalence of dementia is highest in Black older adults (19.3% in those aged 65+), followed by Latinx older adults (16.7% prevalence), while White older adults have roughly half the rate of dementia (7.4%).
This may result from underlying differences in medical risk factors for AD (e.g., depression, diabetes, obesity, hypertension
Failure to account for all types of heterogeneity limits the generalizability of AD trial and clinical research results and impedes the development of treatments.
Large, diverse cohorts that include considerably greater proportions of URPs than are currently enrolled in studies are therefore urgently needed.
Like most AD studies in the USA and Canada, until recently, ADNI has been largely composed of well-educated, non-Latinx White participants
Given the increasing 3. Future Directions: ADNI4 will recruit participants from under-represented populations (URPs) using community engaged approaches and an online portal for screening.
Of the anticipated 20,000 participants screened, 4000
(50 to 60% URPs) will undergo remote blood collection and testing for plasma biomarkers and APOE.
Of these, 500 will be selected for in-clinic assessment, and the remainder will be followed using longitudinal digital cognitive and plasma testing.
An additional project will develop a comprehensive platform for AD clinical trial simulation using multidisciplinary data.
role of ADNI as a validation cohort for diagnostic or prognostic tools, 1 increased inclusion of participants from diverse backgrounds is of paramount importance.
ADNI4 will address the chronic lack of ethnocultural and educational diversity in research and trial populations by engaging and recruiting individuals from these historically under-included groups.
ADNI4 adds an innovative team, the Engagement Core, to facilitate enrollment of a new clinical study cohort comprising 50% to 60% URPs.
As AD trials are commonly plagued by slow recruitment of suitable par- The novel approaches proposed for ADNI4 respond to the changing landscape and requirements of clinical research and clinical trials, importantly addressing the challenges of recruiting and retaining a large and diverse cohort that will be needed to demonstrate generalizability of results and to standardize diagnostic and prognostic tools.

METHODS

Overall inclusion/engagement and schedule of events
The lack of diversity within previous ADNI studies will be addressed in our inclusion and engagement strategy (Figure
We will recruit at least 20,000 participants to join the remote digital cohort via an online portal (operating on mobile phones, PCs, tablets; based on the Brain Health Registry [BHR]
This will request informed consent, collect contact information and demographic data, query ADNI inclusion/exclusion criteria, and ask about subjective cognitive and functional decline Latinx/Hispanic 6.7%
and complaints using the Everyday Cognition 12-item list (12-item ECog), with updated language to improve relevancy for diverse older adults.
.
Participant cognition will be assessed using Novoic Ltd.'s Storyteller test (London, England).
This is an online speech and language test using story recall and verbal fluency, which is able to distinguish between CU and MCI participants with high accuracy.
isting BHR infrastructure will be used to allow all participants to identify a study partner,
The ADNI4-S responses, in conjunction with demographic data (e.g., sex, ethnocultural, and education information), will be used to determine eligibility and priority to join the remote blood biomarker cohort (n = 4000).
Remaining participants in the remote digital cohort who are not selected for blood testing or who decline the invitation (approximately n = 16,000) can return to the ADNI4-S website semiannually for the length of the ADNI4 study to complete the same cognitive assessment tools.
At least 4000 participants, oversampled for URPs (50% to 60% of total) and those likely to have MCI/AD (due to the general difficulties in recruiting these participants), will be directed to a local phlebotomy center or will have at-home blood collections.
Plasma will be analyzed for ATN biomarkers (Biomarker Core) and APOE (Genetics Core).
The ADNI4-S responses and one or more ATN biomarkers (to be determined) will be used to select participants for referral to the full in-clinic study (n = 500; 40% CU, 40% MCI, 20% dementia).
Consistent with clinical trial design, these participants will be approximately 80% Aβ+, with Aβ-participants providing a comparison group, which will allow measurement of the Aβ-to Aβ+ transition and provide information on non Aβ-related causes of cognitive decline.
These selection methods will be iteratively optimized over the study course to achieve enrollment goals for sample diversity, and enrichment for cognitive impairment and Aβ status.
At least 50% of the existing 1084 ADNI3 participants (Table
In-clinic participants will complete clinical work-ups similar to ADNI3 except for certain changes to the clinical assessments (Section 2.3).
MCI and dementia participants (age 55 to 90) will be seen annually and CU (age 60 to 90) every other year (Figure
Participants in the remote blood draw cohort (n = 3500) and the in-clinic cohort (n = 1000) will be asked to complete remotely administered assessments every 6 months.
Those will include both the 12-item ECog and the Novoic Storyteller test.

F I G U R E 2 Recruitment strategy for ADNI4
F I G U R E 3 In-clinic schedule of testing of new ADNI4 participants

Enrollment of new participants to improve generalizability of ADNI results
Guided by a Community-Science Partnership Board, ADNI4's new Engagement Core will extend community-engaged research strategies developed by ADNI3's Diversity Task Force (DVTF), established in July 2020, to enroll 50% to 60% of URPs as new participants.
e DVTF launched culturally informed recruitment initiatives at 13 ADNI sites resulting in the near tripling of URP recruitment to 77% of new enrollments.
A culturally informed digital marketing and social media campaign integrating locally site-branded websites will drive ∼20,000 participants to the ADNI4 screening portal.
This Core will ADNI4 will also incorporate more culturally informed assessment and research methods (e.g., sociocultural measures, less strict exclusion criteria) to enhance the inclusion, engagement, and characterization of diverse participants, including those with more extensive CVD (e.g., small strokes, white matter lesions) and other comorbidities.
This will enhance enrollment of URPs, due to the higher rates of comorbidities in some of these groups,
Importantly, participants on aducanumab and other approved treatments will be included.

2.3
Novel and innovative assessments vs Aβ PET (-) individuals, accurately predicted Aβ plaque burden,
A pilot project using the Brain Health Registry demonstrated the feasibility of remote blood collection on over 600 participants in 1 month.
As AD research advances, efforts to include lower-cost and more widely available screening and diagnostic tools are at the forefront of both academic and industry efforts.
Plasma biomarkers are poised to become a key component in this area and ADNI4's use of remote blood testing will provide critical data to AD researchers studying these tests for their potential clinical applications in the future.

Digital biomarkers
All participants in the ADNI4 study will be asked to complete a digital biomarker cognitive assessment, the Novoic Storyteller test.
Remote administration of both a subjective test (12-item ECog) and objective test (Novoic Ltd.
Storyteller) at 6-month intervals will improve longitudinal monitoring of all participants.
ADNI4 will consider expanding the digital biomarker battery for those enrolled in either the remote blood (n = 3500) or in-clinic cohort (n = 1000) as digital biomarker assessments continue to develop and be validated over time.

Methodological improvements to individual Cores
ADNI Cores will coordinate aspects of the study under the overall supervision and leadership of the Administrative Core as previously described.

MRI Core
This Core will implement new multimodal MRI measures to assess the prevalence of CVD.
It will create and distribute protocols to each site, and continue to ensure quality control across all scanner types.
Despite standardization of the acquisition protocol, heterogeneity will still exist due to fundamental differences across different vendor/system configurations.
Therefore, the MRI Core will identify solutions to interand intra-site data heterogeneity and distribute harmonized postprocessed images and numeric data.
An additional focus will be the improvement of participant privacy protection by using an optimized approach to de-face MRI images.
Tau PET ligands have also been validated though not as exhaustively in relation to autopsy except for FTP.
Rollover participants will continue with the same tracers as in ADNI3, but new participants will be assigned tracers based on proximity to radiopharmacies with the highest priority to those tracers with the least available data.
All participants enrolled in clinical assessment will be scanned every 2 years.
The Core will apply standard methods of harmonization, ensure quality control of data acquisition and analysis, and select optimal approaches to producing standard analytic readouts for new tracers.
Aβ PET results will be reported in a standard scale (centiloids
and centralized visual reads of the scans will be shared with the referring sties who will provide feedback to participants.
The Core will also develop methods for harmonizing tau PET results across different tracers.
FDG-PET scans will be discontinued in ADNI4.
Finally, artificial intelligence (AI) methods to detect α-synuclein and TDP-43 pathology by imputation from MRI data will be explored, optimized and validated.

Biomarker Core
This Core will be instrumental in measuring plasma-based biomarkers used to screen participants in the remote blood cohort, and measuring biomarkers in all ADNI legacy plasma samples.
They will promptly analyze blood samples collected at phlebotomy centers from the remote blood cohort participants and provide biomarker results to aid in the enrollment of new ADNI4 in-clinic participants.
Biofluid samples from all ADNI4 participants will be received, aliquoted, stored, and curated continuously throughout the study.
Through the sample sharing mechanism provided by the Resource Allocation Review Committee (RARC), the Core will support new biomarker assay development in plasma and CSF and organize and collaborate with biomarker researchers in standardization and test performance round robin studies for Aβ42/Aβ40, p-tau isoforms, and other promising biomarkers in plasma.
The Core will collaborate with the UPenn ADRC and with other ADNI cores to validate and establish plasma biomarker cut-points using autopsy/imaging/genetics to characterize relationships between biomarkers and disease progression.

Genetics Core
This Core will contribute to the new screening and enrichment strategy for the 4000 blood draw participants by determining APOE ε4 status.
It will implement systems biology and AI/machine learning modeling approaches that incorporate multiple biological processes, in addition to Aβ and tau measures to better address the complexity inherent in AD.
Cross-sectional and longitudinal omics (e.g., transcriptome, DNA methylation, metabolome/lipidome, proteome) will be analyzed as they the Neuropathology Core will be incorporated and disseminated.
The Core will develop a powerful data exploration/search interface providing investigators with enhanced accessibility to the ever-increasing breadth and complexity of ADNI data in accordance with FAIR (findability, accessibility, interoperability, and reusability) principles.
e interface will allow the creation, saving, and sharing of custom cohorts, and "validation-ready" datasets will be structured for immediate use by ADNI investigators.
The Core will address privacy concerns by developing and applying enhanced methods for subject data de-identification, including de-facing algorithms.
Participant speech recordings, generated by Novoic Ltd., will be securely stored.
Transcripts of the recordings will be available to ADNI investigators and access to the audio files may be available in the future following a similar model ADNI uses for biospecimen analysis requests.
Finally, in coordination with the Biomarker Core, this Core will improve the visibility of available biosamples and biofluid analysis results.

Project 1
One goal of ADNI4 is to assess the roles of imaging and fluid biomarkers for detecting the AD pathology states and stages, predicting disease progression, and monitoring disease progression.
To achieve this, ADNI4 will leverage its rich phenotypical data in a coordinated

DISCUSSION
The overall goals of our field are to develop validated biomarkers that can be used to diagnose and track progression of AD and related pathologies and to develop effective treatments to slow or stop cognitive decline, eventually leading to treatments that prevent the development and progression of symptoms from neurodegenerative disorders.
For our results to be applicable to the entire population, all clinical research would ideally be performed on cohorts that resemble the "overall population" as defined by current survey data, such as the

CONCLUSIONS
ADNI continues to achieve its primary goal of biomarker validation and its data are widely used for planning AD academic and industry clinical


in 2004, has provided a model for Alzheimer's disease (AD) clinical trials and continues to produce a standardized, multi-site, longitudinal data set of the natural history of AD across the cognitive continuum from cognitively unimpaired (CU) to mild cognitive impairment (MCI) to dementia.
The overall goals of ADNI have been to standardize and validate neuroimaging and fluid biomarkers as diagnostic and prognostic tools, and to inform the design of AD clinical trials.
ADNI's commitment to open data and sample sharing has led to over 4000 publications from researchers worldwide across an array of disciplines.



RESEARCH IN CONTEXT 1 . 2 .
Systematic Review: The authors reviewed the literature using traditional means.
Research studies and clinical trials of Alzheimer's disease in the US and Canada have mostly enrolled white, well educated participants and may not be generalizable to the general population.
Interpretation: The Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) has developed and validated biomarkers for clinical trials.
However, a lack of diversity in the ADNI cohort questions the generalizability of results.


oversee Clinical Research Liaisons (CRLs) who will provide local support in URP communities, and Community Research Navigators (CRNs) who will help guide participants through the ADNI4 processes prior to in-clinic enrollment.
Participants will be offered three options to facilitate ADNI4 enrollment: (1) digital screening using the online portal (ADNI4-S) in English or Spanish for participants or their study partners, (2) phone screening by CRLs, and (3) direct enrollment of URPs and MCI/dementia participants by the ADNI clinical sites.
Those recruited through the online portal (ADNI4-S) will have the option for a study partner to act as a first point of contact.



37


add [ 18 F]-NAV4694 as an Aβ PET tracer (to ADNI-3's [ 18 F]-florbetapir (FBP) and [ 18 F]-florbetaben (FBB)), and [ 18 F]-MK6240 and [ 18 F]-PI2620 as tau tracers (to ADNI3's [ 18 F]-flortaucipir (FTP)).
[ 18 F]-NAV4694 shows high agreement with autopsy-validated [ 11 C]-PIB.


attempt across individual Cores to determine the cross-sectional and longitudinal relationships between Aβ, tau, neurodegeneration, and cerebrovascular biomarkers.
Project 1 will use these data to develop advanced data harmonization and disease progression modeling methods for the selection of participants at different disease states and stages and the determination of the biomarker characteristics of disease progression.
The final objective is to develop a principled comprehensive platform including both analytic and simulation tools to interpret multimodal and multidisciplinary information in the context of AD clinical trials.


trials, enabling dramatic changes to trial design, including early intervention strategies.
Over the next 5 years, ADNI4 will address the lack of generalizability of results to date by increasing URP enrollment via community-engaged strategies and concomitantly deploying culturally informed assessment and research methods (e.g., new sociocultural measures, loosening exclusion criteria).
It will use innovative technologies such as remote digital cognitive assessments and ultra-sensitive plasma assays for AD biomarkers that overcome the shortcomings of current CSF and PET assessments to help select participants for inclinic studies and to monitor longitudinal progression.
Additional MRI protocols will assess the anticipated higher levels of CVD pathologies, and new PET tracers will allow comparison with a range of ongoing clinical trials.
Project 1 will assess data from multiple Cores to ultimately develop a clinical trial simulation platform to guide participant selection and track disease progression.
Improvements to the data and sample sharing infrastructure will ensure the information generated by ADNI4 is even more accessible to global researchers.
ADNI4 will continue the tradition of innovation of previous ADNI iterations and their impact on AD research while demonstrating the feasibility of screening, enrolling, and following diverse populations.


Past history of ADNI


Notable and innovative extensions to methodologies and goals of individual Cores in addition to those outlined in Sections 2.2


The failure to enroll diverse populations in AD clinical research and trials has left unanswerable the question of the extent to which findings in cohort studies such as ADNI are generalizable to the entire USA and Canadian populations.
Intensive measurement of biomarkers in participants in population studies are extremely difficult and expensive to perform.
There have been a few exceptions such as the Mayo Clinic Study of Aging, but, as this is primarily restricted to the area around Rochester, Minnesota which has a predominantly White population, the findings may not be generalizable to the entire USA population, which is 58% White, 19% Latinx, 12% Black, and 11% other races beyond non-Latinx White.
Thus, there is an urgent need for a very large epidemiologically sampled population-based study which uses state of the art cognitive and functional measurements, measurements of Aβ, tau, neurodegeneration, and CVD, and which has sample banking and brain donation for those who pass away.
We propose the ADNI4 project, which aims to enroll 50% to 66% URPs, as an important step in the direction of generalizable AD biomarker studies.