Introduction-Participant retention is important to maintaining statistical power, minimizing bias, and preventing scientific error in Alzheimer's disease (AD) and related dementias research.
Methods-We surveyed representative investigators from NIH-funded Alzheimer's Disease Research Centers (ADRC), querying their use of retention tactics across twelve strategies.
We compared survey results to data from the National Alzheimer's Coordinating Center for each center.
We used a generalized estimating equation with independent working covariance model and empirical standard errors to assess relationships between survey results and rates of retention, controlling for participant characteristics.
Results-Twenty-five (83%) responding ADRCs employed an average 42 (standard deviation=7) retention tactics.
In a multivariable model that accounted for participant characteristics, the number of retention tactics used by a center was associated with participant retention (OR=1.68,
95% CI 1.42, 1.98; p<0.001 for the middle compared to the lowest tertile survey scores; OR=1.59, 95% CI 1.30, 1.94; p<0.001 for the highest compared to the lowest tertile survey scores) at the first follow-up visit.
Participant characteristics such as normal cognition diagnosis, older age, higher education, and Caucasian race were also associated with higher retention.
Conclusions-Retention in clinical research is more likely to be achieved by employing a variety of tactics.

Introduction
Achieving adequate recruitment and retention of participants poses a significant barrier to clinical research.
Challenges in accruing a full sample and retaining participants to study completion in Alzheimer's disease (AD) and Related Dementias (ADRD) research are pronounced, due to the need to recruit older participants who may have multiple comorbidities as well as cognitive impairment and may lack capacity to provide informed consent.
Recent commentaries address a crisis in ADRD research recruitment
Equally important to the research goals in ADRD will be improved methods to retain participants.
Studies with greater than expected loss to follow-up are underpowered, may have limited impact, and provide questionable validity due to the potential for nonignorable dropout that may bias analytic results.
]
Yet, due to the challenges associated with ADRD research, one review found that 19 of 29 AD clinical trials failed to achieve 80% completion (a common assumption for study power calculations).
e AD Research Center (ADRC) system is a network of academic centers funded by the National Institute on Aging to perform longitudinal research across the spectrum of ADRD.
This includes collecting protocol-derived clinical and neuropsychological assessments.
critical aspect of this research enterprise is to retain participants longitudinally, ideally across clinical diagnostic transitions and even to death.
cent meta-analyses identified more than 900 retention tactics and showed that the number of tactics employed was positively correlated with higher study completion rates.
The use and effectiveness of these retention tactics in ADRD research have been minimally investigated.
To examine retention practices among the ADRCs, we developed and administered an on-line survey.
To assess whether these practices are associated with retention rates,
We hypothesized that greater use of retention practices is associated with greater retention rates and that specific populations (e.g., those with cognitive impairment and those lacking a spouse) are more difficult to retain in longitudinal research.

Methods

Survey instrument
Based on recent publications,
Strategies included community involvement (involve community in study design, recruitment, and retention); study identity (create a study identity for participants); study personnel (characteristics, training, and management of study personnel); study description (explain study requirements and details, including potential benefits and risks to participants); reminders (provide reminders about appointments and study participation); contact and scheduling methods (use systematic methods for patient contact, appointment scheduling, and cohort retention monitoring); visit characteristics (minimize participant burden through characteristics and procedures of follow-up study visits); benefits of study (provide benefits to participants and families that are directly related to the nature of the study); financial incentives (provide financial incentives or payments); reimbursements or cost coverage (provide reimbursement for research-related expenses or tangible support to facilitate participation); non-financial incentives (provide non-financial incentives or tokens of appreciation); and special tracking methods (methods of tracking or dealing with hard-to-find or difficult participants).
In addition to the retention themes and tactics, we asked specific questions related to ADRC practices including the average lengths of study visits and the neuropsychological test battery, and whether centers required some or all subjects to participate in blood draw, neuroimaging, lumbar puncture, and autopsy studies.
While clinical and cognitive assessments are standardized parts of the UDS visits performed at every ADRC, the use of optional modules and biomarker assessments, as well as ADRC-specific research studies, result in variability across centers in visit lengths.
e survey was developed by investigators at the UC Irvine ADRC and then reviewed for completion and understandability sequentially by investigators at two geographically dispersed centers (University of Kansas and Oregon Health & Science University).
Questions assessed whether centers engaged in up to twelve specific tactics for each retention strategy (Appendix).
Additionally, for each strategy, up to 25 additional examples could be provided by respondents.
The final survey was distributed on September 29, 2017 via online data collection and a Research Electronic Data Capture (REDCap) database.
urvey links were sent to leaders of the Outreach, Recruitment and Engagement Cores of the thirty funded ADRCs.
These Cores serve as a bridge between the ADRC and the community at large, and are responsible for implementing center recruitment and retention strategies.
We requested that only one survey be completed per ADRC and that the survey be completed in collaboration with the ADRC Clinical Core.

Data analyses
We examined the frequencies with which retention tactics were used across ADRCs.
In the absence of a priori data to suggest differential importance of tactics, we calculated a total retention score by summing the number of endorsed tactics across the twelve strategies for each center.
To assess whether retention practices were associated with longitudinal research retention rates, we used data from the NACC database for the specific centers that responded to the survey.
Data from one center that had recently halted depositing clinical data into NACC were excluded in models of retention rates.
We assessed NACC UDS data from a period of 2012 through 2017.
We restricted our analyses to participants newly enrolled between 2012 and 2015 to eliminate potential cohort effects for subjects who had been retained for multiple years prior to data collection.
We defined a participant as retained for their first follow-up visit (F1) if the subject returned for a visit within a two-year period.
In NACC, participants are anticipated to have annual follow-up visits, based on the original date of initial visit, within a 6-month window (±3months from the target date, which is the calendar date of the baseline visit).
Thus, the 2year period of assessing retention vs. drop-out was deemed a conservative approach of estimating retention.
Participants enrolling at their respective center less than two years prior to the data freeze were removed from the analysis as they were not observed for the full duration of their scheduled visit window.
Similarly, participants who died prior to the completion of their first scheduled visit window were also removed from analysis.
Retention to the second and third follow-up visits (F2 and F3) was assessed identically, restricted to those participants who had an F1 and F2 visit, respectively, during the study period.
In addition to total retention score (examined as lower, middle and upper tertiles), we examined variables chosen a priori including participant sex, race (Caucasian, African American, Asian, other), ethnicity (Hispanic or non-Hispanic), age (as 5-year increments), study partner type (spousal, adult child, other), comorbidities (the presence or absence of a history of stroke or cardiovascular disease) and diagnostic status.
For diagnostic status, we categorized participants as normal, Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI), or dementia at the baseline visit.
In addition to covariates derived from NACC, we included two covariates collected by the survey that were not components of a specific retention strategy: ADRC visit length and neuropsychological test battery length.
We also chose, a priori, to include an interaction between gender and marital status.
We examined the relative contributions of these associations through a multivariable generalized estimating equation (GEE) logistic regression model.
An independence working correlation structure was assumed and empirical sandwich variance estimates were used for all inference.
assess whether associations between retention tactics and participant retention were consistent across the duration of participation (e.g., F2 compared to F1 and F3 compared to F2), we considered an interaction term between retention tactics and follow-up periods.
We report follow-up visit-specific estimates for the association between retention tactics and the probability of retention.
We used multivariate Wald tests to test for effect modification of retention tactics by visit number.

Results

Survey results
Twenty-five centers completed the survey (83% response rate).
Table
Most centers reported performing retention tactics within each of the themes.
Nearly all centers reported employing diverse staffs and coordinating visits in a manner such that specific staff members are responsible for seeing and retaining specific participants.
Twenty-one centers indicated that they involve participants in retention, for example, through testimonials and advisory boards.
Fewer reported involving participants in study design or review of ongoing study practices.
While all centers reported having a website, fewer indicated using social media through Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, or blogs.
Every center responded that some form of between-visit communication was used, most frequently telephone calls and sending pre-visit materials.
Nearly every center responded that they use an automated system for monitoring visit windows, including alert systems to remind staff to send visit invitations.
Fewer acknowledged use of automated communication systems (email and phone) to actually contact participants.
Though some centers reported maintaining a phone tree of individuals who could be contacted in the event of inability to reach a participant, few other special tracking methods were reported.
Every center reported flexibility around visit requirements, such as offering breaks and snacks, splitting visits, and performing at least some study aspects by phone.
Few centers indicated that they perform visits at convenient locations, days of the week, or times of the day.
Nearly all centers indicated that they reimburse for parking and/or public transportation and about half indicated that they provide meals.
Most centers reported providing some form of financial incentives for participation, including cash or non-cash incentives.
Some centers indicated that they only pay a subset of participants who undergo specific optional procedures such as lumbar puncture.
Nearly every center indicated that they provide diagnostic feedback from the annual visit, either directly to participants or to their treating physicians.
This included laboratory and neuropsychological data at two-thirds of the responding centers.
The frequency with which centers reported sharing biomarker research data with participants was lower.
Twelve centers reported providing participants with structural neuroimaging results while eight reported returning results from molecular neuroimaging and seven reported returning cerebrospinal fluid results.
Three centers reported returning genetic testing results to participants.
Five centers reported a total visit length under 3 hours.
The most common total visit length reported was 3-4 hours (n=7).
Five centers reported a visit length of 4-5 hours, five reported 5-6 hours, and 1 reported >6 hours.
Most centers (n=15) reported a neuropsychological test battery below 2 hours.
Five centers reported a battery length of 2-3 hours and one reported a battery of 3-4 hours.
Table
Most centers indicated that they require blood draw.
Fewer indicated requiring biomarker tests or autopsy.
For blood draw, MRI, and lumbar puncture, at least some centers reported making exceptions to requirements for unique populations (e.g., underrepresented racial groups).

Associations with participant retention
Overall, centers reported employing a mean 42 (SD=7) specific retention tactics, with a range of 25-62.
Data were included for 5568 newly enrolled participants at 24 centers during the study period (Supplementary Table ).
Figure
Data were available for 2994 participants eligible for F2, and 1563 participants eligible for F3.
In a GEE regression model, greater retention survey scores were associated with higher retention rates at F1 (Table
Thus, participants at centers employing at least 38 retention tactics were at least 58% more likely to return for their first follow-up visit, controlling for other covariates.
The forest plots in Figure
While no significant interaction between the number of tactics and visit number was observed (p=0.192), the estimated association between retention tactics attenuated over the length of participation.
Despite this attenuation, the estimates continued to indicate a positive association between the number of tactics used and the odds of retention at the F2 ( Several other factors were associated with participant retention.
Compared to participants with a normal control diagnosis, participants with MCI and dementia were estimated to have 21% (OR=0.79,
95% CI 0.69, 0.89; p=0.0003) and 38% (OR=0.62,
95% CI 0.55, 0.69; p<0.0001) lower odds of being retained, respectively.
Compared to Caucasians, African Americans were estimated to have 24% lower odds of being retained.
Higher education, older age, and having fewer comorbidities were all associated with greater odds of being retained.
Among unmarried participants, female participants were estimated to have 24% higher odds of being retained than male participants (OR=1.24,
95% CI 1.02, 1.50; p=0.02).
For married participants, female participants were estimated to have a 17% lower odds than male participants (OR=0.83,
95% CI 0.74, 0.93; p=0.002) of being retained (Table
Although the length of the neuropsychological battery had no effect on participant retention, overall visit lengths that were greater than 5 hours, compared to those less than 4 hours, were associated with poorer retention.

Discussion
Retaining participants is critical to minimizing bias and error and ensuring that research advances knowledge.
Predictors of loss-to-follow-up and means to reduce data missingness remain areas in need of research.
We examined participant retention practices at NIH-funded ADRCs.
We found that centers consistently engage in a large number of retention activities and that at most centers these activities include most or all of 12 recently outlined retention strategies.
The universal or near-universal practice of some retention tactics by ADRCs (e.g., providing diagnostic feedback and reimbursing for parking, see Table
Differences were apparent, however, among the centers in specific tactics employed and there was a sizeable range in the total number of tactics used (25-62).
The number of tactics used by a center was associated with rates of participant retention.
Centers in the middle and upper tertiles of survey scores, equating to employing at least 38 retention tactics, outperformed the lowest tertile (<38 tactics) in participant retention.
This suggests that inadequate retention effort may risk greater than expected dropout and that increasing the number of retention tactics for a given center or study could meaningfully increase participant retention or completion rates.
The relationship between a center's number of retention tactics and the retention rate was strongest for the first follow-up visit.
An initial period of preventing dropout may therefore be most critical, after which participant retention may require less intervention.
This conclusion is supported by the observation that, for the centers that reported the lowest numbers of retention tactics, retention rates were higher at F2 and F3, compared to at F1, controlling for other covariates.
In addition to the number of tactics employed at a center, the structure of study visits was also associated with retention.
Participants at centers where visits took more than 5 hours were 35% less likely to be retained.
In contrast, we observed a trend toward longer cognitive testing batteries being associated with slightly higher retention.
This may suggest that the composition of study visits, as well as their total length, is important to optimize participant retention.
Across centers, there was consistent use of tactics to ease the burden of participation, such as offering breaks, performing some study aspects by telephone, and breaking visits into multiple days.
Opportunities to participate at non-traditional locations (e.g., in the home) and times (e.g., evenings or weekends), however, were less frequently offered.
Notable absences from our analyses were whether participants resided in urban or rural settings, whether they used personal or public transportation to attend study visits, the distance they lived from the ADRC, and the time required for participants to commute to study visits.
We did identify a number of demographic characteristics that were associated with participant retention.
In most cases, these observations were consistent with our hypotheses and previous observations in the literature.
Individuals with MCI and dementia had lower retention rates than those with normal cognition.
Those with lower education and younger age at enrollment were at greater risk to be lost to follow-up.
Racial and ethnic minorities had lower retention rates than did non-Hispanic Caucasians.
4]
One observation that contrasted previous findings was a lack of difference in retention rates among dyad types, based on the relationship between the participant and their study partner.
Nonspousal dyads were not significantly more likely to be lost, compared to participants with a spousal study partner.
We did, however, observe an interesting dichotomy of dropout risk based on participant sex, depending upon whether the participant was married.
Among unmarried participants, females were more likely to be retained, whereas married female participants were less likely than married male participants to be retained.
This suggests that study partner sex (most non-spousal study partners are female), may be more important than the relationship to the participant (or the participant's sex).

Limitations
Several limitations of this study should be noted.
We aimed to assess, on a broad level, the general retention practices of ADRCs.
We attempted to limit the length of the survey to maximize response rate and there was no opportunity for follow-up questions.
Our survey did not permit respondents to provide results specific to diagnostic or other subpopulations for most items.
For example, centers may provide amyloid positron emission tomography (PET) results
The survey items examining center practices related to financial incentives and study procedures (such as amyloid imaging, blood draws, and lumbar puncture), in fact, indicate that at least some centers have different practices for different participants.
We focused on the first three follow-up visits because we deemed retention of newly enrolled participants during the study period most pertinent to our research question.
Doing so, however, limited data analyses to less than half of the total number of NACC UDS participants and most centers attempt to retain participants for very long (>3 years) periods of follow-up.
Though potential interactions could be of interest (e.g., do retention tactics work differently in specific diagnostic populations), we chose to model associations without such interactions to ensure clarity of results.
Similarly, systematically examining the impact of specific tactics is beyond the scope of the current study.

Conclusions
These results demonstrate that centers consistently engage in a large number of retention strategies, but that the specific tactics employed vary among centers.
The total number of tactics used by a center is associated with the probability that participants will be retained.
Specific participants may be more challenging to retain.
Future research should examine whether specific tactics are most effective, whether tactics differ in their effectiveness for specific subpopulations, and how they may need to change over time.
Relationship between retention strategies and retention rates.
ADRC survey responses were used to calculate a total retention score (x-axis) and plotted vs. individual ADRC's retention rates at F1 (y-axis).
A positive correlation was observed, whereby retention rate increased 0.14% for every one unit increase on the survey score.
RR=retention rate; TS=total retention survey score.
Forest plots of associations between retention scores and retention performance at F1, F2, and F3.
The estimates for F2 and F3 (for each survey score tertile) are presented with estimated 95% CIs.
All estimates are relative to the rates for the lowest survey score tertile.
• Other 0 (0) 0 (0)

Contact and scheduling 25 (100) 24 (100)
• Use data capture system (e.g., REDCap) to monitor visit windows 23 (92) 22 (92)
• Use alerts to study staff to send visit reminders 17 (68) 16 (67)
• Use automated email systems to remind participants about visits 3 (12) 3 (13)
• Use automated telephone systems to remind participants about visits 4 (
• Use automated text messaging systems to remind participants about visits 1 (4) 1 (4)
• Other ○ 'personal' touch calls or emails from familiar staff 1 (4) 1 (

Visit characteristics 25 (100) 24 (100)
• Offer breaks during visits 25 (100) 24 (100)
• Permit telephone completion of study partner activities 25 (100) 24 (100)
• Follow participants by phone if it becomes impossible for them to attend visits due to disease severity 25 (100) 24 (100)


The NACC database is funded by NIA/NIH Grant U01 AG016976.
NACC data are contributed by the NIA-funded ADCs: P30 AG019610 (PI Eric Reiman, MD), P30 AG013846 (PI Neil Kowall, MD), P50 AG008702 (PI Scott Small, MD), P50 AG025688 (PI Allan Levey, MD, PhD), P50 AG047266 (PI Todd Golde, MD, PhD), P30 AG010133 (PI Andrew Saykin, PsyD), P50 AG005146 (PI Marilyn Albert, PhD), P50 AG005134 (PI Bradley Hyman, MD, PhD), P50 AG016574 (PI Ronald Petersen, MD, PhD), P50 AG005138 (PI Mary Sano, PhD), P30 AG008051 (PI Thomas Wisniewski, MD), P30 AG013854 (PI Robert Vassar, PhD), P30 AG008017 (PI Jeffrey Kaye, MD), P30 AG010161 (PI David Bennett, MD), P50 AG047366 (PI Victor Henderson, MD, MS), P30 AG010129 (PI Charles DeCarli, MD), P50 AG016573 (PI Frank LaFerla, PhD), P50 AG005131 (PI James Brewer, MD, PhD), P50 AG023501 (PI Bruce Miller, MD), P30 AG035982 (PI Russell Swerdlow, MD), P30 AG028383 (PI Linda Van Eldik, PhD), P30 AG053760 (PI Henry Paulson, MD, PhD), P30 AG010124 (PI John Trojanowski, MD, PhD), P50 AG005133 (PI Oscar Lopez, MD), P50 AG005142 (PI Helena Chui, MD), P30 AG012300 (PI Roger Rosenberg, MD), P30 AG049638 (PI Suzanne Craft, PhD), P50 AG005136 (PI Thomas Grabowski, MD), P50 AG033514 (PI Sanjay Asthana, MD, FRCP), P50 AG005681 (PI John Morris, MD), P50 AG047270 (PI Stephen Strittmatter, MD, PhD).



Figure 1 .
Figure 1.



Figure 2 .
Figure 2.



Table 3 ;
OR=1.38, 95% CI 1.11, 1.71; p=0.0035 for the middle compared to the lowest tertile survey scores; OR=1.34, 95% CI 1.01, 1.77; p=0.0408 for the highest compared to the lowest tertile survey scores) and F3 visits (Table3; OR=1.44, 95% CI 1.09, 1.90; p=0.01 for the middle compared to the lowest tertile survey scores; OR=1.05, 95% CI 0.73, 1.51; p=0.77 for the highest compared to the lowest tertile survey scores).



Table 1 .
ADRC Retention Survey Responses



Table 2 .
ADRC requirements of participation to undergo research procedures