Music Intervention Approaches for Alzheimer’s Disease: A Review of the Literature
Music interventions have been widely adopted as a potential non-pharmacological therapy for patients with Alzheimer's disease (AD) to treat cognitive and/or behavioral symptoms of the disease.
In spite of the prevalence of such therapies, evidence for their effectiveness report mixed results in the literature.
The purpose of this narrative review is to investigate the effectiveness of various intervention strategies (music therapy vs. music listening techniques) and music type used in the intervention (individualized vs. non-individualized music) on cognitive and behavioral outcomes for persons with AD.
Databases were searched for studies using either active music therapy or music listening techniques over the last 10 years.
These studies were in English, included persons with AD dementia, and whose protocol gathered pre-and post-intervention outcome measures.
We initially identified 206 papers which were then reduced to 167 after removing duplicates.
Further review yielded 13 papers which were extensively reviewed, resulting in a final sample of six papers.
Our analysis of these papers suggested that, regardless of the music intervention approach, individualized music regimens provided the best outcomes for the patient.
Furthermore, music listening may act as a relaxation technique and therefore provide a long-term impact for the patient, while active music therapy may acts to engage participants through social interaction and provide acute benefits.
Our findings suggest that music techniques can be utilized in various ways to improve behavior and cognition.

INTRODUCTION
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the most common form of dementia with an estimated 50 million people living with the disease today
It is marked by decreased cognitive functioning (memory, visuospatial issues, and executive functioning), emotional control, and neuropsychiatric symptoms such as apathy, depression, and agitation
Medications for AD aim to improve cognition and relieve behavioral symptoms, however, many approved drugs provide only modest benefits for the patient
As a result, there has been an increase for research for non-pharmacological interventions to reduce symptom burden for AD persons and their caregivers.
In recent years, music interventions have grown in popularity as a method of non-pharmacological treatment for persons with AD for a number of reasons.
First, there is evidence to suggest that music for memory can remain intact for persons with AD, even while experiencing rapid cognitive decline
This is thought to be because musical memory networks are separate from traditional temporal lobe memory networks
According to these studies, music activates a broad network in the brain rather than a single "music area."
Particularly, when listening to familiar music (such as popular folk songs, nursery rhymes, and songs on top 100 charts), musical memory retrieval involved areas both within and outside of the temporal lobes, including frontal and parietal regions
This diffuse network may allow sparing of musical memory functions.
Furthermore,
The ability for persons with remember music makes music a unique stimuli which effectively engages persons with AD.
Another reason why music interventions are becoming popular with this population is because behavioral studies have shown that music can improve some cognitive functions in AD persons.
For example, music in the background has been shown to improve autobiographical recall
According to
El
In other words, music can be used as a cue to evoke involuntary autobiographical memories which are specific and invoke an emotional response.
Furthermore,
The ability of music to enhance encoding, memory and cognition in AD persons has been attributed to modulating physiological responses.
It has been postulated that music's ability to induce arousal and evoke positive emotional responses can activate the parasympathetic or sympathetic nervous system, depending on the type of music and rhythm, to in turn alleviate neuropsychological symptoms and enhance encoding efforts
One study by
Music interventions have also been shown to have other positive physiological effects on AD persons that may affect cognition and behavior, such as improving sleep by increasing melatonin levels
Lastly, music interventions have gained an increasing amount of interest in researchers and caregivers because, conceptually, it is an inexpensive, easily implemented, and highly enjoyable means of treatment for persons with AD.

Behavioral studies investigating music interventions in AD report
of low drop-out rates and high engagement in those with the disease
Music is highly versatile and accessible, which allows it to be used in patient populations in a variety of ways.
Music therapy is defined by the Canadian Association of Music Therapists (2016) as "a discipline in which credentialed professionals use music purposefully within therapeutic relationships to support development, health, and well-being."
Music therapy involves a crucial component of client/therapist interaction through an empirically supported model, and can consist of active (involving improvisation, singing, clapping, or dancing) and/or receptive (music listening purposefully to identify emotional content emerging from music) techniques
Music listening approaches involve a music therapist to create a music playlist for the client, which can be individualized programs or chosen by the therapist
Recent literature suggests that individualized music is most beneficial in AD by improving autobiographical memory
Generalized music interventions involve the use of music without a music therapist with the goal of improving the well-being of the patient.
These methods can also use active or music listening protocols.
Music listening is used to "stimulate verbalization, memories, or to encourage of relaxation"
Previous reviews have been published investigating the impact of music intervention on persons with dementia.
They found that interventions which included music were best at reducing behavioral symptoms of dementia.
Specifically, music reduced agitation and anxiety.
Another large review by
However, their investigation found little evidence to suggest there are benefits for anxiety, cognition, or overall quality of life.
Another systematic review and meta-analysis
Again, this study found a lack of evidence to suggest that music interventions provide benefits on cognition for persons with dementia.
Contrary to these results,
As well,
Regardless of the mixed results in the literature, many clinicians and researchers suggest that music should be used in a medical setting
In this review, we will examine the existing literature on music interventions involving individuals with AD dementia and summarize the various techniques used and their impact on cognition and behavior for this population.

METHODS Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria
For this review, we included studies published in the last 10 years
The intervention must meet the definition as either music therapy, music listening or generalized musicbased interventions (active or music listening), and can be individualized or non-individualized
Generalized music approaches without a music therapist must be validated by a caregiver or conducted in a controlled setting to ensure adherence to protocol.
The studies gathered in our review included only patients with AD dementia.
Studies that were excluded included reviews, letters to the editors, studies which did not involve a music intervention or included an intervention other than music approaches, studies using a mixed intervention strategy, or studies that included a diagnosis of dementia other than AD, such as vascular dementia, Lewy body dementia, or mixed dementia.

Search Strategy
The electronic databases MEDLINE, Pubmed, and PSYCHINFO were searched using the terms "AD" and "music intervention" or "music therapy" or "music based intervention."
The abstracts of all results from this search were read and sorted whether they adhered to our inclusion or exclusion criteria.
These papers were then read for their entirety and further exclusions were made based on the inclusion criteria.

RESULTS

Search Results
Our initial search of the databases resulted in 206 papers meeting search criteria.
After removing repeated articles between the databases, 167 papers were included in the search.
After reviewing titles and abstracts for meeting the criteria above, 13 papers were identified.
A thorough reading of the papers resulted in size papers meeting criteria of this review (Table
The seven exclusions from the 13 papers identified were excluded due to: including no primary outcome of cognition or behavioral measure, non-AD dementia population included in the study, a study investigating acute effects on a small population after an 18-min live one-on-one session, and AD being assessed only as a covariate.

Music Approaches for Studies That Met Inclusion Criteria
All studies included in this review involved an intervention classified as either an active music therapy or music listening
The music was gathered by the authors based on either the patient's preferences (individualized) or chosen by the experimenter (not individualized).
All the participants were diagnosed with AD dementia.
Studies varied in the method of music exposure, setting, and type of music used.
Three studies included in this review implemented a music listening approach without an active component or music therapist
These studies involved listening to music streamed to their rooms or headphones under the supervision of their caregivers.
Participants were asked to listen to their given music program and listen attentively in a quiet room with headphones and without distractions.
Interestingly, the approach used by
The music was streamed via headphones to patient's room.
Two studies investigated solely active music therapy led by at least one music therapist
This involved allowing participants to choose instruments and play them freely.
They were instructed to appreciate sounds and movement and to create interpersonal relationships with others and evoke emotions.
The intervention was not individualized to the participant.
Gómez
Sessions included a welcome song (patients greeted and introduced themselves), rhythmic accompaniment (clapping hands or playing music instruments), moving to background music (moving arms and legs to music, dance therapy with hoops and balls), guessing songs, and farewell song.
One study compared outcomes between a music listening intervention group to an active music therapy group led by a team of clinicians.
The study by
The music listening sessions involved an individualized music playlist via a CD player with no interaction with their caregivers or a music therapist.
The active group also used the CD player with individualized music but the sessions were led by music therapists, occupational therapists, and nurses, who facilitated activities such as clapping, singing, and dancing.
Participants in control group remained in a silent room with their caregiver.

DISCUSSION
A diverse method of approaches for intervention were implemented across studies, including varying music selection and method of exposure.
In this discussion, we will look at the effects of music selection and intervention approach on cognition or behavior in persons with AD.
Studies which used individualized playlists
For example,
The use of classical music in order to enhance cognition is known as the "Mozart Effect"
This phenomenon has been attributed to acute arousal caused by the enjoyment of listening to music, and not because classical music has the ability to enhance cognition beyond the music listening session
Additionally,
The authors found only slight clinical improvements in a verbal initiative executive functioning task and episodic memory (in 7.69 and 23.08% of participants, respectively), but much less so than the cognitive training (CT) condition
This study also found that, although some mood improvements were found in their intervention, the same improvements were found in CT and Neuroeducation (NE) groups, and therefore can be attributed to the creation interpersonal relationships with group members, experience of a change of setting from their regular routine, or interaction between group members and clinicians and music therapists
Conversely, our investigation found that intervention approaches which provided individualized music playlists generally found positive outcomes in both cognition and behavior for their participants
Arroyo-Anlló et al. (
Gómez
Finally,
The benefit of music on cognition and behavioral symptoms of AD have been commonly attributed to arousal and improved mood
However, our investigation showed that music that is individualized to the patient show greater benefits than music that the patient does not know, suggesting more than arousal is involved in improving cognitive and behavioral outcomes for patients.
We suggest this is due to the positive effects that long-known music can have on the brain of AD persons.
Previous literature suggests that music can evoke autobiographical memories in persons with AD
The deterioration of memory in AD is often linked with impairment of autonomy and the sense of Self
Since music that is known to the patient has the ability evoke autobiographical memories
Our investigation provided evidence that the intervention approach used may also have an effect on cognition and behavior.
Namely,
However, those who underwent music therapy experienced additional benefits compared to the music listening group in the domains of paranoid/delusion, aggression, activity disturbance and overall rating of behavioral symptoms in persons with more severe AD.
However, these results disappeared after the intervention.
Conversely, the other two studies utilizing active music therapy provided conflicting results on both cognition and mood
Since Gómez
The music intervention approach may also have different impacts on the sympathetic and parasympathetic nervous systems of participants, which may affect acute and long-term outcomes.
Active music therapy tends to focus more on and activity and the social aspects of participation
While all the active music therapies encouraged interpersonal relationships with others and emotional introspection, the music listening approaches undergone by the studies in this review focused more on engaging participants to music they enjoy and know from their past.
Additionally, music listening approaches provided a calm and relaxing environment to induce relaxation, while active music therapies increased arousal with participation
As postulated by
During active music therapy sessions,
Therefore, the effects of active sessions may be based more on arousal mechanisms to reduce behavioral symptoms acutely, while music listening may act to train participants in relaxation techniques that provide parasympathetic regulation and prolonged benefits to the patients.
Additionally,
The authors created this type of music program with individualized music for each participant.
In addition to providing benefits for anxiety and depression after completion of intervention, the authors found the effects of the therapy lasted 6 months after completion.
Of the three studies that followed up with participates after completion of the intervention
Our findings of the benefits of music listening for persons with AD compared to active music therapy is supported by a recent review by
Our review has limitations that should be addressed.
The aim of this narrative review was to determine the impact of various music intervention approaches specifically for persons with AD.
However, the studies included vary in other aspects which may impact the results, such as participant age, disease severity, cognitive level, outcome measures, length of intervention, etc.
Furthermore, the methodology differed within musical approaches.
For example, music listening regimens ranged in their method of exposing participants to music, such as via headphones or streamed through the room.
Music therapy techniques differed in the activities conducted during the sessions.
As well, our investigation included only a small amount of studies, which may result in low power of our results.

CONCLUSION
In this review, we discussed six studies involving a music intervention approach for AD persons that met our search criteria.
In summary, our investigation into the aforementioned studies suggested music interventions which used individualized music playlists and focused on relaxation techniques tended to yield greater benefits on AD persons.
We hypothesize this is due the enhancement of autobiographical memory, autonomy, and parasympathetic modulation which in turn has positive effects on cognition and behavior.
While there are many reviews available looking at the effect of music on various symptoms, intervention studies that assess music, cognition, and memory are less common.
As cognitive decline is a main effect of AD and can contribute further to increasing neuropsychiatric symptoms, medication use, and visits to the emergency room, investigation of music on cognition in the future is imperative.
As well, more rigorous behavioral studies, as well as systematic reviews and metaanalyses, are needed to investigate the impact of individualized vs. not individualized music to make stronger evidence-based conclusions.
Lastly, although many studies have investigated outcomes pre-and post-music intervention for AD persons, there is a lack of studies investigating brain changes associated with a music intervention.
As well, imaging studies investigating brain areas involved in music listening have thus far only been investigated in healthy, young controls.
Such studies could provide empirical evidence to further the understanding of mechanisms involved in musical memory, and how music can work to improve cognition and behavior in persons with AD.


Participants were instructed to listen to Mozart's Sonata for Two Pianos in D major for 30 min in morning and Pachelbel's Canon in D major for Violins for 30 min before sleep.
Conversely, Guétin et al. (2009) and Arroyo-Anlló et al. (2013) used individualized playlists based on their participant's interests.
Arroyo-Anlló et al. (



TABLE 1 |
Studies investigating music interventions for AD.
Mental Status Examination; CT, cognitive training; AMT, Active Music Therapy; NE, Neuro-education; WFT, Word Fluency Task; SST, Short Story Test; RAVLT, Rey Auditory Verbal Learning Test; RCPM, Raven Colored Progressive Matrices; BDI, Beck Depression Inventory; STAI, State Trait Anxiety Inventory; LSNS, Lubben Social Network Scale; CDR, Clinical Dementia Rating; NPI, Neuropsychiatric Inventory; HADS, Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale; BI, Barthel Index; CASI, Cognitive Abilities Screening Instrument; CDR-SB, CDR-sum of boxes; MMSE-CE, MMSE-CASI estimated; MBI, music-based intervention.