Distinct structural correlates of the dominant and nondominant languages in bilinguals with Alzheimer's disease (AD)
Structural adaptations in brain regions involved in domain-general cognitive control are associated with life-long bilingualism and may contribute to the executive function advantage of bilinguals over monolinguals.
To the degree that these adaptations support bilingualism, their disruption by Alzheimer's disease (AD) may compromise the ability to maintain proficiency in two languages, particularly in the less proficient, or nondominant, language that has greater control demands.
The present study assessed this possibility in Spanish-English bilinguals with AD (n = 21) and cognitively normal controls (n = 30) by examining the brain correlates of dominant versus nondominant language performance on the Multilingual Naming Test (MINT), adjusting for age and education.
There were no significant structural correlates of naming performance for either language in controls.
In patients with AD, dominant language MINT performance was associated with cortical thickness of the entorhinal cortex and middle temporal gyrus, consistent with previous findings of temporal atrophy and related decline of naming abilities in AD.
Nondominant language MINT performance, in contrast, was correlated with thickness of the left caudal anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), a central cognitive control region involved in error monitoring and task

Introduction
Mounting evidence suggests that bilingualism is associated with the delayed onset of cognitive decline due to Alzheimer's disease (AD) by an average of 4-5 years
This type of cognitive reserve is often attributed to the executive control advantage of bilinguals compared to monolinguals, which may result from increased demands associated with needing to manage and switch between activation of two languages in a single cognitive system
In their seminal neurocognitive language control model
In their more recent Adaptive Control Hypothesis,
Nevertheless, the very need to monitor which type of language use is appropriate for each conversation could itself produce adaptations within control regions, in turn resulting in advantages compared to monolinguals in non-linguistic executive control functions such as response inhibition, working memory, and task-switching (e.g., a bilingual advantage on the flanker task associated with more efficient functional activation of the ACC;
Structural neuroimaging studies in cognitively normal bilinguals support this view, suggesting that bilingualism may produce structural adaptations (i.e., increased grey matter density or volume) in a range of regions associated with domain-general cognitive control
Structural changes in the inferior frontal gyrus (IFG; part of the PFC) correlate with second language training
Second language proficiency and bilingualism appears to similarly affect the left IPL in young adults
Aging bilinguals also have increased grey matter volume in the ACC
A recent study also identified greater temporal pole volume in aging bilinguals compared to monolinguals, and reported a correlation between volume of this structure and second language proficiency
This is consistent with other reports of the protective effect of bilingualism on age-related temporal pole atrophy
While not part of the domain-general control network
Although structural advantages (e.g., thicker cortex and higher grey matter density) in domain-general control regions persist in multilinguals with AD or Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI)
If bilingualism is supported by these adaptations, their disruption by AD may compromise the ability to maintain proficiency in two languages, particularly in the less proficient, or nondominant, language
Consistent with this possibility, it has been reported that bilinguals with AD gradually lose the ability to maintain fluency in two languages
In addition,
These effects may, however, be specific to bilinguals with a clearly dominant language since studies of balanced Spanish-Catalan bilinguals (i.e. who were similarly proficient in both languages) with AD showed similar declines in both languages cross-sectionally as well as longitudinally
Greater decline in the nondominant than dominant language in non-balanced bilinguals with AD may be related to atrophy of domain-general cognitive control regions and accompanying decline in executive control functions
Retrieval of words in the nondominant language is more difficult and less automatic than in the dominant language, and therefore more likely to be affected by the well-known deficits in executive control that occur in AD
The present study assessed this possibility in Spanish-English bilinguals with AD and cognitively normal controls by examining the brain correlates of dominant versus nondominant language performance on the Multilingual Naming Test (MINT), a picture naming task designed for use in multiple languages
We hypothesized that naming ability in the nondominant language would be associated with structural integrity in cognitive control areas previously associated with bilingualism in healthy older adults.
Naming ability in the dominant language, in contrast, would be less reliant on the domain-general control network and be more likely to correlate with the structural integrity of temporal lobe structures associated with semantic memory.

Methods
The research protocol was reviewed and approved by the Institutional Review Board (IRB) at the University of California, San Diego and informed consent to participate in the study was obtained at the point of entry into the ADRC longitudinal study from all patients or their caregivers consistent with California State law.

Participants
The study included 21 Spanish-English bilingual participants clinically diagnosed with AD and 30 cognitively normal (NC) Spanish-English bilingual participants from the University of California, San Diego (UCSD) Shiley Marcos Alzheimer's Disease Research Center (ADRC).
Participants were diagnosed by a panel consisting of at least one neurologist and one neuropsychologist using systematic guidelines for clinical diagnosis based on the most up to date published research criteria
Groups did not differ in age, gender distribution, APOE ε4 allele frequency, or dominant language spoken (see Table
Education, expressed continuously as the cumulative years of formal education, was greater in the NC group (p < 0.001).
On average, the AD group had lower scores on global cognition measures such as the Mini-Mental State Exam (MMSE; p < 0.001) and the Mattis Dementia Rating Scale (DRS; p < 0.001), as well as a worse confrontation naming performance in their dominant and nondominant languages (MINT; p < 0.001 and p < 0.01 respectively).
The bilingual index (a measure of degree of bilingualism that is described in detail below) revealed a small but significant difference between the groups such that the AD patients were relatively less bilingual (p = 0.04).
Participants with AD were also more functionally impaired as judged by the Functional Assessment Questionnaire (FAQ; p < 0.001).

Procedures
Participants were tested on the Multilingual Naming Test (MINT) as part of their annual standardized ADRC neuropsychological evaluation.
Testing was performed by a Spanish-English bilingual psychometrician.
The MINT
The drawings are graded in difficulty, with the easiest drawings presented first.
The MINT was designed to assess both dominant and nondominant languages; thus it includes a greater proportion of medium to high frequency items than is typical for naming tests designed for monolinguals (e.g., the Boston Naming Test;
Participants first named all the pictures in their dominant language, and then in their nondominant language.
If an individual encountered difficulty identifying an object, a semantic or phonemic cue was provided.
Testing was discontinued after six consecutive failed naming trials.
The number of spontaneous correct responses and correct responses following a semantic cue were summed to give a total score (which ranges from 0 to 68).
Bilingualism Index scores were calculated by dividing the score in whichever language produced the lower score (nondominant language) by the score in the language which produced a higher score (dominant language).
Index scores range from 0-1 and measure the extent to which knowledge of each language is similar, ignoring direction of dominance and absolute ability level

Image Analysis
2.3.1 MRI Aquisition-High-resolution, three-dimensional, T1-weighted images were acquired for each subject (TE: 2.8 ms/3.8 ms; TR: 6.5 ms/8.5 ms; TI: 600 ms/500 ms; flip angle: 8°/10° matrix: 256 × 256; voxel size: 0.9375 mm × 0.9375 mm × 1.2000 mm; values separated by '/' are for 3.0 T data/1.5 T data).
Respiratory effort and heart rate were monitored with a pressure transducer (BioPac Systems Inc., Goleta, CA) and a pulse oximeter (BioPac Systems and InVivo, Orlando, FL), respectively.

MRI
Processing-A model of each subject's cortical surface was reconstructed from the T1-weighted MRI scan using FreeSurfer (version 6.0), an automated image processing pipeline that is documented and freely available online (
The technical details of these methods have been described in prior publications (e.g.,
Following completion of the automated FreeSurfer pipeline, all scans were reviewed to assess the quality of skull stripping and ensure that cortical surfaces followed the gray and white matter boundaries.
Where needed, manual edits were performed to improve accuracy of segmentation.
This involved correction of pial surface misplacement (e.g., inclusion of non-brain tissue) and errors in white matter segmentation.
This editing procedure was conducted by operators blinded to the diagnostic status of the participants.
Final surfaces were visually inspected to search for gross errors; none were found in the present data set.
The surface cortical model was then anatomically parcellated using the Desikan-Killiany atlas and standard FreeSurfer tools
This process assigns each point (vertex) on the native surface to the most probable anatomical label (e.g., inferior parietal, precentral, parahippocampal, etc.) based on registration to a probabilistic atlas of surface folding patterns and on the observed surface geometry at that location of the native surface
Automated parcellation by this method has been shown to be comparable to manual labeling
The parcellation for each subject was visually inspected to search for gross errors; none were found in the present data set.

Selection of Regions of Interest-Regions of interest (ROIs
) for this analysis were selected from the literature, targeting: 1) cognitive control regions demonstrating a bilingualism effect in older adults including the rostral and caudal ACC
Figure

Statistical Analysis
Demographics, clinical characteristics, and cognitive performance were compared using ANOVA for continuous variables and Fisher Exact Tests for categorical variables.
Average cortical thicknesses for each ROI were extracted from FreeSurfer and subjected to a linear regression with dominant MINT score, nondominant MINT score, years of education, and age in years as predictors.
The Kolmogorov-Smirnov test demonstrated that within each group, our variables did not deviate from normality (D range 0.10 -0.14; all p > 0.6), while a variance inflation factor (VIF) of less than 3 for each covariate indicated that no significant co-linearity was present.
For each of the models used, no autocorrelation was observed with the Durbin-Watson test (d range 1.72 -2.27, all p > 0.16), and heteroscedasticity was ruled out with the Goldfeld-Quandt test (GQ range 0.38 -1.20, all p > 0.34).
Partial correlations were calculated for each variable, controlling for the others, from the regression model.
We sampled 18 regions (9 ROIs bilaterally), with corrections for multiple comparisons carried out using the Benjamini-Hochberg
Results that survived this correction are bolded in tables.
Analyses were performed using the R statistical software package (v 3.5.1,
R Core Team, 2015).

Results

Cortical thickness differences between AD and NC
Compared to the cognitively normal bilingual controls, bilinguals with AD exhibited cortical thinning in bilateral entorhinal, middle temporal, temporal pole, and inferior parietal and supramarginal cortices.
In addition, bilateral pars orbitalis and the right pars triangularis of the IFG, as well as the left rostral ACC were significantly thinner among patients (all FDRadjusted p < 0.05, Table

Partial correlations for dominant and nondominant MINT
Partial correlations were used to examine the unique contributions of dominant and nondominant MINT scores, adjusted for age and education, on cortical thickness in each of our target ROIs in AD patients and NC controls separately.
In the NC group, despite a larger sample size, no significant correlations emerged with any regions sampled (Supplemental Table
In the AD group, dominant language MINT performance showed a robust positive correlation with left entorhinal cortical thickness (partial r = 0.63, FDR adjusted p < 0.05; Figure
In contrast, nondominant language MINT was positively associated only with left caudal ACC thickness (partial r = 0.68, FDR-adjusted p < 0.05; Figure

Correlations with the Bilingual Index
The bilingual index provides a measure of relative degree of bilingualism by taking the ratio of nondominant to dominant naming ability.
When using the bilingual index measure in place of the nondominant MINT in the regression, the pattern of results was unchanged, such that there was a correlation with only left caudal ACC thickness (partial r = 0.68, FDRadjusted p < 0.05; Supplemental Figure
Three AD patients had bilingual index scores that were less than 10%, lower than any NC participants.
When excluding these three cases, the correlation strengthened to a partial r of 0.70 (FDR-adjusted p < 0.05; Supplemental Figure

Discussion
The goal of this study was to examine the distinct structural correlates of dominant and nondominant picture naming ability in bilinguals with AD.
Previous work suggested that bilingualism is associated with increased grey matter density, thickness, or volume in cognitive control regions in healthy individuals
Our analysis was specifically designed to address this question by subjecting the average cortical thickness for each a-priori defined region of interest to a regression analysis with both dominant and nondominant confrontation naming performance on the MINT, controlling for age and education.
This approach allowed us to examine correlates of naming ability in the two languages in the AD brain, and revealed reliable differences between them.
As expected, thickness of the left entorhinal cortex and left middle temporal cortex correlated with dominant MINT performance.
This result suggests that ability to name pictures in the dominant language primarily taps semantic processes that are known to be impaired in AD in conjunction with early atrophy and decreased metabolic activity in the temporal lobes (Domoto-Reilly, Sapolsky, Brickhouse,
The middle temporal gyrus in particular has been shown to be the common correlate of confrontation naming in AD, frontotemporal dementia, and corticobasal degeneration
This region, along with the entorhinal cortex, exhibited significant thinning in AD compared to healthy controls (Table
Our finding of a robust association between dominant MINT scores and cortical thickness in patients, but not in elderly control participants (Figure
The nondominant language, in contrast, was positively correlated with thickness of the left caudal ACC in AD patients.
The ACC has been postulated to be a common locus for domain-general cognitive control, particularly related to task monitoring and conflict/error detection
The ACC is recruited in tasks that require bilingual language control-e.g., language switching in production (e.g.,
These fMRI studies suggest that the dorsal ACC region may be more engaged when processing a weaker language.
Previous literature also suggests overlap between language control and cognitive control functions, with bilinguals showing activation in the ACC across both verbal and nonverbal tasks (e.g.,
For example,
Our finding of the association of nondominant language performance with thickness of the ACC in AD patients lends support to the idea that the same brain regions that are enhanced by bilingual language use are also important for the maintenance of bilingualism in AD.
Indeed, the bilingual index (an objective measure of bilingualism) is at least as strongly related to ACC thickness as the nondominant language (Supplemental Figure
However, the correlation between bilingual ability and ACC thickness is apparent only in patients and not controls, despite the lack of a difference in the mean ACC thicknesses between the groups.
This suggests that this region did not exhibit significant atrophy in our AD patients.
Because all of the other major hubs of the cognitive control network (namely the IFG and IPL) did show severe atrophy in AD (Table
This relationship is masked by intact cognitive systems in normal controls.
This is in line with the suggestion of
Several limitations of the present study should be noted.
First, the sample size was relatively small, precluding a voxel-wise whole-brain analysis.
We instead chose to focus on regions of interest from the literature which may introduce bias and miss unexpected results.
Given this smaller sample size, caution should be taken in interpreting any null findings, and future replication with different groups of bilinguals is warranted.
Second, the AD and NC groups differed in education by approximately 4 years.
While we adjusted for education in regression analyses, the potential for nonlinear interactions between brain changes, education and bilingualism warrants further study.
This point is emphasized by the results of
This suggests an upper limit to the extent to which cognitive reserve can function to delay dementia.
In contrast to these limitations, the sample was a well-characterized group of Spanish-English bilinguals who had undergone thorough clinical and neuropsychological evaluations that included objective measures of language ability in both languages.
The use of the MINT administered in both languages allowed measurement of language ability as a continuous variable for each language, and allowed degree of bilingualism to be measured in an objective manner on a continuous scale.
This approach provides significant advantages over most previous studies that performed group comparisons by treating bilingualism as a dichotomous variable based upon the participant's self-report of their proficiency (which is not as powerful or reliable as the MINT in measuring language proficiency;

Conclusions
We examined cortical structural correlates of dominant and nondominant language abilities in patients with AD and cognitively normal adults, controlling for age and education.
Correlations between dominant language naming performance and measures of cortical thickness were identified in the left entorhinal cortex and left middle temporal gyrus.
These results are consistent with the temporal lobe atrophy and decline in naming that occur in AD.
In contrast, we found a robust correlation between nondominant language naming performance and thickness of the left caudal ACC, a region associated with conflict monitoring and language switching.
This association was only apparent in bilinguals with AD, and suggests that AD-related atrophy may increase reliance on the ACC for the control requirements of nondominant language use.



Figure 1 .
Figure 1.
Regions of InterestRegions of interest selected for the analysis overlaid on the pial surface of the standard FreeSurfer "fsaverage" brain.



Figure 2 .
Figure 2. Relationship with Cortical Thickness Scatterplots of the significant correlations of A) dominant MINT with cortical thickness left temporal regions, and B) nondominant MINT with cortical thickness of the left caudal ACC.
Patients with AD are red circles, while normal controls are in blue triangles.



Table 3 .
Partial Correlations of Dominant and Nondominant Language with Cortical Thickness in ADBold indicates significant differences after adjustment using the Benhamini-Hochberg procedure for a false discovery rate (FDR) < 0.05 Abbreviations: AD = Alzheimer's Disease, ACC = Anterior Cingulate Cortex Neuropsychologia.
Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 September 01.