Molecular Insight Into the Therapeutic Potential of Long Non-coding RNA-Associated Competing Endogenous RNA Axes in Alzheimer’s Disease: A Systematic Scoping Review
ceRNAs and Alzheimer pair.
Among miRNAs, miR-107 played a key role by regulating three different loops.
Understanding the various aspects of this regulatory mechanism can help elucidate the unknown etiology of AD and provide new molecular targets for use in therapeutic and clinical applications.
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a heterogeneous degenerative brain disorder with a rising prevalence worldwide.
The two hallmarks that characterize the AD pathophysiology are amyloid plaques, generated via aggregated amyloid β, and neurofibrillary tangle, generated via accumulated phosphorylated tau.
At the post-transcriptional and transcriptional levels, the regulatory functions of non-coding RNAs, in particular long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs), have been ascertained in gene expressions.
It is noteworthy that a number of lncRNAs feature a prevalent role in their potential of regulating gene expression through modulation of microRNAs via a process called the mechanism of competing endogenous RNA
Given the multifactorial nature of ceRNA interaction networks, they might be advantageous in complex disorders (e.g., AD) investigations at the therapeutic targets level.
We carried out scoping review in this research to analyze validated loops of ceRNA in AD and focus on ceRNA axes associated with lncRNA.
This scoping review was performed according to a six-stage methodology structure and PRISMA guideline.
A systematic search of seven databases was conducted to find eligible articles prior to July 2021.
Two reviewers independently performed publications screening and data extraction, and quantitative and qualitative analyses were conducted.
Fourteen articles were identified that fulfill the inclusion criteria.
Studies with different designs reported nine lncRNAs that were experimentally validated to act as ceRNA in AD in human-related studies, including BACE1-AS, SNHG1, RPPH1, NEAT1, LINC00094, SOX21-AS1, LINC00507, MAGI2-AS3, and LINC01311.
The BACE1-AS/BACE1 was the most frequent ceRNA

INTRODUCTION
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a progressive neurodegenerative disorder (NDD) and is a form of dementia that triggers difficulties with memory, thinking, and behavior
Based on the Alzheimer's Association, AD makes up about approximately 60-80% of dementia cases.
Currently, worldwide, 50 million people are living with AD and other dementias.
AD incidence doubles every 5 years after age 65
Symptoms generally develop slowly and aggravate with time.
From a hereditary point of view, AD is a heterogeneous polygenic condition.
The condition has been categorized into two groups according to age-onset: early-onset AD (EOAD) and late-onset AD (LOAD).
LOAD also called sporadic AD (SAD), is the most common type of dementia.
AD is a multifactorial condition as a result of interactions between the susceptible genes and environmental factors
Genes play an important role in AD.
The heritability of LOAD is 58-79%, while it is more than 90% in EOAD.
The genetic association has helped us to understand the etiology of AD.
Over 50 loci are currently associated with AD.
These findings highly suggest that AD is a complex disease

Alzheimer's Disease Pathogenesis
The pathophysiology of AD is defined by the accumulation of β-amyloid peptide (Aβ) in the brain, as well as hyperphosphorylated and cleaved structures of the microtubuleassociated protein tau.
It is known that metabolic dysfunction of Aβ precursor protein (APP) and abnormal tau protein phosphorylation
According to biochemical, behavioral, and genetic research, the pathologic development of the neurotoxic Aβ peptide resulting from serial APP proteolysis is a critical step in AD development.
Moreover, APP is metabolized rapidly and in a highly complicated manner by groups of sequential secretases, including β-site APP-cleaving enzyme 1 (BACE1), γ-secretase, and the ADAM family as α-secretases.
Regarding tau proteolysis, this process is crucial in neurodegeneration and the tau aggregation process.
Tau is a microtubule-associated protein that is predominantly produced in neurons and is encoded by the Microtubule-Associated Protein Tau (MAPT) gene.
Intracellular tau is sometimes hyperphosphorylated, resulting in hazardous oligomers and aggregates visible as NFTs
Aside from the tau and amyloid theory about AD, several additional ideas have been proposed, namely inflammatory reactions, oxidative stress, mitochondrial failure, and cholinergic hypothesis
Although there are numerous hypotheses about AD pathogenesis, the actual triggers and ideal therapy strategies are still elusive.

Antisense Therapeutics
For therapeutic development, RNA is a novel target with numerous advantages, including:
Whereas other promising progress has been made in the discovery of small-molecule medicines that affect RNA activity, antisense oligonucleotides (ASOs) provide a far straightforward technique
ASOs are synthetic oligonucleotides or oligonucleotide analogs with lengths ranging from 12 to 30 nucleotides (nt) and are engineered for binding to RNA through Watson-Crick base pairing.
ASOs can be constructed to bind to both proteincoding RNAs (mRNAs) and ncRNAs, including microRNAs (miRNAs) or long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs).
After ASOs bind with the RNAs of interest, antisense medicine can alter the activity of the RNAs in different ways

Long Non-coding RNAs
NcRNAs are classified into two types based on their lengths: short ncRNAs (less than 200 nt) and long ncRNAs (more than 200 nt).
lncRNAs range in size from 200 nt to more than 100 kb and often lack a clear open reading frame.
LncRNAs, resembling proteincoding genes, are widely transcribed by RNA polymerase II and are frequently post-transcriptionally changed by 5 capping, 3 polyadenylation, and RNA splicing processes.
However, lncRNAs differ from protein-coding genes in that they possess shorter lengths and exhibit poorer sequence conservation among species
Many biological functions rely on lncRNAs, including RNA transcription, translation, chromatin and DNA modifications, mRNA stability, and pre-RNA splicing

Long Non-coding RNAs and mRNA Stability
The rate of mRNA synthesis and degradation determines its steady-state level; hence, the degradation of mRNA is an important factor in controlling gene expression.
Previous research has shown that instability of mRNAs that encode synaptic transmission proteins leads to synaptic function loss in AD pathogenesis
Furthermore, in AD patients, the mRNA degradation rate of AD risk genes is abnormal
It has been shown that lncRNAs have a role in AD pathogenesis via regulating mRNA stability

Competing Endogenous RNA Hypothesis
A new mechanism of interaction between RNAs, called ceRNA, is proposed by Pier Paolo Pandolfi's group in 2011.
This hypothesis suggests that cross-talk between RNAs, both coding RNAs and ncRNAs (such as lncRNAs, circRNAs: circular RNAs, and pseudogenes) through miRNA complementary sequences called miRNA response elements (MREs) builds a large-scale regulatory network throughout the transcriptome.
Based on the ceRNA hypothesis, if two RNA transcripts regulate each other via a ceRNA mediated mechanism, the expression levels of these two RNA transcripts would be negatively correlated with the levels of target miRNAs, and the expression levels of these two RNA transcripts would be positively associated with each other
Figure
Studies of ceRNA interactions are according to the prediction of target RNA transcripts using multiple software programs
These predictions are based on identifying the same MRE within multiple RNA sequences.
As the precision of prediction programs is unclear
Over the last few years, several studies have verified the ceRNA theory.
It is well known that the disruption of the equilibrium of ceRNA cross-talk can play a role in various diseases
So far, the ceRNA mechanisms have been further studied in the field of cancer
During the last 4 years, the study in the field of NDDs has begun systematically, and significant improvements have been produced.
Among NDDs, the ceRNA interactions in AD have been studied to a greater extent
Since 2017, there have been increasing studies to identify the genome-wide ceRNA networks in AD using bioinformatics prediction
Since interaction networks of ceRNAs are multifactorial, they might be advantageous in investigations of complicated diseases, like AD, in terms of therapeutic targets only by targeting one of them, the levels of several disease-related RNAs change at once

Aim of Study
In this study, we performed a scoping review to analyze validated ceRNA loops in AD.
Our focus was on lncRNA-associated ceRNA axes that underlie AD pathophysiology and could potentially be therapeutic targets.

METHODS
The strategy for this review was according to the scoping review structure recommended by
This consists of five distinct steps: (1) identifying the research question, (2) identifying relevant studies, (3) study selection, (4) charting the data, and (5) collating, summarizing, and reporting results.
An optional sixth step in the scoping review, consultation, was not used in our study.
This review was also well guided by the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses Extension for Scoping Reviews (PRISMA-ScR) Checklist

Identifying the Research Question
This study focused on mapping the current literature on lncRNAassociated ceRNA loops in AD.
To address this aim, we sought to answer the following question: Precisely what is known from existing literature about lncRNA-associated ceRNA regulatory axes in AD?

Identifying Relevant Studies
An initial limited search of PubMed and Embase was performed, and then the keywords in the title and abstract were assessed, as well as the index terms that were utilized in the articles.
A second search was performed across PubMed, Embase, Scopus, Web of Science, and Cochrane databases according to specific search tips of each database without any restriction, using keywords, MeSH, or Emtree terms recognized from the primary search.
The search strategies for PubMed and Embase are shown in Appendix I. Additionally, searches were also carried out in two gray (i.e., difficult to locate or unpublished) literature databases: Google Scholar and ProQuest.
The last search was performed on July 10, 2021.
We also examined the reference lists of the relevant literature and review articles for additional sources.

Selecting Studies
The included studies fulfilled the following criteria: (1) explicitly discussing the lncRNA-associated ceRNA axes in AD, (2) written in English, and (3) be original research.
The exclusion criteria were (1) studies of non-AD or unspecified dementia, (2) studies that did not use human specimens or cell lines, and (3) studies that did not use molecular techniques to validate the components of the ceRNA loop.
The title and abstract of articles were first independently screened by three reviewers (HS, NA) for eligibility according to the above criteria.
The full texts of the remaining articles were evaluated, and articles going to fulfill the eligibility criteria were included in the final data analysis.
Any disagreements were solved through discussion or with a third reviewer (MR) if required.

Charting the Data
Three reviewers (HS and NA) independently extracted data into a predesigned charting form in Microsoft Excel.
It provided details about the first author, year of publication, origin, type of study, cell line(s), human samples, methods, ceRNAs, shared miRNA(s), and key findings.

Collating, Summarizing, and Reporting the Results
We performed quantitative and qualitative analyses.
For the quantitative part, we provided a descriptive numerical summary of the characteristics of the included articles.
For the qualitative analysis, we provided a narrative review of the existing information addressing our earlier mentioned research question, focusing on the importance of results in the broader framework as suggested by

RESULTS

Search Results
The different steps of finding eligible studies are shown in the flow chart in Figure
One hundred and fifty-three articles were excluded for irrelevance.
The full texts of the remaining 34 articles were evaluated, and 20 more articles were also excluded because they did not validate the components of the ceRNA loop using molecular techniques
Lastly, a total of 14 eligible articles remained

Study Characteristics
The characteristics of the included studies are summarized in Table
Almost all studies have been published since 2019.
All but one study
Eleven studies examined the ceRNA regulatory loop on human cell lines
All studies with human specimens had a case-control design.
One study used brain samples
Bioinformatics analysis was used to identify the potential ceRNA interactions.
Also, different molecular techniques were utilized to validate the components of the ceRNA loop and investigate their involvement in AD pathogenesis.
The reported loops are shown in Figure
The lncRNA BACE1-antisense (BACE1-AS) was reported in four studies
The lncRNA small nucleolar RNA host gene 1 (SNHG1)
The remaining ceRNAs were reported once each in six studies
Among the identified miRNAs, miR-107 was reported in three regulatory axes in three different studies
According to these results, we found that three independent ceRNA interaction loops (loop A, loop B, and loop C) are regulated by miR-107.
Loop A includes nuclear enriched abundant transcript 1 (NEAT1) and targets of miR-107, loop B includes SOX21 antisense RNA1 (SOX21-AS1) and targets of miR-107, loop C includes BACE1-AS and BACE1 (Figure

DISCUSSION
The most contentious issue with ceRNA regulation is whether or not it is effective in physiological contexts.
Most studies questioning ceRNA functions reach the conclusion that regulation of ceRNA is highly improbable to yield biologically major impacts at physiological RNA concentrations; however, these experiments cannot rule out the potential of potent miRNA sponges or the marked downregulation or upregulation of ceRNAs and miRNAs at particular developmental stages or subcellular sites
There are many reports indicating that ceRNA machinery operates in numerous diseases and that ceRNA is expressed differently with various tissues, cells, and subcellular situations.
The literature represents novel visions by which designing ceRNA-mechanism-based therapeutical utilization can be facilitated for the manipulation of special developmental phases and disease pathogenicity with the use of synthesized oligonucleotides specific to sequences
Over the last decade, significant effort has been put toward the clinical use of RNA-based therapies, mainly using antisense oligonucleotides as well as small interfering RNAs, with many obtaining Food and Drug Administration (FDA)  approval
However, trial findings have been mixed, with some research claiming strong benefits and others showing minimal effectiveness or toxicity.
Alternate entities, including lncRNA-based therapies, are gaining interest
The lncRNAs' wide function offers many possibilities for clinical application, the methods of which must be adapted to the lncRNA's mode of action
Investigating natural antisense transcripts (NATs): lncRNAs that are transcribed from opposite strands of adjacent genes and negatively regulate them in cis is an intriguing discovery.
AntagoNATs are ASOs that target NATs and have demonstrated extremely promising preclinical findings for gene reactivation in the central nervous system (CNS)
AntagoNATs effectively increased the expression of brainderived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), a protein important in memory development
Remarkably, BDNF-AS-targeting antagoNATs were effectively delivered across the blood-brain barrier in a murine model utilizing a minimally invasive nasal depot (MIND).
MIND is a medication delivery system that directs drug administration to the olfactory submucosal region and has achieved about 40% effectiveness compared to riskier invasive delivery methods
Such encouraging findings imply that lncRNA-based therapies will soon enter clinical testing.
Moreover, the therapeutical impact of ASO-based lncRNA knockdown has shown promise in patients with Angelman syndrome, a single-gene illness represented by intellectual disability
Despite no development of ASOs that target lncRNA in the therapy of NDDs, ASOs that target mRNAs have received approval by the FDA for the therapy of Duchenne muscular dystrophy and spinal muscular atrophy
Furthermore, ASOs have presented potential effectiveness in the therapy of Huntington's disease (HD) by affecting the huntingtin gene (HTT) as the target, in the therapy of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis by influencing SOD1 and C9ORF72 as the targets, and in the therapy of AD by affecting MAPT (tau) as the target
Hence, lncRNAs and lncRNA-associated ceRNA axes can also serve as a new therapeutical target for AD therapy.
In this study, we performed a scoping review and identified nine lncRNAs that were experimentally validated to act as ceRNA in AD in human studies.
These lncRNAs are discussed below.

BASE1-AS
As mentioned above, in AD patients, the extracellularly deposited plaque of the Aβ peptide is one of the representative pathologic signs.
To produce Aβ, APP needs to be sequentially cleaved proteolytically with β-secretase and γ-secretase.
BACE1 is a critical enzyme in AD pathophysiology responsible for Aβ plaque formation through the cleavage of APP in collaboration with γ-secretase.
Thus, a misregulated BACE1 can have a major contribution to this pathologic event.
Both miRNAs and lncRNAs have been involved in regulating BACE1 posttranscriptionally, with which lncRNA BACE1-AS has the utmost relevancy
The lncRNA BACE1-AS was the first validated component of a ceRNA loop described in AD pathogenesis.
Both BACE1-AS and BACE1 mRNA transcripts originate from a similar locus in chromosome 11 in humans; the transcription of BACE1 mRNA and BACE1-AS is triggered from the sense and antisense strands, respectively.
An RNA duplex is formed by pairing BACE1-AS to BACE1, leading to a structurally changed BACE1 and improved stableness of mRNA.
Consequently, BACE1-AS has a role in increasing both the mRNA and protein concentrations of BACE1
This ceRNA pair had been reported in two studies.
The first loop was BACE1-AS/miR-485-5p/BACE1, which was shown to be involved in AD pathogenesis through BACE1 posttranscriptional regulation
It was also shown that BACE1-AS and to a lower level BACE1 were upregulated, and the expression of miR-485-5p was decreased in the brain of AD patients
The second study showed that BACE1-AS prevented BACE1 mRNA degradation by sponging miR-29b-3p/miR-107/miR-124-3p/miR-485-5p/miR-761 in the pathophysiology of AD.
In addition to the mentioned ceRNA pair, it was shown that BACE1-AS exacerbated isoflurane (anesthetic)-induced neurotoxicity by BACE1-AS/miR-214-3p axis in AD
This drug increases the risk of AD by increasing Aβ production and its oligomerization, as well as neuronal apoptosis
It is noteworthy that increased expression of BACE1-AS and down-regulation of miR-214-3p in the plasma samples of AD patients was also reported.
In addition, BACE1-AS is a ceRNA for miR-132-3p.
This axis was involved in the berberinemediated neuroprotective effect in AD
Berberine is an isoquinoline alkaloid found in many medicinally important plants
Berberine has been reported to play a crucial role in AD treatment

MAGI2 Antisense RNA 3 (MAGI2-AS3)
Alongside BACE1-AS, MAGI2-AS3 (via miR-374b-5p) could reportedly regulate BACE1 mRNA levels, Aβ-induced neurotoxicity, and neuroinflammation in AD
This underlines that the BACE1 is complexly regulated in AD by the mediation of multiple ceRNA networks.
It was also shown that serum MAGI2-AS3 and miR-374b-5p expression was significantly up-regulated and down-regulated in AD patients compared with healthy controls, respectively
LncRNA MAGI2-AS3 is reportedly a sponger of miR-374b-5p in ovarian carcinoma and hepatocellular carcinoma
It has been found to be involved in regulating cell survivability in a variety of diseases
There are also reports on the association between MAGI2-AS3 and chronic inflammatory illnesses

SNHG1
In AD pathology, SNHG1 involves in Aβ-induced neuronal injury via two different ceRNA regulatory axes, SNHG1/miR-137/kringle containing transmembrane protein 1 (KREMEN1)
SNHG1 has been well-studied in different types of cancers due to its oncogenic role
It is shown that it can also promote neuronal autophagy and neuroinflammation in Parkinson's disease (PD)
KREMEN1 encodes a receptor for Dickkopf (DKK) proteins that functionally cooperates with DKK1/2 to inhibit wingless (WNT)/beta-catenin signaling
It exerts its pro-apoptotic activity in a Wnt-independent pathway
It has been shown that the silencing of KREMEN1 prevents Aβ-mediated synapse loss in AD
Besides, the oncogenic role of ZNF217 has been shown in many cancers
In AD studies, the down-regulation of ZNF217 could relieve Aβ-induced neurotoxicity
It had also been shown that the neuroprotective effect of resveratrol could occur through SNHG1/miR-361-3p/ZNF217 axis
Resveratrol is a polyphenolic compound that its high concentrations are found in red grapes, blueberries, and peanuts
Various studies have proved its antioxidant and anti-inflammatory effects on AD

NEAT1
NEAT1 aggravated Aβ-induced neuronal injury via acting as a sponge for miR-107
Knockdown of NEAT1 attenuated Aβ induced inhibition of viability and promotion of apoptosis and p-tau levels.
MiR-107 was down-regulated, and it reversed Aβ-induced injury when overexpressed in Aβ-treated cells
NEAT1 is frequently overexpressed in human tumors and proposed as a novel target for human cancer therapy and diagnosis by sponging miRNAs
According to previous studies, it also has a crucial role in HD and PD
In AD studies, its increased expression levels were shown in brain tissues of AD patients, compared to controls

SOX21-AS1
SOX21-AS1, similar to NEAT1, exacerbated Aβ-induced neuronal injury via sequestering miR-107
SOX21-AS1 is a recently discovered lncRNA that can suppress neuronal apoptosis of hippocampal cells and mitigate oxidative stress in AD, hence, being involved as an agent in AD pathogenicity
It is noteworthy that, as mentioned above, the present study identified that miR-107 was at the center of three different loops, as shown in Figure
The miR-107 family is a group of evolutionarily conserved miRNAs that show high expression in the human cerebral cortex.
Numerous studies have shown misregulation of this miRNA in AD brains
It has been reported that it may have a protective role in AD by preventing Aβ-induced bloodbrain barrier (BBB) disruption, endothelial cell dysfunction
miR-107 shows a certain potential to be used as a biomarker in AD
The ceRNA interactions are mediated by miRNAs, and altered miRNAs expression result in dysregulation of its competitive interactors.
On the other hand, it is hypothesized that ceRNAs in the modules play a role in disease progression as a whole instead of acting individually
Thus, these identified ceRNA modules comprising NEAT1, SOX21-AS1, BACE1-AS, miR-107, targets of miR-107, and BACE1 can be further assessed as potential ceRNA modules for ceRNA-based therapeutic purposes in AD.
Long Intergenic Non-protein Coding RNA 507 (LINC00507)
It was reported that LINC00507/miR-181c-5p/tau-tubulin kinase-1 (TTBK1)/MAPT axis regulated tau hyperphosphorylation via P25/P35/GSK3β signaling pathway
LincRNAs are a subclass of lncRNAs.
LINC00507 has an age-dependent expression pattern and is specifically expressed in the primate cortex
MAPT encodes the tau protein, and TTBK1 is a CNS-specific protein kinase that involves in tau hyper-phosphorylation and deposition in AD
It also has been shown that P25/P35/GSK3β signaling pathway deteriorates tauopathy

Long Intergenic Non-protein Coding RNA 94 (LINC00094)
As indicated in previous reports, LncRNA LINC00094 (called BRD3OS as well) is involved in regulating BBB penetrability in the AD microenvironment by sponging miR-224-5p and miR-497-5p, and SH3GL2 mRNA is targeted by both of them
LINC00094 may reportedly act as a prognostic biomarker of lung cancer
Additionally, microarray examination revealed the LINC00094 down-regulation in Memantine-incubated cells.
As an N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor antagonist, memantine has received wide applications for AD treatment
SH3GL2 encodes Endophilin-1, an endocytosis protein that has a marked increase in the AD brain and is responsible for Aβ-induced postsynaptic dysfunction

Long Intergenic Non-protein Coding RNA 1311 (LINC01311)
It was reported that the LINC01311/hsa-miR-146a-5p axis could operate as a functional regulator in AB1-42-stimulated apoptosis, proliferation slowdown, autophagy, and accumulated APP in human-lineage neurons
As a new lncRNA, LINC01311 was discovered throughout human genome-wide screening, which has an aberrant expression in human liver and prostate cancers
However, the functional activity of LINC01311 has never been clarified in other human disorders.

RPPH1
Unlike the lncRNAs discussed above, RPPH1 apparently exerts a neuroprotective compensatory mode of action in AD pathology via two varying ceRNA axes: RPPH1/miR-122/WNT1
Specifically, evidence indicates that it can mitigate Aβ25-35-stimulated neuronal damage, apoptosis, and endoplasmic reticulum stress
RPPH1 is the RNA component of RNase P, which plays a role in tRNA maturation in Archaea, Bacteria, and Eukarya
Wnt/β-catenin signaling has a confirmed essential function in developing AD.
Huperzine A, which reversibly and selectively inhibits acetylcholinesterase and is utilized for AD treatment, has been reported to have a neuroprotecting impact by activating Wnt/β-catenin signaling in AD
As shown previously, the BBB failure in AD is caused by an impaired Wnt/β-catenin signaling
Besides, research indicates that activating the Wnt/β-catenin signaling is capable of protecting neuronal cells by regulating survival and c-myc, as well as apoptosis-linked proteins Bcl-2 and Bax
As a glycolytic sensor, PKM2 has a crucial contribution to the dephosphorylation of phosphoenolpyruvate to pyruvate and catalysis of the final stage of glycolysis
The emergence of recent documentation has highlighted that PKM2 is involved in AD.
According to reports, oxidatively inactivated PKM2 had an association with the progress of AD from mild cognitive impairment
The poly(ADPribose)polymerase 1 could also modulate PKM2, indicating that the PKM2-linked glycolytic pathway has a contribution to AD

Limitations of Scoping Review
A scoping review is different from a systematic review.
It systematically studies the literature, quantitatively synthesizes the accomplishments and sums up the gaps in a particular field's literature rather than evaluating it to offer a solution to a particular question.
The approach is not substantially different from a systematic review, but an evaluation of methodological limitations or risk of bias of the evidence contained in a scoping review is not usually undertaken.
A scoping review is often conducted before a systematic review to examine the literature and determine pertinent research topics to be addressed by a subsequent systematic review.
Additionally, a scoping review does not seek to aggregate results via meta-analysis but rather maps the literature to determine themes, gaps, and patterns
Because ceRNAs and AD is relatively new, a scoping review was conducted to evaluate the extent, scope, and type of research effort in this field to bring attention to topics where further study is required.
Our results, however, should be interpreted with caution because we decided to perform a scoping review, which omits quality evaluations of the articles.
The most significant limitation of this study is most likely the dearth of evidence available for review.

CONCLUSION
LncRNA-associated ceRNA regulation produces biologically significant effects in various diseases so it can elucidate the pathogenic procedures and offer options for new therapies.
Thus, our efforts to understand different aspects of ceRNA regulatory mechanisms in AD pathogenesis provide new insights into the potential molecular targets, discover ceRNA-based biomarkers, and design ceRNA-based therapeutic applications.



FIGURE 1 |
FIGURE 1 | Competing endogenous RNA (ceRNA) model.
All transcriptome components, such as long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs), circRNAs, pseudogenes, and mRNAs that share common MRE, can function as ceRNAs and can co-regulate each other by sponging shared miRNAs.
Differentially expressed transcripts can lead to ceRNA dysregulation and biological alterations.
ceRNA.
(A) Down-regulation of ceRNAs increases the amounts of free miRNAs, thereby repressing target expression.
(B) Conversely, up-regulation of ceRNAs reduces free miRNAs abundance, thereby derepressing target expression.
Competing endogenous RNA; circRNA, circular RNA; lncRNA, long non-coding RNA; miRNA, microRNA; MRE, miRNA response element.



FIGURE 2 |
FIGURE 2 | Search strategy flow chart based on the PRISMA flow diagram.



Frontiers
FIGURE 3 | Validated lncRNA-associated ceRNA axes in Alzheimer's disease.
The loops were visualized using Cytoscape v3.8.0 software
Red represents the damaging role, and blue represents the protective role of competing endogenous RNA axes.
LncRNAs, miRNAs, and mRNAs are represented by hexagon, round rectangle, and ellipse, respectively.
LncRNA, long non-coding RNA; miRNA, microRNA.



FIGURE 4 |
FIGURE 4 | miR-107 regulates different competing endogenous RNA (ceRNA) loops.
Loop A (NEAT1 and targets of miR-107), loop B (SOX21-AS1 and targets of miR-107), and loop C (BACE1-AS and BACE1) were all regulated by miR-107.
Red represents the damaging role of ceRNA axes.
Lon non-coding RNAs, microRNAs, and mRNAs are represented by hexagon, round rectangle, and ellipse, respectively.



TABLE 1 |
Characteristics of studies included in the scoping review.The overexpression of BACE1-AS repressed the miRNAs that target BACE1 and increased Aβ levels.
Knockdown of BACE1-AS increased the expressions of these miRNAs and reduced the expression of BACE1.