Structure of amyloid-β (20-34) with Alzheimer’s-associated isomerization at Asp23 reveals a distinct protofilament interface
Amyloid-β (Aβ) harbors numerous posttranslational modifications (PTMs) that may affect Alzheimer's disease (AD) pathogenesis.
Here we present the 1.1 Å resolution MicroED structure of an Aβ 20-34 fibril with and without the disease-associated PTM, L-isoaspartate, at position 23 (L-isoAsp23).
Both wild-type and L-isoAsp23 protofilaments adopt β-helix-like folds with tightly packed cores, resembling the cores of full-length fibrillar Aβ structures, and both self-associate through two distinct interfaces.
One of these is a unique Aβ interface strengthened by the isoaspartyl modification.
Powder diffraction patterns suggest a similar structure may be adopted by protofilaments of an analogous segment containing the heritable Iowa mutation, Asp23Asn.
Consistent with its early onset phenotype in patients, Asp23Asn accelerates aggregation of Aβ 20-34, as does the L-isoAsp23 modification.
These structures suggest that the enhanced amyloidogenicity of the modified Aβ segments may also reduce the concentration required to achieve nucleation and therefore help spur the pathogenesis of AD.
A prevalent theory for the biochemical basis of Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the amyloid cascade hypothesis, which describes the aggregation of the Aβ peptide into oligomeric or fibrous structures that then trigger the formation of neurotoxic tau neurofibrillary tangles
The Aβ peptide is subject to a number of posttranslational modifications (PTMs) that may affect its aggregation in vivo
Specifically, Aβ phosphorylation (Ser8, Ser26), pyroglutamylation (Glu3, Glu11), nitration (Tyr10), and racemization/isomerization (Asp1, Asp7, Asp23, Ser26) have been shown in vitro to increase the aggregation propensity or neurotoxicity of the Aβ 1-42 peptide
Isomerized products of aspartic acid residues perturb protein structure by rerouting the peptide backbone through the side chain β-carbonyl.
This age-dependent modification introduces a methylene group within the polypeptide backbone and thus may have a significant effect on the structure of Aβ oligomers or fibrils
In addition, the isopeptide bond is resistant to degradation, potentially increasing the concentration of the isomerized Aβ form with respect to the native peptide.
Despite the presence of a repair enzyme in the brain, the L-isoaspartate (D-aspartate) O-methyltransferase (PCMT1) for L-isoaspartate, the isomerization of Aβ Asp1, Asp7, and Asp23 has been identified within AD brain parenchyma
In the cases of the heritable early-onset AD Iowa mutation (Asp23Asn), 25-65% of Asn23 residues have been shown to be isomerized in frontal lobe tissues
In vitro studies demonstrate that L-isoaspartate at Asp23 (L-isoAsp23) significantly accelerates Aβ 1-42 fibril formation, while L-isoAsp7 alone does not
Subsequent studies using peptides with multiple sites of isomerization showed only minor accelerated aggregation of the tri-isomerized species (1, 7, and 23), over the di-isomerized species (7 and 23)
Taken together, these results suggest that among the known sites of Asp isomerization in Aβ, L-isoAsp23 is primarily responsible for the increase in aggregation propensity in vitro.
Given the relevance of the isomerization of Asp23 to both sporadic and hereditary Iowa mutant forms of AD, we sought to discover the structural basis for its acceleration of fibril formation
As a platform for evaluating this modification, we chose synthetically generated 15-mer peptides encoding residues 20-34 of the Aβ peptide (Aβ
Challenged by the small size of crystals formed by this segment, we employed the cryo-electron microscopic (cryo-EM) method microcrystal electron diffraction (MicroED) to determine the structures.
The structures of Aβ
Our results suggest that the L-isoAsp23 residue facilitates the formation of a more stable form of this unique interface, promoting enhanced fiber formation and stability.
The length of these peptide segments, four residues longer than any other crystallographically determined amyloid structures
Six early-onset hereditary Alzheimer's mutations and two PTMs, including the isomerized Asp23, are localized in the Aβ 1-42 peptide to a region spanning six residues from Ala21 to Ser26 near the center of the peptide (Fig.
The amyloidforming propensity of segments in this region of Aβ was assessed using a computational method of predicting steric zippers by a threading protocol (ZipperDB
This method highlights a region of Aβ from Asn27 to Gly37 with high aggregation propensity near the site of Asp23 isomerization (Fig.
To characterize segments containing an isomerized Asp residue at position 23, we utilized synthetic 15 residue peptides spanning the Aβ residues 20-34 (Aβ

Results

Fibril formation and characterization of Aβ
To evaluate the effect of these variations on this 15-residue segment of Aβ, we assayed its capacity to form fibrils as measured by light scattering at 340 nm (Fig.
Both the peptide based on the Iowa mutant (Aβ
Fibers of the native peptide at this concentration (1.6 mM) were not observed by light scattering or EM.
We further discovered that only 34% of these Aβ
These data suggest that a majority of the L-isoAsp sites are occluded from the normal repair pathway once in this aggregate form.
To determine the ability of these modified forms to accelerate the aggregation of native peptide, seeding of 3.2 mM Aβ
The addition of each of the preformed aggregates caused significant acceleration in the onset of fiber formation. The la
gest shift occurred with the native Aβ 20-34 seed, followed by isomerized Aβ
Powder diffraction performed on the final aggregates revealed nearly identical sets of reflections, suggesting that the three seeds have similar enough structures to template wild-type (WT) Aβ
Fibrillization experiments of full-length Aβ 1-40 with and without the L-isoAsp modification at residue 23 reveal that the isomerized species displays a shorter lag time, consistent with the results obtained with the corresponding Aβ
Thus, while the isomerized form may be only a minor component of the in vivo Aβ population, it aggregates at a faster rate and can cross-seed the native form efficiently in vitro.
In contrast to the results obtained with 1.6 mM Aβ
Importantly, light scattering under these conditions for this native peptide is not detected until 3.5 h at the earliest, while shifts in light scattering for the 1.6 mM isomerized and mutated peptides were detected by 1.5 and 0.5 h, respectively (Fig.
Direct comparisons of formation rates were complicated by the insolubility of the Aβ 20-34, Asp23Asn peptide at high concentrations, but the delayed onset of even the 3.2 mM Aβ 20-34 incubation compared to the 1.6 mM Aβ
Fibrils of each segment were also investigated for their resistance to dissociation by dilution into increasing concentrations of sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) at 70 °C as measured by light scattering at 340 nm (Fig.
Fibrils of the native 15-residue Aβ segment appeared to partially dissolve upon dilution into the SDS-free buffer, although remaining aggregates were found by EM.
However, these were completely dissolved upon incubation with 1% SDS and higher concentrations (Fig.
In contrast, the isomerized peptide showed increased resistance to dissolution compared to the native peptide and still showed light scattering at a concentration of 2% SDS, though no more aggregates were seen at 5% SDS (Fig.
The fibrils of the Iowa mutant appeared to be largely unaffected by dilution even at the highest concentrations of SDS, with no significant changes observed in the levels of light scattering.
However, the aggregates in 5% SDS seen by EM appeared to be less bundled than at lower concentrations (Fig.
These results show that alterations of the structure at Asp23 strongly contribute to fibril formation and stability.
Crystallization and data collection of the Aβ
To understand the atomic structural basis for changes in the properties of the isomerized peptide, we sought to crystallize it in the amyloid state.
Vapor diffusion screening yielded no crystals large enough for analysis by conventional X-ray crystallography for either the Aβ
stead ordered nanocrystals of the native segment were obtained with continuous shaking at 1200 rpm, and ordered nanocrystals of the isomerized segment were generated with constant mixing using an acoustic resonant shaker
Nanocrystals obtained in varying buffer conditions were evaluated by morphology and diffraction via light and EM, respectively.
Those formed under the most promising conditions were used as seeds for additional rounds of batch crystal formation.
The optimal crystallization condition for the isomerized segment was 50 mM Tris, pH 7.6, 150 mM NaCl, and 1% dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) for 48 h with 2% seeds.
Crystals of the native segment grew in 50 mM Tris, pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, and 1% DMSO for 30 h without seeding.
Isomerized crystal trials produced densely bundled nanocrystals that could not be disaggregated by sonication and freeze-thawing.
However, washing crystal solutions with a 0.75% (w/v) solution of β-octyl glucoside in TBS, pH 7.6 yielded a higher number of single crystals for subsequent data collection. Dilut
on one to one in buffer yielded sufficient single crystals of the native segment for data collection (Fig.
ere collected on a Thermo Fisher TALOS Arctica microscope operating at 200 kV using a bottom mount CetaD CMOS detector.
Each Aβ
A 1.1-Å-resolution structure was obtained by direct methods for each segment as described in the "Methods" section; refinement statistics for the structures are shown in Table
MicroED structures of Aβ
e structures of both the Aβ
In cross-section, both protofilaments appear triangular owing to sharp turns (β-arches) at Gly25 and Gly29, which divide each chain into three short, straight segments (Fig.
When compared with the structures in the protein databank, the three-sided Aβ 20-34,iso- Asp23 structure aligns best with a β-helical antifreeze protein from Marinomonas primoryensis but lacks linker regions between each stacked chain.
We thus designate this amyloid motif as a β-helixlike turn (Supplementary Fig.
al core of both Aβ
The side chain of Asn27 further stabilizes the assembly by forming a ladder of hydrogen bonds (polar zipper) along the length of the protofilament
Each protofilament self-associates with neighboring protofilaments in the crystals through two distinct interfaces.
Interface A in both structures resembles a canonical steric zipper-with intersheet distances of 8.3 and 9.1 Å for the native and isomerized, respectively (Fig.
Both are lined by the hydrophobic side chains of Ala30, Ile32, and Leu34 that are related by 2 1 screw symmetry (steric zipper symmetry class 1
Interface A is completely dry owing to a high S c of 0.73 in the native and 0.62 in the isomerized.
This interface buries approximately 130 Å 2 per chain in the native form and 131 Å 2 in the isomerized form.
Unlike the dry steric zipper interface A, six water molecules line the second Aβ
Here the protofilaments are also related by a two-fold screw symmetry axis.
Nearest this central axis, Gly25 and Ser26 contact their symmetry partners across the interface, separated by only 3.5 Å. Furthest from the axis, Asp23 and Lys28 from opposing protofilaments form charged pairs.
In between each of these two regions is a solvent channel with the three ordered waters, yielding low shape complementarity (S c = 0.43) to this interface overall.
In contrast, in the Aβ
This interface is tightly mated over its entire surface with an average distance of 4.0 Å between the backbones.
Interface B buries approximately 139 and 122 Å 2 per chain for the native and isomerized forms, respectively.
The exclusion of water molecules from the L-isoAsp interface B likely results in a favorable gain in entropy for the structure, and there are attractive van der Waals forces along the tightly mated residues L-isoAsp23-Ser26.
Powder diffraction studies of Aβ peptides.
X-ray powder diffraction (XRD) patterns revealed that the fibrils of Aβ
The similarity among the powder diffraction patterns of Aβ
Thus this second interface packing may be achievable for a Aβ 20-34, Asp23Asn structure as shown in the L-isoAsp interface B model; however, the XRD patterns reveal that the native Aβ
Both the native and heritable Iowa mutant forms lack more defined peaks at 22.9, 24.7, 29.4, and 32.5, while both have more broad peaks at 30.9 Å (Fig.
These similarities between the Aβ
This model maintains the backbone hydrogen bond between Asn23 and Val24, the ordered core of the Aβ 20-34 structure, and allows for the additional polar zipper between stacked Asn23 residues.
The added network of hydrogen bonds along the asparagine side chain may explain in part the increased fiber formation rates and stability of Aβ
While the isomorphous powder diffraction patterns seen between Aβ
Importantly, the powder diffraction of full-length Aβ and the shorter peptide segments all display cross-β patterns with strong reflections at ~4.7 and 9-10 Å (Fig.
Thus we hypothesized that the Aβ
To visualize a potential full-length fiber with the Aβ
The resulting model demonstrates that the remainder of the residues of Aβ 1-42 can be accommodated in a favorable conformation with the isomerized segment as a core with interface A or B as the primary interface (Fig.

Comparison of segment structures to known Aβ structures.
The structures presented here are the longest segments of an amyloid peptide determined by crystallography-four residues longer than the previous amyloid spines determined by MicroED
This extension is significant due to the fact that, as the number of residues in a segment grows, the packing of idealized β-strands in a lattice becomes more difficult owing to the strain created by the natural twist of the β-sheet/strand.
This strain hypothesis is consistent with observations that, as the number of residues in an amyloid segment grows, the crystals that can be grown are correspondingly smaller
In the literature to date, the crystal structures of shorter segments of amyloid proteins have revealed that the dominant forces stabilizing protofilaments occur between different peptide chains
In the native and modified Aβ 20-34 structures, we are not only able to see interactions between protofilaments, such as the interfaces A and B, but we also see folding of the peptide to produce a β-helix-like Fig.
Representative single crystal electron diffraction pattern of Aβ
Left inset shows the diffracting crystal (lower left scale bar represents 1 μm).
Right inset shows light microscopic image of microcrystal sediment in a 1.6-mL microfuge tube (scale bar represents 3 mm).
b One layer of the Aβ
Interface distances are labeled (center circle indicates fibril axis).
Waters are represented by red crosses.
The 2F o -F c density is shown as a gray mesh at 2σ on the center protofilament.
The Asp23 residue is outlined in magenta and shown by the red arrow.
c Three layers of the Aβ
Left inset shows the diffracting crystal (lower left scale bar represents 1 μm).
Right inset shows a light microscopic image of microcrystal sediment in a 1.6-mL microfuge tube (scale bar represents 3 mm).
e One layer of the Aβ
Interface distances are labeled (center circle indicates fibril axis).
Waters are represented by red crosses.
The 2F o -F c density is shown as a gray mesh at 2σ on the center protofilament.
The L-isoAsp23 residue is outlined in magenta and shown by the red arrow.
f, Three layers of the Aβ
While not all full-length native structures contain β-arches, such as the peptide dimer structure shown in Schmidt et al.
The native Aβ
A tree representing the structural relationships between residues 20 and 34 of eight full-length Aβ structures and our Aβ
Four
These strong overlaps between our segment structure and other full-length Aβ structures support the validity of this segment as an atomic resolution structure of an Aβ core.
Importantly, in each of the full-length structures shown here, the putative interface B is accessible as a possible secondary nucleation site (Fig.
This interface is stabilized within our structures by the L-isoAsp modification, which mates more tightly between protofilaments than the L-Asp interface B and excludes waters.
Thus a full-length structural polymorph with this interface may be isolated more readily with the modification.
The increased structural complexity afforded by extending from 11 to 15 residues is appreciated best in comparing the crystal structures of Aβ
The four extra N-terminal residues in both native and modified Aβ
Despite Aβ 24-34 lacking these kinks, there is remarkable alignment between residues Gly29 to Leu 34 and interface A of the Aβ 20-34 crystals, yielding a total atom RMSD of 0.70 and 0.68 Å with the native and isomerized forms, respectively (Fig.
An inhibitor was previously developed to the human islet amyloid polypeptide (hIAPP) steric zipper interface analogous to this interface of the 5VOS Aβ 24-34 segment and was shown to be effective against fibril formation of both hIAPP and full-length Aβ
Given the striking alignment between our Aβ

Discussion
The typical age of onset for sporadic AD is after 65 years, suggesting that slow spontaneous processes such as the accumulation of age-dependent PTMs in Aβ may be contributing factors to aggregation and toxicity
The spontaneous isomerization of aspartate (isoAsp) has been identified at all three aspartate residues within the Aβ 1-42 peptide-1, 7, and 23.
However, immunohistochemical studies have shown that, while native Aβ and isoAsp7 Aβ are present in senile plaques from four nondisease patient controls, isoAsp23 Aβ was identified only in one of the four non-disease patient controls, as well as in the senile plaques from all AD patient samples, indicating that the isoAsp23 may be more specifically associated with AD pathology than native Aβ and the L-isoAsp7 form
This implied pathogenicity of isoAsp23 correlates with in vitro studies, which have demonstrated accelerated amyloid formation of the isoAsp23 Aβ 1-40 and 1-42 peptides compared to native Aβ
These results suggest that the change in the structure of Aβ accompanying isomerization at Asp23 may represent a route to the pathogenesis of AD.
In this work we present the 1.1 Å structures of segments spanning residues 20-34 of the Aβ peptide containing either an Asp or an isoAsp residue at site 23.
These 15-residue segments, crystallized at physiological pH, maintain a topology seen in the core of Aβ fibrils, a β-helix-like turn (Fig.
The length of these peptides facilitates their similar overall fold to previous WT Aβ fibril structures and demonstrates that amyloid cores are rigid and ordered enough to form crystals.
These structures reveal a previously unseen protofilament interface (B) involving residues Asp23-Lys28 in the native structure, and residues L-isoAsp23-Ser26 in the isomerized structure.
The native interface (L-Asp interface B) has low surface complementarity and contains six water molecules encased between charged residue pairs Asp23 and Lys28 on opposing sheets.
In contrast, the isomerized interface (L-isoAsp interface B) is a dry tightly mated sheet with high surface complementarity.
Our data suggest that the changes in the structure along this interface, namely, the exclusion of water molecules and van der Waals attractive forces associated with the high S c , are likely responsible in part for the increases in fiber formation rate and stability of the aggregate observed for the isomerized peptide.
The modified interface may provide a better site for secondary nucleation of amyloid formation resulting in the observed enhancements in aggregation.
However, it cannot be ruled out from the data presented here that the flexibility imparted by the methylene group of the L-isoAsp residue promotes amyloid formation by allowing an ordered nucleus for primary nucleation to form at a faster rate than the native peptide.
Our models of Asn23 in the Aβ
wever, the native Aβ
The hereditary Iowa mutant nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) structure (Fig.
It is clear that both the isomerization and Iowa mutation at residue 23 accelerate aggregation and increase stability of Aβ fibrils.
Our structures of Aβ
is analysis leads to the hypothesis that the Asp23 isomerization in vivo could lead to the accelerated formation of Aβ fibrils, thereby contributing to the aggregation of Aβ and AD pathology.
The hereditary Iowa mutation Asp23Asn may work in a similar manner either by forming the same fold as the isomerized Asp23 or, since Asn undergoes isomerization more rapidly relative to Asp, may also produce an isomerized Aβ with accelerated aggregation and increased stability.
The isomerized structure may also provide insight into the mechanisms behind the A21G, E22G, and E22Δ hereditary mutations that introduce flexibility into the same region of the backbone.
Importantly, we have also found that the only known repair pathway for L-isoAsp, the enzyme PCMT1, is unable to fully methylate and repair aggregates of Aβ
Recent structures of tau isolated from AD patients have revealed distinct structural polymorphs
Both the paired helical filaments and the straight filaments of tau display β-arches in their sheets, which is a feature also shared by the native and isomerized Aβ
This similarity not only suggests that our structure's β-helix-like turn may be a common amyloid motif but also identifies a potential crossseeding site between Aβ and the tau protein of AD.
This discovery emphasizes the need for atomic-resolution structures of diseaseassociated amyloid, as these core segments are critical for structure-based drug design and protein prediction efforts
These crystal structures can be used in conjunction with fulllength cryo-EM structures to obtain a high-resolution view of the interactions mediating amyloid fiber formation
High-resolution structures are also valuable when looking at the effect PTMs may have on amyloid structure as seen here and elsewhere
Therefore, the combination of increasing peptide length and high resolution makes the Aβ
Materials.
Aβ
Peptides were validated by electrospray ionization-mass spectrometry (ESI-MS) performed by Genscript.
Aβ 1-42 was purchased from Bachem Americas, Inc. (Catalog #, H-1368).
Aggregation of Aβ
Peptides were dissolved at 1.6 mM in 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.6, 150 mM NaCl (TBS) with 2.5% DMSO unless otherwise designated in the figure legend.
Peptides solutions were filtered through 0.22-μm cellulose acetate Costar Spin-X centrifuge tube filters (Corning Inc., product #8161).
Filtered peptide solutions in a final volume of 100 μL/well in a 96-well plate (Fisherbrand, 12565501) were read at 340 nm in a Varioskan plate reader at 37 °C with continuous shaking at 1200 rpm.
Readings were recorded every 15 min.
Fig.
hematic diagrams of residues 20-34 of previously solved Aβ structures
The structures most divergent from Aβ
Residues are colored according to general chemical properties (legend-top left)
Seeding of Aβ
Seeds were formed shaking continuously on an acoustic resonant shaker at 37 °C at a frequency setting of 37
Seeds of Aβ
All seeds were diluted to 200 μM stocks and 5 μL were added to 3.2 mM Aβ
Not all wells the unseeded 3.2 mM Aβ
1d).
Solutions were read in a 96-well plate at 340 nm in a Varioskan plate reader at 37 °C with continuous shaking at 1200 rpm.
Readings were recorded every 15 min.

Synthesis and purification of native
The purified Aβ (1-40) WT has an estimated purity of 93% by highperformance liquid chromatography (HPLC; Supplementary Figs.
Aβ
The peptide solution was then shaken continuously for 30 h at 1200 rpm at 37 °C.
Aβ
The filtered peptide solution was then shaken for 2 days on an acoustic resonant shaker at 37 °C at a frequency setting of 37
Four microliters of this suspension was then used to seed 196 μL of a second peptide solution (1.6 mM) as a 2% seed on the acoustic resonant shaker at 37 °C.
Crystals were obtained within 48 h.
The presence of crystals was verified by EM, using a standard holder, with no negative stain.
Crystals of the native and isomerized segments were on average ~77 and ~71 nm in width, respectively, and were typically >2 μm in length.
MicroED sample preparation.
Quantifoil R1.2/1.3 cryo-EM grids (Electron Microscopy Sciences, product # Q325CR1.3) were glow discharged for 30 s on either side, and 1.5 µL of a 1:1 dilution of Aβ
Twenty microliters of Aβ
These detergent-treated crystals were then spun down a second time.
Pelleted crystals were resuspended in 50 μL water.
A total of 1.5 μL of the washed crystal solution was then applied on both sides of a glow discharged Quantifoil R1.2/1.3 cryo-EM grid (Electron Microscopy Sciences, product # Q325CR1.3).
All grids were plunge frozen into supercooled ethane using a Vitrobot Mark 4 instrument.
MicroED data collection and processing.
MicroED data was collected in a manner similar to previous studies
Briefly, plunge-frozen grids were transferred to an FEI Talos Arctica electron microscope and diffraction data were collected using a bottom-mount CetaD 16M CMOS camera with a sensor size of 4096 × 4096 pixels, each 14 × 14 µm.
Diffraction patterns were recorded by operating the detector in continuous mode with 2 × 2 pixel binning, producing datasets with frames 2048 × 2048 pixels in size.
The exposure rate was set to <0.01 e -/A 2 /s.
The exposure time per frame was set at 3 s while the rotation speed was set to 0.3 deg/s resulting in a final oscillation range of 0.9 deg/exposure for the Aβ
his rotation rate was optimized to allow a maximum amount of reciprocal space to be sampled before crystal decay

5VOS
Aβ
The Aβ steric zipper structure with the lowest total atom root-mean-square deviation of all the short Aβ segment structures, PDB: 5VOS 32 (orange), is shown aligned with interface A of Aβ
ffraction movies typically covered a 50-140 deg wedge of reciprocal space and were taken of crystals randomly orientated on the grid with respect to the incident beam.
These crystals had a highly preferred orientation on the grid, resulting in a systematic missing cone and hence lower completeness along the c* axis; however, this did not preclude structure determination, with a high overall completeness of >80% for both structures (see Table
Structure determination.
Diffraction datasets were converted to SMV format to be compatible with the X-ray data processing software
Data were indexed and integrated using XDS
The parameters controlling the raster size during indexing and integration were optimized to reduce contributions by background and to exclude intensities that conform poorly to the lattice determined during indexing.
The number of diffraction images used per crystal was aggressively pruned to maximize I/σ.
The resulting outputs from XDS were sorted and merged in XSCALE.
To produce a final merged dataset, partial datasets were selected based on their effects on the Rmerge values.
In total, for the Aβ 20-34 structure, 10 partial datasets, containing 404 diffraction images, were merged to produce a final dataset with high completeness up to 1.1 Å.
An ab initio solution was achieved using SHELXD
In total, for the Aβ
The phases obtained from both Aβ
The resulting models were refined with Phenix 59 , using electron scattering form factors, against the measured data.
Powder diffraction sample preparation and data collection.
Designated aggregates of Aβ 1-42 and Aβ
Aggregates were spun at 20,000 × g for 5 min.
The pellet was resuspended in water and re-spun.
Pelleted fibrils were resuspended in 5 μL water and pipetted between two facing glass rods that were 2 mm apart and allowed to dry overnight at room temperature.
These glass rods with ordered fibrils were secured to a brass pin and mounted for diffraction at room temperature using 1.54 Å X-rays produced by a Rigaku FRE+ rotating anode generator equipped with an HTC imaging plate.
Patterns were collected at a distance of 200 mm and analyzed using the ADXV software package
SDS dissolution of aggregates.
Aggregates of Aβ
Both Aβ
The Aβ
spensions of Aβ
Measurements at 340 nm were recorded on a Nanodrop 2000 instrument.
Two microliters of each solution was analyzed by EM for remaining aggregates on glow discharged Formvar/Carbon 400 mesh, Copper grids (Ted Pella, Catalog # 01754-F).
Analysis of S a and surface S c in Aβ
The structures of Aβ
a was calculated as the average of the buried surface area per chain and the difference between the sum of the solvent accessible surface area of the two sheets and the solvent accessible surface area of the entire complex, divided by the total number of strands in both sheets using the CCP4 suite.
Modeling modified and full-length Aβ and RMSD calculations.
Residues 1-42 of Aβ were modeled onto the N-and C-termini of the Aβ
Distance matrices for RMSD relationships between Aβ
Reporting summary.
Further information on research design is available in the Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this article.



Fig. 1 L
Fig. 1 L-isoAsp in Aβ 20-34 accelerates fiber formation and can seed native segment.
a Sequence of human Aβ including known early-onset hereditary mutations and posttranslational modifications (pyrE pyroglutamate, P phosphorylation, NO nitration, Y:Y dityrosine crosslink, HexNAc glycosylation, MetO oxidation).
b ZipperDB 22 amyloid propensity profile for the human Aβ sequence with the Aβ 20-34 sequence highlighted in light blue.
c 1.6 mM of Aβ 20-34 , Aβ 20-34, Asp23Asn , and Aβ 20-34, isoAsp23 peptide aggregation was monitored by turbidity at 340 nm.
Each data point is shown as a round symbol, the solid line represents the mean value, and error bars represent SD of three replicates.
Transmission electron micrographs of aggregates are shown at the top left of the graph, scale bars represent 0.5 μm in each image.
d Aggregation of 3.2 mM Aβ 20-34 in 50 mM Tris, pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, and 1% dimethyl sulfoxide was monitored by turbidity at 340 nm alone (black lines) or with 10 µM pre-aggregated seeds of Aβ 20-34 (yellow), Aβ 20-34, isoAsp23 (blue), and Aβ 20-34, Asp23Asn (red).
Each line represents a replicate well.
Transmission electron micrographs of aggregates are shown at the top left of the graph; scale bars shown at the lower left represent 0.5 μm in each image.
Source data are provided as a Source Data file



Fig. 2
Fig. 2 Modified fibers have increased resistance to sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) disaggregation.
a Fiber stocks (Undiluted & Unheated initial points are two readings of the fiber stocks) were mixed 1:1 in buffer (0% SDS final) and increasing concentrations of SDS (1, 1.5, 2, 5% final) as described in the "Methods" section.
Each data point is shown as a round symbol, the solid line represents the mean value, and error bars represent the SD of three technical replicates.
b Transmission electron micrographs of disaggregated fibers, scale bars in the lower left represent 0.5 μm.
Source data are provided as a Source Data file



Fig. 4 A
Fig. 4 A putative model of the heritable Iowa mutation in interface B. a Fiber diffraction patterns of Aβ 1-42, Aβ
All fibers including Aβ 1-42 were prepared in 50 mM Tris, pH 7.6, 150 mM NaCl, and 1% dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), except Aβ
b Intensities of reflections from fiber diffraction of the segments were plotted against D spacing.
Radial intensity values are vertically staggered for visibility of peaks.
c From left to right, interface B down the fibril axis of Aβ
d A view perpendicular to the fibril axis of residues 23-24 of each structure.
Yellow dashed lines represent measured distances in Å between the amide carboxyl of residue 23 and the amide nitrogen of Val24 on the adjacent strand.
Source data are provided as a Source Data file



Fig. 5
Fig.5Model of Aβ
Model of Aβ 1-42, isoAsp23 centered on interface A. b Centered on interface B. Blue residues correspond to the crystal structure core (Aβ


Amyloid β (20-34) (D23 →isoD) Nonpolar Polar Glycine Acidic Basic Amyloid β (1-42) (5kk3) Amyloid β (1-42) (2nao) Amyloid β (1-40) (2Imn) Amyloid β (1-42) (2beg) Amyloid β (1-42) (2mxu) Amyloid β (1-40) (E22Δ Osaka mutant (2mvx) Amyloid β (1-40) (D23N lowa mutant (2mpz) Amyloid β (1-42) (5oqv) 10 Å



Aβ 1 - 40 .
The syntheses of Aβ(1-40) WT and Aβ (1-40) IsoAsp23 were completed in a CEM Liberty BlueTM Microwave Peptide Synthesizer.
The crude peptides were purified using an Interchim puri-Flash® 4125 Preparative Liquid Chromatography System.
Details of the syntheses and purifications are available in the Supplementary Methods section (Supplementary Tables



Table 1
Data collection and refinement statistics


IsoAsp23 has an estimated purity of 97% by HPLC (Supplementary Figs.
19 and 20) and was characterized by ESI-MS via direct injection into a Q-Exactive TM Plus Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap TM Mass Spectrometer (Supplementary Figs.
21 and 22).
The calculated average mass for C 194 H 295 N 53 O 58 S: 4327.148
g/mol, m/z calculated: [M+3H] 3+ = 1443.39;
[M+4H] 4+ = 1082.79;
[M+5H] 5+ = 866.44.
Observed: 1443.3912;
1082.7959;
866.4373.