The Multiplex Model of the Genetics of Alzheimer's disease
r o s ci e n c e 2 3 , p p . 3 1 1-3 2 2.

Early-onset AD and the amyloid cascade hypothesis
Early genetic findings of disease mutations in the amyloid precursor protein (APP) and presenilin genes
It posits that misprocessing of A and its deposition, as the primary causal event in AD pathogenesis.
Although these mutations explain less than 1% of AD, there is no doubt that this hypothesis has shaped mechanistic research and drug development for AD over the last 25 years
However, recent failures in clinical trials based on removing either soluble and/or insoluble A or targeting enzymes responsible for cleavage of APP have thrown doubt on the hypothesis
Several possibilities may explain this lack of success.
First, the hypothesis may only relate to rare forms of early-onset AD in which causal mutations are observed.
Second, the drug treatments may only be effective in the early stages of AD and not when the disease has already caused extensive neurodegeneration
Indeed, evidence suggests that the disease process begins up to 20 years before the first cognitive symptoms are observed
The hope is that amyloid-based drug trials on mutation carriers, recruited and treated presymptomatically, will inform our understanding here
Third, A and the associated amyloid plaques may be correlates of disease mechanisms that have the primary influence on disease development

Late-onset AD Genetics: Common Variation
Looking beyond AD mutations, genetic research has now produced extensive evidence that other genetic factors contribute to disease.
Common forms of late-onset AD (LOAD) have heritability estimates of 56-79%
Apolipoprotein E (APOE) on chromosome 19 was the first risk gene identified to associate with LOAD
The differential expression of the three major isoforms of ApoE (ε2, ε3 and ε4) is dependent on 2-point mutations (rs429358 and rs7412) within exon 4 of the gene.
An increased risk of AD is found in carriers of the ε4 allele, whereas the ε2 allele confers a small protective effect
Risk is dose dependent with a 3-fold increase in ε4 heterozyogotes (ApoE ε3/ε4), and a 15-fold increase in ε4 homozygotes (ApoE ε4/ε4).
Disease susceptibility is thought to result from a conformational change in ApoE that affects the proteins ability to bind ligands, including A and TREM2
ApoE ε4 is thought to be less efficient in mediating clearance of soluble and aggregated A
Perhaps the most successful approach to identify the genetic architecture of AD is the genome-wide association study (GWAS).
In 2009, the first novel genetic associations were identified using GWAS showing genome-wide association between AD and variants within the CLU, PICALM and CR1 loci
To date, over 40 risk loci (Figure1, Table
This success in identifying risk loci can be attributed to the extensive national and international collaboration seen within the field.
The initial Genetic and Environmental Risk in AD (GERAD) and European AD Initiative (EADI) GWAS
The four consortia subsequently joined together to form the International Genomics of Alzheimer's Project (IGAP) who, in 2013, identified a further 11 risk loci as novel genome-wide significant LOAD susceptibility loci
The IGAP GWAS results summary dataset is freely available to researchers (individual level data available upon request to the relevant consortia) and has been pivotal to multiple successive studies in a variety of research areas
Building upon IGAP (2013)
It is estimated that a substantial proportion (up to 60%)
Given the success in other diseases
Currently, studies using research based or clinically diagnosed AD number 33,692 cases and 56,077 controls
However, this 'missing heritability' may also be contributed to by rare/low frequency susceptibility genes.

Late-onset AD Genetics: Rare Variation
The primary technology for the detection of rare genetic variation (population frequency less than 1%) has been sequencing.
Next-generation sequencing (NGS) technologies in the form of whole-exome and whole-genome sequencing have identified protein-coding changes associated with disease
Interestingly, a number of rare disease-associated variants are identified in loci with common variants associated with LOAD
A number of additional loci have received attention as putative risk genes
Sequencing has historically proven to be prohibitively expensive for broad use in the field.
While the costs of such experiments are falling, future gene discovery may be increasingly tractable through enriching sequencing for the most heritable samples, including early onset and familial AD.
An alternate approach for rare variant detection is the use of exome-wide micro-arrays with variants selected from whole-exome sequencing.
This approach has limitations and can only test what is known.
Sims and colleagues used this approach in a powerful genome-wide study and found novel coding variants that influence AD and also showed that improved imputation panels now make GWAS more amenable to detecting rare variants
It is important to note that variants of small statistical effect can show substantive biological changes of disease relevance.
For example, Sims et al.
Systematic analysis of gene-gene interaction or epistasis in AD has been limited largely due to insufficient power and the massive multiple-testing burden inherent in genome-wide epistasis screening.
Initial studies have identified interaction between single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) that require replication
It is noteworthy that a small number of individuals live well beyond 75 years of age without any symptoms of cognitive decline despite possessing a large number of risk factors for AD.
These 'AD resilient' individuals may harbour protective genetic variation

Subphenotypes of disease
Genetic relationships have also been sought for disease phenotypes.
Aside from the core cognitive symptoms of disease, individuals with AD can develop a range of behavioural symptoms.
One area that has received attention in recent years is psychosis.
Psychotic symptoms are significantly more common in AD than the general population, affecting ∼40% of cases
They are associated with decreased quality of life for caregivers and patients
While no gene has, thus far, shown genome-wide significant association to psychosis in AD, evidence suggests that loci influencing psychosis in disease do so with a greater effect than generally seen in LOAD (excluding APOE)
Another area of study is rate of decline.
Early studies show that the genetic architecture for AD disease risk and rate of decline are distinct, with APOE showing no association with disease progression
Recent work investigating the impact of both single nucleotide AD associated variation and PRS (generated from the IGAP genome-wide significant hits) on rate of decline show association between both the PRS and the rare TREM2 p.(His47) variant
In fact, TREM2 p.(His47) carriers show a 23% faster rate of decline compared with non-variant carriers.

Comorbid Traits
Epidemiological observations of shared comorbidity in twin and family studies have long provided evidence for genetic correlations among diseases
The advent of GWAS allowed, for the first-time, systematic, cross phenotype analyses, with a significant number of traits sharing genetic architecture
Indeed, up to 4.6% of SNPs and 16.9% of genes have cross-phenotype associations
In dementia, initial work shows that AD and Parkinson's disease (PD) are genetically distinct
Work by the Brainstorm consortium, attempted to quantify the degree of overlap in genetic risk factors of 25 common brain disorders including AD,
While AD shows no significant evidence of correlation with psychiatric or neurological traits, strong negative correlations with college attainment, years of education and intelligence are observed.
AD and some aspects of cardiovascular disease also share common risk variants
We are now in the era where sufficiently powered genome-wide datasets are available to extend these sophisticated analyses to a range of phenotypes and sub-phenotypes seen to overlap traditional diagnostic boundaries.

Functional Genomics
The progression from genetic association to biological mechanism poses a significant challenge to exploit the findings of GWAS for the development of new therapies.
This is, in part, due to the location of the majority of risk variants to non-coding elements of the genome.
Combined with the polygenic nature of many diseases, it is clear that analytical approaches that combine multiple data types are required to assist in this translation.

Pathway Analysis
The identification of many risk genes suggests commonalities or convergence in function.
As with studies of gene expression, 'pathway' analyses methods have been developed for genomic association data that aim to identify, in general, an excess of association signal in sets of genes based on independent annotations (e.g.
ALIGATOR
Application of these methods to AD GWAS results has been particularly powerful in identifying disease relevant processes.
Indeed, these approaches provide some of the first convincing genetic evidence that the immune system contributes to AD risk (Figure
Other pathways implicated include endocytosis, cholesterol metabolism, ubiquitination and more recently, A clearance, and tau biology (Figure

Gene Expression
In parallel with the identification of risk variants by GWAS, the genetic control of gene expression has been investigated using studies of expression quantitative trait loci (eQTLs)
These studies aim to link specific variants with levels of gene expression, often across multiple tissue types and cellular contexts.
As such, they are a powerful tool for investigating the relationship between genetic disease risk and gene expression, and for linking non-coding variants to target genes.
Analytical advances such as Transcriptome Wide Association Studies
Although many resources for brain tissue exist
eQTL studies represent the gold standard for linking variants to gene expression changes but they require multiple donors with matched genotype and RNA expression measurements.
The sample sizes often range from 100s-1000s, making them expensive, and difficult to perform on hard to isolate cell types.
In contrast, gene expression measurements from a small number of samples have also proven useful in linking putative risk genes to specific cell types.
For AD, the integration of GWAS results with cell types identified from single-cell RNA-seq of brain tissue has highlighted microglia as the most enriched cell type

Tissue Specificity
In addition to identifying likely causal cell types, the application of single cell technologies to heterogeneous tissues will help resolve different cellular states.
This is particularly important for cells of the immune system, that are known to both rapidly respond to environmental cues and adopt long lasting 'activation' states.
Indeed, recent scRNA-seq profiling of microglia from mouse models of AD have identified a subset of 'disease-associated microglia'
Distinct microglia subsets, based on scRNA-seq, have also been identified during normal development and response to injury
Identification of the molecular and environmental regulators of these cells states open up new opportunities for the manipulation of microglia function.
Likewise, the influence of AD associated variants and genes on the transition between these states may have important consequences for understanding and treating the disease.
Beyond measurements of gene expression, single cell omics technologies are now capable of interrogating the chromatin landscape
The availability of increasingly high-resolution data on cell types of interest (e.g.
microglia) promises to refine these findings further
Finally, convergence between genes at genetic risk loci and molecular system level changes in aged or diseased brains suggest that AD risk genes operate in pathways relevant to pathology

Epigenome
The gene regulatory mechanisms underlying eQTLs and non-coding risk variants is often poorly understood, but our knowledge of the gene regulatory landscape (the epigenome) of cell types is rapidly expanding with the advent of genome-wide sequencing applications such as ChIP-seq.
These assays are able to provide genome-wide profiles of regulatory features based on histone modifications, the binding of individual transcription factors and biophysical properties, such as open chromatin.
Integration of these data types with GWAS findings can provide insights into risk mechanisms at individual loci, as well as identify cell types in which multiple loci operate.
For AD GWAS, integrative analyses with gene regulatory elements, have identified immune cell types, particularly monocytes, as likely effectors of risk at genome-wide significant loci
These approaches have been extended with methods such as stratified linkage disequilibrium (LD) score regression 103 to partition the heritability by gene regulatory elements from different cell types.
Again, SNPs located in immune cell types, including microglia, are the most enriched 101, 104, 105 .
Recently, these approaches have been used with gene regulatory information from human microglia 106 to increase the resolution from cell type to transcription factor cistromes.
Tansey et al. (2018)   identified an enrichment of genome-wide significant AD risk variants within particular microglial/macrophage motif containing DNA elements 105 , these sites were also enriched for AD common variant heritability.
Amongst these enriched cistromes were those targeted by PU.1 (encoded by SPI1) and MEF2 (encoded by MEF2C).
Interestingly, both SPI1 and MEF2C have been identified as AD risk, or onset modifying, loci
These findings suggest that common variant AD risk operates through transcriptional networks controlled by other AD risk genes that act as 'hubs'.
Such genes have also been referred to as 'peripheral master regulators' 108 .
Through co-ordinated regulation of other risk genes they could provide important avenues into trait biology.
It is noteworthy that the majority of human functional genomic data produced to date uses post-mortem tissue and therefore poorly captures dynamic changes in gene regulation (e.g. during development or response to an environmental challenge).
To address this, collections of induced pluripotent stem cells from genotyped individuals are being generated to explore the genetic control of context specific gene expression

Somatic mutations
Single cell technologies are also being used to probe heterogeneity in cellular DNA content and sequence.
These postzygotic changes are known as somatic mutations.
Studies of somatic mutation in the brain are in their infancy.
Nevertheless, they do occur in healthy brain tissue, resulting in mosaicism
Damaging mutations can therefore occur/accumulate in a subset of cells, resulting in restricted cell type consequences, including vulnerability to cell death 112 .
Whole genome approaches to single cell DNA content are largely restricted by the cost of obtaining sufficient sequencing coverage for reliable quantification.
However, targeted approaches have identified changes in APP copy number in cells from AD brain samples compared to controls 113 , as well as APP recombination events that result in the insertion of known disease causing APP mutations into the genome of individual neurons 114 .
The general importance of this type of mutation is still to be quantified and it should be noted that they do not contribute to the observed heritability of the AD.
They are therefore likely to operate in conjunction with common variant risk factors.

Risk prediction
The finding that LOAD is the result of the combined influences of multiple genetic loci or polygenic effects, and that these effects can be captured in one algorithm, has enormous utility in the field.
Whilst APOE has an established role as the strongest single genetic risk factor for sporadic AD, given it is neither necessary nor sufficient to cause disease.
The effect estimates of the other associated risk loci range from an odds ratio of approximately 1.1-2.1 for each disease associated allele, meaning their individual contribution to disease risk is relatively small.
However, the cumulative effect of these susceptibility loci can be captured by PRS analysis.
This takes advantage of all relevant association information and thus captures most of the variance of GWAS studies, including true genetic risk loci that are hypothesised to lie below the genome-wide significance threshold.
This approach is supported by the observed increase in explained heritability when weak effect loci are also considered
Early work showed that AD is a polygenic disease (P=4.9×10 -2
)
).
Escott-Price and colleagues created the Cardiff PRS (CPRS) from 17,008 AD cases and 37,154 controls taken from the IGAP dataset
Using an association cut-off of P<0.5 they produced an algorithm based upon over 87,000 variants, incorporating age and sex, which showed an area under the curve (AUC) of 0.78, thus this CPRS could correctly classify cases and controls 78% of the time.
The predictive utility of CPRS has now been validated in a number of independent datasets 117 .
With the predictive accuracy of disease status reaching 84% in neuropathologically confirmed AD samples, 82% in the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) cohort (Figure
Notably, those with a CPRS two standard deviations above the mean (extreme PRS) showed highly accurate prediction of AD diagnosis (Figure
Thus, the CPRS could identify those at high risk early in life.
This facility could transform our understanding of the first stages of disease and also provide a means to develop high and low-risk stem cell models to explore disease mechanisms in human systems.
Interestingly, the ADNI dataset also showed that APOE was just as good as CPRS at detecting individuals with amyloid plaque deposition.
However, only 62% of these went on to develop AD and CPRS and extreme CPRS still remained the best predictor of amyloid deposition within AD.
The genetic heritability explained by APOE and the genome-wide significant loci is not high (h 2 =5.1%)
The CPRS
These AUC estimates are very close to the maximum prediction accuracy which can be achieved based upon SNP-based heritability captured by the whole genome 118 and can be used for AD risk prediction with more confidence.
If used in the general population the majority of people will gain little from CPRS, however those with extreme CPRS will have a high degree of confidence that they will either develop or never develop AD.
Current research is exploring the utility of using CPRS calculated for the biological pathways implicated in AD, enabling participant stratification for preventative and clinical trials of relevant targets, and potentially for precision medicine.
Initial work, assessing the cumulative risk of 20 AD associated risk variants categorised by biological pathway suggests that the clinical model of early AD pathology is explained by different biological pathways
In particular, the endocytosis pathway shows relevance in subjects with mild cognitive impairment
Development of full PRS models for each AD implicated pathway are now needed to improve the quality of pathway-specific genetic scores that could feed into future research, including clinical trials of drugs targeting relevant pathways.
Targeted drugs will also need pathway-specific biomarkers and drug trials which possibly move away from full disease measures to define outcomes, with the consequence of a likely reduction in timescale and cost.
Identifying individuals at high or low risk of developing AD will also allow better understanding of the earliest signs of disease, develop appropriate biomarkers through imaging and bio-sampling and help test for relationships with environmental factors which may interact with genetics to delay or exasperate disease mechanisms.
Neuroimaging approaches offer insight into AD pathogenesis in vivo, demonstrating how the combined impact of AD risk genes are associated with altered brain physiology
Accumulating evidence suggests that AD GWAS risk alleles influence brain structure and function in asymptomatic individuals.
Early studies showcase the potential roles of individual GWAS AD SNPs on brain structure and function
These studies have primarily focused on putatively AD susceptible brain regions, such as medial temporal lobe macrostructure (hippocampal formation; amygdala) and other in vivo biomarkers of AD pathology such as Aβ42 deposition
Collectively these observations suggest that an excessive burden of AD risk alleles may compromise brain health in individual's years before the onset of clinical symptoms.
These hypotheses are further supported by large GWAS of neuroimaging data, demonstrating genetic correlations between AD and markers of brain health such as subcortical brain volumes
However, the extended impact of AD PRS on the brain remains relatively unknown.
This is largely due to constraints such as multisequence, multi-modal imaging in large sample sizes and constraints intrinsic to harmonization procedures 136 .
Initial evidence from a middle aged, population cohort (UK Biobank) does suggest relationships between CPRS and surface areas of the frontal and cingulate cortex, and specifically the anterior cingulate for the microglia-mediated innate immunity PRS

Genetic modelling and disease mechanisms
Establishing animal and cellular models of AD mutations or functional coding variants is now routine.
Several transgenic mouse models have been developed utilizing AD mutations in APP and the presenilin genes, but none recapitulate the full profile of the disease as seen in humans
However, they do show accumulation of A peptide in the brain and cognitive deficits, but rarely show AD associated cell death or tau dysfunction (unless tau mutations are also introduced).
It is noteworthy that rodents do not naturally develop AD, and human based manipulations are necessary to produce AD relevant changes.
If, as the genetics of common forms of AD suggests, the disease requires multiple components to change in order to trigger AD, then it is not surprising that transgenic models of single AD components do not reflect full blown AD.
Transgenic models of APOE are less numerous, but have shown interesting results when crossed with APP transgenic models
APOE is shown to influence A aggregation and clearance from the brain, although other outcomes are now the focus of new research.
Indeed, as many more APOE models are being produced (MODEL-AD) we will soon see a much broader capture of the AD phenotype.
Drosophila models of AD have also been the source of much research and benefit from the speed at which results, and manipulations can be achieved.
Drosophila have low redundancy which simplifies the analysis of gene disruption.
Early work focussed on APP and tau models, but lately the models are facilitating the screening of GWAS susceptibility genes 139 .
Stem cell derived models of AD genetic risk variants have, understandably, focused on rare variants, particularly those that cause familial AD.
Lines derived from AD cases carrying PSEN1 and PSEN2 mutations were the first to be investigated 140 , followed by APP duplications 141 .
More recently, TREM2 variant and null lines have been developed and used to investigate AD related microglial function
Common variant stem cell models have generally lagged behind with only a small number of target models developed, most notably APOE
Only three loci identified exclusively by GWAS, PICALM 146 , CLU
Specifically, that of constructing induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSC) from individuals with high or low PRS for AD or its component pathways, thereby creating resources which capture multiple disease factors in the same cells.
However, there are challenges with these approaches.
Individuals selected for high PRS will vary in other ways which could influence outcomes.
Accordingly, studies involving many different iPSC donors will be needed to overcome this natural variation and identify the disease relevant consistencies.
Thus, future research could combine information from models of specific known AD variants of APP, presenilin, APOE, TREM2, PLCG2, ABI3 for example, with the outcomes of high and low PRS models to triangulate onto disease relevant mechanisms (Figure
The multiplex model of AD (see below) also has implications for what are tested as outcome measures.
Recent advances in cellular approaches such as single cell RNA-seq, 3D cultures, organoids of neurons, glia and epithelial cells, and the ability to transplant cells into the brains of mice to form chimeras, will undoubtedly expand our knowledge of disease mechanisms underpinning the AD model.

The Multiplex Model of Alzheimer's disease
The multiplex model builds from evidence we observe from genetic, and for that matter, environmental studies of AD.
Genetics show us that AD is a multi-component disease, and that deficits combine additively to trigger disease.
There is strong evidence for changes in immunity/inflammation, Aβ production and clearance, endocytosis, ubiquitination, cholesterol and tau processing.
Epidemiological research (not reviewed here) also highlights a significant vascular component to AD development (Figure
The multiplex model assumes that changes to some, or all, of these model components act together to trigger a disease cascade, which ultimately results in the cell/synaptic loss observed in AD.
AD could be triggered by a number of different patterns of deficits that may differ between tissues and over the course of disease development.
Indeed, in time we may characterize AD as several diseases.
However, until we understand the specific biological mechanisms which underlie the model, it is beneficial to continue viewing AD as a single disease.
As we learn more, we will refine the model.
For example, we already have evidence that endocytosis could affect Aβ clearance 146 .
However, with current knowledge there is simply not enough evidence to show that they pinpoint the same disease mechanism.
It is also assumed that the liability threshold for disease could result from extreme loading on a limited number of components or indeed, moderate vulnerability across multiple components.
Future treatments and preventative approaches may focus on one or multiple AD components, which may also change over the course of disease development.
The multiplex model of AD encourages future research to focus on a broader range of outcome measures to understand disease mechanisms, identify several new targets for treatments and may ultimately change the way we diagnose AD.

Conclusions
It is now well-established that drug trials based upon evidence with a genetic basis are more likely to succeed 151 .
Thus, using this well-replicated robust biological evidence for future research into disease mechanisms and therapies seems the logical step.
A variety of genomewide approaches have already identified over 40 loci associated with AD at a genome-wide level of significance.
Pathway and functional genomic analyses have shown strong patterns of susceptibility implicating immunity, endocytosis, cholesterol transport, ubiquitination, A and tau processing and have highlighted several "hub" genes of significant influence, using most of the information from GWAS data, accounting for up to 50% of heritability, PRS can be calculated which show around 80% accuracy in predicting AD in a variety of independent datasets.
Moreover, selecting individuals at the polygenic extremes achieves sensitivities of over 90% for the detection of AD cases.
Applications of overall and AD pathway specific CPRS to future research could include selection/enrichment for clinical trials and precision medicine, understanding of early disease development through risk related epidemiology, selective biomarkers and iPSC models of PRS risk for single cell, multi-tissue/organoid and whole system chimeric analyses.
Combine this with the growing multi-omic approaches now available and it is clear our understanding of this complex disease will advance at a considerable pace.
Genetic studies have changed our perception of AD, highlighting its multifactorial complexity.
Building on these findings, together with the role of vascular factors implicated by epidemiology, we propose the multiplex model as a way of integrating evidence from several domains to support our understanding of Alzheimer's disease.


and PLCG2, have been used for stem cell models.
Of these, only the PICALM and PLCG2 models are based on a likely causal non-coding variant, highlighting the challenges of moving from GWAS association to a cell model.
These models have begun to identify important AD relevant biology.
For example, neurons deficient in CLU protein are resistant to neurodegeneration in response to Aβ risk and altered PICLAM expression manifests as disrupted transcytosis of Aβ by endothelial cells.
Models of APOE mediated risk have identified multiple dysregulated processes across different stem cell derived cell types e.g.
diminished neurotrophic function of APOE ε4/ε4 astrocytes 144 , differential activation of neuronal APP transcription and Aβ-synthesis by glial APOE isoforms 148 , and altered Aβ aggregates and hyperphosphorylation of tau in organoids. 145
However, none as they stand recapitulate all aspects of the human AD 149 .



Figure 2 :
Figure 2: Multiplex model of Alzheimer's disease.
Pathways associated in the etiology of LOAD by genetic analysis, represented as cogs within the cell, the cell types implicated in disease, and the environment cues thought to directly affect biology.



Figure 3 :
Figure 3: Part a) Illustrates accuracy of classifying AD and Control status (Area under the Curve) using APOE, Full, and Extreme Polygenic Risk Scores classed as two standard deviations above or below the mean across clinically diagnosed (Genetic and Environmental Risk for AD (GERAD) 21 ), neuroimaging positive (Alzheimer's disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI): adni.loni.usc.edu) and neuropathically confirmed cohorts 120 .
Part b) Illustrates the distribution of Polygenic Risk Scores and highlights two standard deviations above or below the mean indicated by the red lines.
The white histogram bars represent controls and the grey histogram bars represent AD cases.
The separate normal distributions for AD cases and controls are depicted by the black lines.



Figure 4 .
Figure 4. Schematic demonstrating the complexity and methods to discovering Alzheimer's disease mechanisms.
Identifying and understanding the mechanisms involved in Alzheimer's disease etiology and pathology paves the way for new therapeutic targets and new therapies.