Genetic meta-analysis of diagnosed Alzheimer’s disease identifies new risk loci and implicates Aβ, tau, immunity and lipid processing
familial-proxy of Alzheimer's or dementia.
Fine-mapping of the human leukocyte antigen (HLA) region confirms the neurological and immune-mediated disease haplotype HLA-DR15 as a risk factor for LOAD.
Pathway analysis implicates immunity, lipid metabolism, tau binding proteins, and amyloid precursor protein (APP) metabolism, showing that genetic variants affecting APP and Aβ processing are associated not only with early-onset autosomal dominant Alzheimer's disease but also with LOAD.
Analyses of risk genes and pathways show enrichment for rare variants (P = 1.32 × 10 -7 ), indicating that additional rare variants remain to be identified.
We also identify important genetic correlations between LOAD and traits such as family history of dementia and education.
Our previous work identified 19 genome-wide-significant common variant signals in addition to APOE that influence risk for LOAD (onset age > 65 years)
These signals, combined with 'subthreshold' common variant associations, account for ~31% of the genetic variance of LOAD
To search for additional signals, we conducted a GWAS meta-analysis of non-Hispanic Whites (NHW) by using a larger Stage 1 discovery sample (17 new, 46 total datasets; n = 21,982 cases, 41,944 cognitively normal controls) from our group, the International Genomics of Alzheimer's Project (IGAP) (composed of four consortia: Alzheimer Disease Genetics Consortium (ADGC), Cohorts for Heart and Aging Research in Genomic Epidemiology Consortium (CHARGE), The European Alzheimer's Disease Initiative (EADI), and Genetic and Environmental Risk in AD/Defining Genetic, Polygenic and Environmental Risk for Alzheimer's Disease Consortium (GERAD/ PERADES) (Supplementary Tables
To sample both common and rare variants (minor allele frequency (MAF) ≥ 0.01 and MAF < 0.01, respectively), we imputed the discovery datasets by using a 1,000 Genomes reference panel consisting of 36,648,992 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), 1,380,736 insertions/deletions, and 13,805 structural variants.
After quality control, 9,456,058 common variants and 2,024,574 rare variants were selected for analysis.
Genotype dosages were analyzed within each dataset, and then combined with meta-analysis (Supplementary Fig.

Results

Meta-analysis of Alzheimer's disease GWAS.
The Stage 1 discovery meta-analysis produced 12 loci with genome-wide significance (P ≤ 5 × 10 -8 ) (Table
Genomic inflation factors (λ) were slightly inflated (λ median = 1.05; λ regression = 1.09; see Supplementary Figure
The observed heritability (h 2 ) of LOAD was estimated at 0.071 (0.011) using LDSC.
Stage 1 meta-analysis was first followed by Stage 2, using the I-select chip we previously developed in Lambert et al.
The final sample was 35,274 clinical and autopsy-documented Alzheimer's disease cases and 59,163 controls.
Meta-analysis of Stages 1 and 2 produced 21 genome-wide-significant associations (P ≤ 5 × 10 -8 ) (Table
Three other signals were not initially described in the initial IGAP GWAS: the rare R47H TREM2 coding variant previously reported by others
g.11720308A>G), which was recently identified as a potential genome-wide-significant Alzheimer's disease risk locus in several studies
g.61538148G>A) (Supplementary Figs.
In addition, seven signals showed suggestive association with P < 5 × 10 -7 (closest genes: ADAM10, ADAMTS1, ADAMTS20, IQCK, MIR142/ TSPOAP1-AS1, NDUFAF6, and SPPL2A) (Supplementary Figs.
5-11).
Stage 3A and meta-analysis of all three stages for these nine signals (excluding the TREM2 signal; see Supplementary Table
In addition to ECHDC3, this included four new genome-wide Alzheimer's disease risk signals at IQCK, ADAMTS1, ACE, and ADAM10 (Table
ACE and ADAM10 were previously reported as Alzheimer's disease candidate genes
A recent GWAS using family history of Alzheimer's disease or dementia as a proxy
Two of the four other signals approached genome-wide significance: miR142/TSPOAP1-AS1 (P = 5.3 × 10 -8 ) and NDUFAF6 (P = 9.2 × 10 -8 ) (Table
Stage 3A also extended the analysis of two loci (NME8 and MEF2C) that were previously genome-wide significant in our 2013 meta-analysis.
These loci were not genome-wide significant in our current study and will deserve further investigation (NME8: P = 2.7 × 10 -7 ; MEF2C: P = 9.1 × 10 -8 ; Supplementary Figs.
Of note, GCTA COJO
We also selected 33 variants from Stage 1 (28 common and 5 rare variants in loci not well captured in the I-select chip; see Methods for full selection criteria) for genotyping in Stage 3B (including populations of Stage 2 and Stage 3A).
We nominally replicated a rare variant (rs71618613; NC_000005.9:
g.29005985A>C) within an intergenic region near SUCLG2P4 (MAF = 0.01; P = 6.8 × 10 -3 ; combined P = 3.3 × 10 -7 ) and replicated a low-frequency variant in the TREM2 region (rs114812713; NC_000006.11:
g.41034000G>C, MAF = 0.03, P = 7.2 × 10 -3 ; combined P = 2.1 × 10 -13 ) in the gene OARD1 that may represent an independent signal according to our conditional analysis (Table
In addition, rs62039712 (NC_000016.9:
g.79355857G>A) in the WWOX locus reached genome-wide significance (P = 3.7 × 10 -8 ), and rs35868327 (NC_000005.9:
g.52665230T>A) in the FST locus reached suggestive significance (P = 2.6 × 10 -7 ) (Table
16 and 17).
WWOX may play a role in Alzheimer's disease through its interaction with tau
Since both rs62039712 and rs35868327 were only analyzed in a restricted number of samples, these loci deserve further attention.

Candidate gene prioritization at genome-wide loci.
To evaluate the biological significance and attempt to identify the underlying risk genes for the newly identified genome-wide signals (IQCK, ACE, ADAM10, ADAMTS1, and WWOX) and those found previously, we pursued five strategies: (1) annotation and genebased testing for deleterious coding, loss-of-function (LOF) and splicing variants; (2) expression-quantitative trait loci (eQTL) analyses; (3) evaluation of transcriptomic expression in LOAD clinical traits (correlation with the BRAAK stage
For the 24 signals reported here, other evidence indicates that APOE
37-40 ), BIN1 (ref.
), TREM2 (refs.
), SORL1 (refs.
), ADAM10 (ref.
), SPI1 (ref.
45 ), and CR1 (ref.
) are the true Alzheimer's disease risk gene, although there is a possibility that multiple risk genes exist in these regions
Because many GWAS loci are intergenic, and the closest gene to the sentinel variant may not be the actual risk gene, in these analyses we considered all protein-coding genes within ±500 kilobases (kb) of the sentinel variant linkage disequilibrium (LD) regions (r 2 ≥ 0.5) for each locus as a candidate Alzheimer's disease gene (n = 400 genes) (Supplementary Table
We first annotated all sentinel variants for each locus and variants in LD (r 2 > 0.7) with these variants in a search for deleterious coding, LOF or splicing variants.
In line with findings that most causal variants for complex disease are non-coding
Potentially deleterious variants include the rare R47H missense variant in TREM2, common missense variants in CR1, SPI1, MS4A2, and IQCK, and a relatively common (MAF = 0.16) splicing variant in IQCK.
Using results of a large whole-exome-sequencing study conducted in the ADGC and CHARGE sample
0]
For eQTL analyses, we searched existing eQTL databases and studies for cis-acting eQTLs in a prioritized set of variants (n = 1,873) with suggestive significance or in LD with the sentinel variant in each locus.
Of these variants, 71-99% have regulatory potential when considering all tissues according to RegulomeDB 56 and HaploReg
Focusing specifically on eQTLs, we found overlapping cis-acting eQTLs for 153 of the 400 protein-coding genes, with 136 eQTL-controlled genes in Alzheimer's disease-relevant tissues (that is, brain and blood/immune cell types; see Methods for details) (Supplementary Tables
For our newly identified loci, there were significant eQTLs in Alzheimer's disease-relevant tissue for ADAM10, FAM63B, and SLTM (in the ADAM10 locus); ADAMTS1 (ADAMTS1 locus); and ACSM1, ANKS4B, C16orf62, GDE1, GPRC5B, IQCK, and KNOP1 (IQCK locus).
There were no eQTLs in Alzheimer's diseaserelevant tissues in the WWOX or ACE locus, although several eQTLs for PSMC5 in coronary artery tissue were found for the ACE locus.
eQTLs for genes in previously identified loci include BIN1 (BIN1 locus), INPP5D (INPP5D locus), CD2AP (CD2AP locus), and SLC24A4 (SLC24A4 locus).
Co-localization analysis confirmed evidence of a shared causal variant affecting expression and disease risk in 66 genes over 20 loci, including 31 genes over 13 loci in LOAD-relevant tissue (see Supplementary Table
Genes implicated include CR1 (CR1 locus), ABCA7 (ABCA7 loci), BIN1 (BIN1 locus), SPI1 and MYBPC3 (SPI1 locus), MS4A2, MS4A6A, and MS4A4A (MS4A2 locus), KNOP1 (IQCK locus), and HLA-DRB1 (HLA-DRB1 locus) (Supplementary Table
To study the differential expression of genes in brains of patients with Alzheimer's disease versus controls, we used 13 expression studies
We found that 58% of the 400 proteincoding genes within the genome-wide loci had evidence of differential expression in at least one study (Supplementary Table
Additional comparisons to Alzheimer's disease related gene expression sets revealed that 62 genes were correlated with pathogenic stage (BRAAK) in at least one brain tissue
Finally, 38 genes were present in a set of 1,054 genes preferentially expressed in aged microglial cells, a gene set shown to be enriched for Alzheimer's disease genes (P = 4.1 × 10 -5 )
We also annotated our list of genes with brain RNA-seq data, which showed that 80% were expressed in at least one type of brain cell, and the genes were most highly expressed in fetal astrocytes (26%), followed by microglia/ macrophages (15.8%), neurons (14.8%), astrocytes (11.5%), and oligodendrocytes (6.5%).
When not considering fetal astrocytes, mature astrocytes (21%), and microglial cells (20.3%), the resident macrophage cells of the brain thought to play a key role in the pathologic immune response in LOAD
We conducted pathway analyses (MAGMA
For common variants, we detected four function clusters including (1) APP metabolism/Aβ formation (regulation of Aβ formation: P = 4.56 × 10 -7 and regulation of APP catabolic process: P = 3.54 × 10 -6 ); (2) tau protein binding (P = 3.19 × 10 -5 ); (3) lipid metabolism (four pathways including protein-lipid complex assembly: P = 1.45 × 10 -7 ); and (4) immune response (P = 6.32 × 10 -5 ) (Table
Enrichment of the four clusters remained after removal of genes in the APOE region.
When APOE-region genes and genes near genome-wide-significant genes were removed, tau showed moderate association (P = 0.027), and lipid metabolism and immune-related pathways showed strong associations (P < 0.001) (Supplementary Table
Genes driving these enrichments (that is, having a gene-wide P < 0.05) included SCNA, a Parkinson's risk gene that encodes alpha-synuclein, the main component of Lewy bodies, whch may play a role in tauopathies
While no pathways were significantly enriched for rare variants, lipid and Aβ pathways did reach nominal significance in rarevariant-only analyses.
Importantly, we also observed a highly significant correlation between common and rare pathway gene results (P = 1.32 × 10 -7 ), suggesting that risk Alzheimer's disease genes and pathways are enriched for rare variants.
In fact, 50 different genes within tau, lipid, immunity and Aβ pathways showed nominal rare-variant driven associations (P < 0.05) with LOAD.
To further explore the APP/Aβ pathway enrichment, we analyzed a comprehensive set of 335 APP metabolism genes
We observed significant enrichment of this gene set in common variants (P = 2.27 × 10 -4 ; P = 3.19 × 10 -4 excluding APOE), with both ADAM10 and ACE nominally significant drivers of this result (Table
Several 'sub-pathways' were also significantly enriched in the common variants, including 'clearance and degradation of Aβ', and 'aggregation of Aβ', along with its subcategory 'microglia', the latter supporting microglial cells suspected role in response to Aβ in LOAD
Nominal enrichment for risk from rare variants was found for the pathway 'aggregation of Aβ: chaperone' and 23 of the 335 genes.
To identify candidate genes for our novel loci, we combined results from our five prioritization strategies in a priority ranking method similar to that of Fritsche et al.
ADAM10 was the top ranked gene of the 11 genes within the ADAM10 locus.
ADAM10, the most important α-secretase in the brain, is a component of the non-amyloidogenic pathway of APP metabolism
), an innate immunity receptor expressed selectively in microglia.
Overexpression of ADAM10 in mouse models can halt Aβ production and subsequent aggregation
In addition, two rare ADAM10 alterations segregating with disease in LOAD families increased Aβ plaque load in 'Alzheimer-like' mice, with diminished α-secretase activity from the alterations probably the causal mechanism
For the IQCK signal, which is also an obesity locus
Of the 22 genes in the ACE locus, PSMC5, a key regulator of major histocompatibility complex (MHC)
However, these studies yielded inconsistent results
While ACE was not prioritized, it should not be rejected as a candidate gene, as its expression in Alzheimer's disease brain tissue is associated with Aβ load and Alzheimer's disease severity
Furthermore, cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) levels of the angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) are associated with Aβ levels
Finally, angiotensin II, a product of ACE function, mediates a number of neuropathological processes in Alzheimer's disease
Another novel genome-wide locus reported here, ADAMTS1, is within 665 kb of APP on chromosome 21.
Of three genes at this locus, our analyses nominate ADAMTS1 as the likely risk gene, although we cannot rule out that this signal is a regulatory element for APP.
ADAMTS1 is elevated in Down's syndrome with neurodegeneration and Alzheimer's disease
Finally, WWOX and MAF, which surround an intergenic signal in an obesity associated locus
WWOX has been implicated in several neurological phenotypes
Intriguingly, treatment of mice with its binding partner restores memory deficits
For previously reported loci, applying the same prioritization approach highlights several genes, as described in Fig.
Pathway, tissue and disease trait enrichment analyses support the utility of our prioritization method, as the 53 prioritized genes with a score ≥ 5 are (1) enriched in substantially more Alzheimer's disease-relevant pathways, processes and dementia-related traits; (2) enriched in candidate Alzheimer's disease cell types such as monocytes (adjusted P = 9.0 × 10 -6 ) and macrophages (adjusted P = 5.6 × 10 -3 ); and (3) more strongly associated with dementiarelated traits and Alzheimer's disease-relevant pathways (Supplementary Table
To further investigate the cell types and tissues the prioritized genes are expressed in, we performed differentially expressed gene (DEG) set enrichment analysis of the prioritized genes by using GTEx 102 tissues, and we identified significant differential expression in several potentially relevant Alzheimer's disease tissues including immune-related tissues (upregulation in blood and spleen), obesity-related tissue (upregulation in adipose), heart tissues (upregulation in left ventricle and atrial appendage), and brain tissues (dowregulation in cortex, cerebellum, hippo-campus, basal ganglia, and amygdala).
Furthermore, the 53 genes are overexpressed in 'adolescence' and 'young adult' brain tissues in BrainSpan 103 , a transcriptomic atlas of the developing human brain, which is consistent with accumulating evidence suggesting Alzheimer's disease may start decades before the onset of disease

Fine-mapping of the HLA region.
The above approach prioritized HLA-DRB1 as the top candidate gene in the MHC locus, known for its complex genetic organization and highly polymorphic nature (see Supplementary Fig.
Previous analyses in the ADGC (5,728 Alzheimer's disease cases and 5,653 controls) have linked both HLA class I and II haplotypes with Alzheimer's disease risk
In order to further investigate this locus in a much larger sample, we used a robust imputation method and fine-mapping association analysis of alleles and haplotypes of HLA class I and II genes in 14,776 cases and 23,047 controls from our datasets (Supplementary Table
We found risk effects of HLA-DQA1 * 01:02 (FDR P = 0.014), HLA-DRB1 * 15:01 (FDR P = 0.083), and HLA-DQB1 * 06:02 (FDR P = 0.010) (Supplementary Table
After conditioning on the sentinel meta-analysis variant in this region (rs78738018), association signals were lost for the three alleles, suggesting that the signal observed at the variant level is due to the association of these three alleles.
These alleles form the HLA-DQA1 * 01:02~HLA-DQB1 * 06:02~HLA-DRB1 * 15:01 (DR15) haplotype, which is also associated with Alzheimer's disease in our sample (FDR P = 0.013) (Supplementary Table
Taken together, these results suggest a central role of the DR15 haplotype in Alzheimer's disease risk, a finding originally discovered in a small study in the Tunisian population
Intriguingly, the DR15 haplotype and its component alleles also associate with protection against diabetes 108 , a high risk for multiple sclerosis 109,110, and risk or protective effects with many other immune-mediated diseases (Supplementary Table
Moreover, the associated diseases include a large number of traits queried from an HLA-specific Phewas 111 , including neurological diseases (for example, Parkinson's disease
Two additional alleles, HLA-DQA1 * 03:01 and HLA-DQB1 * 03:02, belonging to another haplotype, show a protective effect on Alzheimer's disease, but their signal was lost after conditioning on HLA-DQA1 * 01:02, and the HLA-DQA1 * 03:01~HLA-DQB1 * 03:02 haplotype is not associated with Alzheimer's disease (FDR P = 0.651).

Genetic correlations with Alzheimer's disease.
As described above, several of our genome-wide loci have potentially interesting co-morbid or pleiotropic associations with traits that may be relevant to the pathology of Alzheimer's disease.
To investigate the extent of LOAD's shared genetic architecture with other traits, we performed LD-score regression to estimate the genetic correlation between LOAD and 792 human diseases, traits and behaviors
The common variant genetic architecture of LOAD was positively correlated with a maternal family history of Alzheimer's disease/dementia (r g for the genetic correlation of two traits = 0.81; FDR P = 2.79 × 10 -7 ), similar to the Marioni et al. family proxy analyses
There is substantial overlap between these estimates, as the Marioni et al. analyses include the 2013 IGAP summary statistics and employed the same UK Biobank variable that we used for r g estimates with maternal history of dementia.
We also find significant negative correlation between Alzheimer's disease and multiple measures of educational attainment (for example, college completion, r g = -0.24;
years of schooling, r g range = -0.19 to -0.24; cognitive scores, r g = -0.24
and -0.25) (FDR P < 0.05), supporting the theory that a greater cognitive reserve could help protect against development of LOAD 117 .
The extent to which socioeconomic, environmental, or cultural factors contribute to the correlation between educational attainment and risk for Alzheimer's disease is unknown, but research shows dementia risk to be associated with lower socioeconomic status, independently of education status
We also found negative correlations at P < 0.05 with multiple measures of cardiovascular health (that is, family history of high blood pressure and heart disease and vascular/heart problems) and diabetes (that is, fasting proinsulin, basal metabolic rate and fasting insulin), supporting previous research suggesting that use of blood pressure and diabetic medications may reduce the risk of Alzheimer's disease 120 .
In fact, use of blood pressure medication does show a negative genetic correlation with Alzheimer's disease in our study (r g = -0.12;
P = 0.035), although this result does not survive FDR correction.
These and other top results from this analysis (for example, body mass index, height; see Supplementary Table

Discussion
In conclusion, our work identifies five new genome-wide associations for LOAD and shows that GWAS data combined with high-quality imputation panels can reveal rare disease risk variants (for example, TREM2).
The enrichment of rare variants in pathways associated with Alzheimer's disease indicates that additional rare variants remain to be identified, and larger samples and better imputation panels will facilitate identifying them.
While these rare variants may not contribute substantially to the predictive value of genetic findings, they will enhance the understanding of disease mechanisms and potential drug targets.
Discovery of the risk genes at genome-wide loci remains challenging, but we demonstrate that converging evidence from existing and new analyses can prioritize risk genes.
We also show that APP metabolism is associated with not only early-onset Alzheimer's disease but also LOAD, suggesting that therapies developed by studying early-onset families could also be applicable to the more common late-onset form of the disease.
Pathway analysis showing that tau is involved in LOAD supports recent evidence that tau may play an early pathological role in Alzheimer's disease
Finally, our fine-mapping analyses of HLA and genetic correlation results point to LOAD's shared genetic architecture with many immunemediated and cognitive traits, suggesting that research and interventions that elucidate mechanisms behind these relationships could also yield fruitful therapeutic strategies for LOAD.

Methods

Samples.
All Stage 1 meta-analysis samples are from four consortia: ADGC, CHARGE, EADI, and GERAD/PERADES.
Summary demographics of all 46 case-control studies from the four consortia are described in Supplementary Tables
Written informed consent was obtained from study participants or, for those with substantial cognitive impairment, from a caregiver, legal guardian, or other proxy.
Study protocols for all cohorts were reviewed and approved by the appropriate institutional review boards.
Further details of all cohorts can be found in the Supplementary Note.

Pre-imputation genotype chip quality control.
Standard quality control was performed on all datasets individually, including exclusion of individuals with low call rate, individuals with a high degree of relatedness, and variants with low call rate.
Individuals with non-European ancestry according to principal components analysis of ancestry-informative markers were excluded from the further analysis.

Imputation and pre-analysis quality control.
Following genotype chip quality control, each dataset was phased and imputed to the 1,000 Genomes Project (phase 1 integrated release 3, March 2012) 132 using SHAPEIT/ IMPUTE2
All reference population haplotypes were used for the imputation, as this method improves accuracy of imputation for low-frequency variants 137 .
Common variants (MAF ≥ 0.01%) with an r 2 or an information measure <0.40 from MaCH and IMPUTE2 were excluded from further analyses.
Rare variants (MAF < 0.01%) with a 'global' weighted imputation quality score of <0.70 were also excluded from analyses.
This score was calculated by weighting each variant's MACH/IMPUTE2 imputation quality score by study sample size and combining these weighted scores for use as a post-analysis filter.
We also required the presence of each variant in 30% of cases and 30% of controls across all datasets.

Stage 1 association analysis and meta-analysis.
Stage 1 single variant-based association analysis employed an additive genotype model adjusting for age (defined as age-at-onset for cases and age-at-last exam for controls), sex, and population substructure using principal components 138 .
The score test was implemented on all case-control datasets.
This test is optimal for meta-analysis of rare variants due to its balance between power and control of type 1 error 139 .
Family datasets were tested using GWAF
Variants with regression coefficient |β| > 5 or P value equal to 0 or 1 were excluded from further analysis.
Within-study results for Stage 1 were meta-analyzed in METAL 141 using an inversevariance-based model with genomic control.
The meta-analysis was split into two separate analyses according to the study sample size, with all studies being included in the analysis of common variants (MAF ≥ 0.01), and only studies with a total sample size of 400 or greater being included in the rare-variant (MAF < 0.01) analysis.
See the Supplementary Note for further details of the meta-analyses methods.

Stage 1 summary statistics quality control and analysis.
Genomic inflation was calculated for lambda (λ) in the GenABEL package
In addition, we performed LDSC regression via LD Hub v.1.9.0 (refs.
) to calculate the LD score regression intercept and derive a heritability estimate for the inverse-variance weighted meta-analysis summary statistics.
The APOE region (Chr19:45,116,911-46,318,605) was removed to calculate the intercept.
Removal of the APOE region reduced the heritability estimate slightly from 0.071 (s.e.m. = 0.011) to 0.0637 (s.e.m. = 0.009).
LDSC was also employed via the LD Hub web server to obtain genetic correlation estimates (rg)
UK BioBank is a large long-term study (~500,000 volunteers aged 40 to 69) begun in 2006 in the United Kingdom, which is investigating the contributions of genetic predisposition and environmental exposure (that is, nutrition, lifestyle, and medications) to the development of disease.
While volunteers in the study are generally healthier than the overall United Kingdom population 144 , its large size and comprehensive data collection make the study an invaluable resource for researchers looking to interrogate the combined effect of genetics and environmental factors on disease.
Before analyses in LD Hub, we removed all SNPs with extremely large effect sizes including the MHC (Chr6:26,000,000-34,000,000) and APOE region, as outliers can overly influence the regression analyses.
A total of 1,180,989 variants were used in the correlation analyses.
Statistical significance of the genetic correlations was estimated using 5% Benjamini -Hochberg FDR corrected P values.
GCTA COJO
See URLs for methods for creation of the 'ADGC reference dataset'.

Stage 2 and 3 genotyping, quality control, and analysis.
Stage 2 genotypes were determined for 8,362 cases and 10,483 controls (Supplementary Table
1,633 variants from the I-select chip were located in the 24 genome-wide loci (defined by the LD blocks of the sentinel variants; excluding the APOE region), with an average of 68 variants per locus.
The most well-covered loci were HLA-DRB1, M24A2, and PICALM (763, 202, and 156 variants available, respectively); the least were MAF, ADAMTS1, and INPP5D (0, 4, and 5 variants, respectively).
Stage 3A was conducted for variants selected as novel loci from meta-analyses of Stages 1 and 2 with P < 5 × 10 -7 (9 variants) and variants that were previously significant (P < 5 × 10 -8 ) that were not genome-wide significant after Stages 1 and 2 (2 variants) (4,930 cases and 6,736 controls) (Supplementary Table
Variants were genotyped using Taqman.
Stage 3B, which combined samples from Stage 2 and 3A, included variants with MAF < 0.05 and P < 1 × 10 -5 or variants with MAF ≥ 0.05 and P < 5 × 10 -6 in novel loci not covered in the 2013 iSelect genotyping 1 (13,292 cases and 17,219 controls) (Supplementary Table
See the Supplementary Note for details on selection of variants for Stage 3B follow-up genotyping.
For Stages 1, 2, and 3, samples did not overlap.
Per-sample quality checks for genetic sex and relatedness were performed in PLINK.
Sex mismatches or individuals showing a high degree of relatedness (identical-by-descent value of 0.98 or greater) were removed from the analysis.
A panel of ancestry-informative markers was used to perform principal component analysis with SMARTPCA from EIGENSOFT 4.2 software 145 , and individuals with non-European ancestry were excluded.
Variant quality control was also performed separately in each country including removal of variants missing in more than 10% of individuals, having a Hardy-Weinberg P value in controls lower than 1 × 10 -6 or a P value for missingness between cases and controls lower than 1 × 10 -6 .
Per-study analysis for Stage 2 and Stage 3 followed the same analysis procedures described for Stage 1, except for covariate adjustments per cohort, where all analyses were adjusted on sex and age apart from the Italian, Swedish, and Gr@ACE cohorts, which were also adjusted for principal components.
Within-study results were meta-analyzed in METAL 141 using an inverse-variance-based model.

Characterization of gene(s) and non-coding features in associated loci.
We determined the base-pair boundaries of the search space for potential gene(s) and noncoding features in each of the 24 associated loci (excluding APOE) using the 'proxy search' mechanism in LDLink 146 .
LDLink uses 1,000 genomes genotypes to calculate LD for a selected population; in our case all five European populations were selected (population codes CEU, TSI, FIN, GBR, and IBS).
The boundaries for all variants in LD (r 2 ≥ 0.5) with the top associated variant from the Stage 2 meta-analysis for each region ±500 kb of the ends of the LD blocks (as eQTL controlled genes are typically less than 500 kb from their controlling variant 147 ) were input into the UCSC genome browser's 'Table
The average size of the LD blocks was 123 kb.

Identification of potentially causal coding or splicing variants.
To identify deleterious coding or splicing variants that may represent causal variants for our genome-wide loci, we first used SNIPA 150 to identify variants in high LD (defined as r 2 > 0.7) with the sentinel variants of the 24 genome-wide loci (excluding APOE) (n = 1,073).
The sentinel variants were defined as the variants with the lowest P in each genome-wide locus.
We then used Ensembl VEP 151 for annotation of the set of sentinel variants and their proxies.
We used BLOSUM62 (ref.
), SIFT 153 , Polyphen-2 (ref.
), CADD 155 , Condel 156 , MPC 157 and Eigen 158 to predict the pathogenicity of protein-altering exonic variants and MaxEntScan to predict the splicing potential of variants.
Splicing variants with high splicing potential according to MaxEntScan 159 and protein-coding variants predicted to be deleterious by two or more programs were considered to be potentially causal variants for a locus.
It should be noted that while we do include rare variants from imputation in our analyses, we may be missing many rare causal variants in this study.

Identification of genes with rare-variant burden via gene-based testing.
We used the summary statistics results of a large whole-exome sequencing (WES) study of LOAD, the Alzheimer's Disease Sequencing Project (ADSP) case-control study (n = 5,740 LOAD cases and 5,096 cognitively normal controls of NHW ancestry) to identify genes within our genome-wide loci that may contribute to the association signal through rare deleterious coding, splicing or LOF variants.
The individuals in the ADSP study largely overlap with individuals in the ADGC and CHARGE cohorts included in our Stage 1 metaanalysis.
All 400 protein-coding genes within our LD-defined genome-wide loci were annotated with the gene-based results from this study, and the results were corrected using a 1% FDR P as a cutoff for significance.
Complete details of the analysis can be found in Bis et al.

Regulatory variant and eQTL analysis.
To identify potential functional risk variants and genes at each associated locus, we first annotated a list of prioritized variants from the 24 associated loci (excluding APOE) (n = 1,873).
This variant list combined variants in LD with the sentinel variants (r 2 ≥ 0.5) using INFERNO
We then identified variants with regulatory potential in this set of variants using four programs that incorporate various annotations to identify likely regulatory variants: RegulomeDB 56 , HaploReg v.4.1 (refs.
), GWAS4D
We used the ChromHMM (core 15-state model) as 'source epigenomes' for the HaploReg analyses.
We used immune (Monocytes-CD14 + , GM12878 lymphoblastoid, HSMM myoblast) and brain (NH-A astroctyes) for the Ensembl Regulatory Build analyses.
We then used the list of 1,873 prioritized variants to search for genes functionally linked via eQTLs in LOAD relevant tissues including various brain and blood tissue types, including all immune-related cell types, most specifically myeloid cells (macrophages and monocytes) and B-lymphoid cells, which are cell types implicated in LOAD and neurodegeneration by a number of recent studies
While their specificity may be lower for identifying Alzheimer's disease risk eQTLs, we included whole blood cell studies in our Alzheimer's disease-relevant tissue class due to their high correlation of eQTLs with Alzheimer's disease-relevant tissues (70% with brain 164 ; 51-70% for monocytes and lymphoblastoid cell lines 165 ) and their large sample sizes that allow for increased discovery power.
See the Supplementary Note for details on the eQTL databases and studies searched, and Supplementary Table
Formal co-localization testing of our summary Stage 1 results was conducted using (1) COLOC 166 via INFERNO and (2) Summary Mendelian Randomization (SMR)-Heidi analysis
The approximate Bayes factor (ABF), which was used to assess significance in the INFERNO COLOC analysis, is a summary measure that provides an alternative to the P value for the identification of associations as significant.
SMR-Heidi analysis, which employs a heterogeneity test (HEIDI test) to distinguish pleiotropy or causality (a single genetic variant affecting both gene expression and the trait) from linkage (two distinct genetic variants in LD, one affecting gene expression and one affecting trait), was also employed for co-localization analysis.
Genes located less than 1 Mb from the GWAS sentinel variants that pass a 5% Benjamini-Hochberg FDR-corrected SMR P-value significance threshold and a HEIDI P-value > 0.05 threshold were considered significant.
The Westra eQTL 168 summary data and Consortium for the Architecture of Gene Expression (CAGE) eQTL summary data were used for analysis.
These datasets, conducted in whole blood, are large eQTL studies (Westra: discovery phase n = 5,311, replication phase n = 2,775; CAGE: n = 2,765), and while there is some overlap in samples between the two datasets, CAGE provides finer coverage.
The ADGC reference panel dataset referenced above for GCTA COJO analysis was used for LD calculations.

Human brain gene expression analyses.
We also evaluated gene expression of all candidate genes in the associated loci (see Supplementary Table
AlzBase includes transcription data from brain and blood from aging, non-dementia, mild cognitive impairment, early-stage Alzheimer's disease, and late-stage Alzheimer's disease.
See ALZBase (see URLs) for a complete list of studies included in the search.
Correlation values for the BRAAK stage expression were taken from the Zhang et al.

Pathway analysis.
Pathway analyses were performed with MAGMA
Adaptive permutation was used to produce an empirical P value and an FDR-corrected q value.
Gene sets used in the analyses were from GO 169,170, KEGG 171,172, REACTOME 173,174 , BIOCARTA, and MGI 175 pathways.
Analyses were restricted to gene sets containing between 10 and 500 genes, a total of 10,861 sets.
Variants were restricted to common variants (MAF ≥ 0.01) and rare variants (MAF < 0.01) only for each analysis, and separate analyses for each model included and excluded the APOE region.
Analyses were also performed after removal of all genome-wide-significant genes.
Primary analyses used a 35-kb upstream/10-kb downstream window around each gene in order to capture potential regulatory variants for each gene, while secondary analyses were run using a 0-kb window 176 .
To test for significant correlation between common and rarevariant gene results, we performed a gene property analysis in MAGMA, regressing the gene-wide association statistics from rare variants on the corresponding statistics from common variants, correcting for LD between variants and genes using the ADGC reference panel.
The Aβ-centered network pathway analysis used a curated list of 32 Aβ-related gene sets and all 335 genes combined (see Campion et al.
The combined dataset of 28,730 unrelated individuals from the ADGC referenced in the GCTA COJO analysis was used as a reference set for LD calculations in these analyses.

Validation of prioritization method.
Evaluation of the prioritization of the risk genes in genome-wide loci was done using STRING 177 , and Jensen Diseases 178 , Jensen Tissues 179 , dbGAP gene sets, and the ARCHS4 180 resource via the EnrichR 181 tool.
We evaluated both the 400 genes set list and a list of 53 genes with priority score ≥ 5 (adding in APOE to both lists as the top gene in the APOE locus) using the standard settings for both STRING and EnrichR.
We used the q value, which is the adjusted P value using the Benjamini-Hochberg FDR method with a 5% cutoff for correction for multiple hypotheses testing.
We also performed 'differentially expressed gene (DEG)' sets analysis via FUMA 182 .
These analyses were performed in order to assess whether our 53 prioritized genes were significantly differentially expressed in certain GTEx v.7 (ref.
; 30 general tissues and 53 specific tissues) or BrainSpan tissues (11 tissue developmental periods with distinct DEG sets ranging from early prenatal to middle adulthood)
FUMA defines DEG sets by calculating a two-sided t-test per tissue versus all remaining tissue types or developmental periods.
Genes with a Bonferonnicorrected P < 0.05 and absolute log(fold change) ≥ 0.58 were considered DEGs.
Input genes were tested against each of the DEG sets using the hypergeometric test.
Significant enrichment was defined by Bonferonni-corrected P ≤ 0.05.

HLA region analysis.
Non-familial datasets from the ADGC, EADI and GERAD consortiums were used for HLA analysis.
After imputation quality control, a total of 14,776 cases and 23,047 controls were available for analysis (Supplementary Table
Within ADGC, GenADA, ROSMAP, TARC1, TGEN2, and a subset of the UMCWRMSSM datasets were not imputed as Affymetrix genotyping arrays are not supported by the imputation software.
Imputation of HLA alleles.-Two-field
resolution HLA alleles were imputed using the R package HIBAG v.
This software uses specific combinations of variants to predict HLA alleles.
Alleles with an imputation posterior probability lower than 0.5 were considered as undetermined as recommended by HIBAG developers.
HLA-A, HLA-B, HLA-C class I genes, and HLA-DPB1, HLA-DQA1, HLA-DQB1, and HLA-DRB1 class II genes were imputed.
Individuals with more than two undetermined HLA alleles were excluded.
Statistical analysis.-All
analyses were performed in R 184 .
Associations of HLA alleles with disease were tested using logistic regressions, adjusting for age, sex, and principal components as specified above for single variant association analysis.
Only HLA alleles with a frequency higher than 1% were analyzed.
Haplotype estimations and association analyses with disease were performed using the 'haplo.glm'
function from the haplo.stats
R package 185 with age, sex, and principal components as covariates.
Analysis was performed on two-loci and three-loci haplotypes of HLA-DQA1, HLA-DQB1, and HLA-DRB1 genes.
Haplotypes with a frequency below 1% were excluded from the analysis.
Considering the high LD in the MHC region, only haplotypes predicted with posterior probabilities higher than 0.2 were considered for analysis.
Meta-analysis P values were computed using an inverse-variance-based model as implemented in METAL software 141 .
For haplotypes analysis, only individuals with no undetermined HLA alleles and only datasets with more than 100 cases or controls were included.
Adjustments on HLA significant variants and HLA alleles were performed by introducing the variant or alleles as covariates in the regression models.
Adjusted P values were computed using the FDR method and the R 'p.adjust' function, and applied to the meta-analysis P values.
The FDR threshold was set to 10%.

Reporting Summary.
Further information on research design is available in the Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this article.

Table 3 |
Significant pathways (q value ≤ 0.05) from MAGMA pathway analysis for common and rare variant subsets Activation of immune response a Significant after FDR correction (q value ≤ 0.05).

Table 4 |
Top results of pathway analysis of the Aβ-centered biological network from Campion et al.



Fig. 1 |
Fig. 1 |.
Manhattan plot of meta-analysis of stage 1, 2, and 3 results for genome-wide association with Alzheimer's disease.
The threshold for genomewide significance (P < 5 × 10 -8 ) is indicated by the red line, while the blue line represents the suggestive threshold (P < 1 × 10 -5 ).
Loci previously identified by the Lambert et al. 1 IGAP GWAS are shown in blue and newly associated loci are shown in red.
Loci are named for the closest gene to the sentinel variant for each locus.
Diamonds represent variants with the smallest P values for each genome-wide locus.



Fig. 2 |
Fig. 2 |.
Top prioritized genes of 400 genes located in genome-wide-significant loci.
The criteria include: (1) deleterious coding, LOF or splicing variant in the gene; (2) significant gene-based tests; (3) expression in a tissue relevant to Alzheimer's disease (astrocytes, neurons, microglia/macrophages, oligodendrocytes); (4) a HuMi microglialenriched gene; (5) having an eQTL effect on the gene in any tissue, in Alzheimer's diseaserelevant tissue, and/ or a co-localized eQTL; (6) being involved in a biological pathway enriched in Alzheimer's disease (from the current study); (7) expression correlated with the BRAAK stage; and (8) differential expression in a 1 + Alzheimer's disease (AD) study.
Novel genome-wide loci from the current study are listed first, followed by known genomewide loci.
Each category is assigned an equal weight of 1, with the priority score equaling the sum of all categories.
Colored fields indicate that the gene meets the criteria.
Genes with a priority score ≥ 4 are listed for each locus.
If no gene reached a score of ≥ 5 in a locus, then the top ranked gene(s) is listed.



( 1 P
nine variants after excluding TREM2) (Stage 3A) or (2) a MAF < 0.05 and Stage not covered on the Stage 2 custom array (Stage 3B). a SNPs showing the best level of association after meta-analysis of Stages 1, 2 and 3. b Build 37, assembly hg19.
c Based on position of top SNP in reference to the RefSeq assembly.
d Variant is annotated to both gene features.
e Average in the discovery sample.



12



35 a
for full results) Category Subcategory No. of genes Common variant P 0 kb Common variant P 35-10 kb Rare variant P 0 kb Rare variant P Significant after Bonferroni correction for 33 pathway sets tested.
Nat Genet.
Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 March 01.



Table 1 |
Summary of discovery Stage 1, Stage 2 and overall meta-analyses results for identified loci reaching genome-wide significance after Stages 1 and 2



Stage 1 discovery (n = 63,926) Stage 2 (n = 18,845) Overall stage 1 + stage 2 (n = 82,771) Variant a chr.



Previous genome-wide-significant loci not reaching significance Nat



Table 2 |
Summary of discovery Stage 1, Stage 2, Stage 3 (A and B), and overall meta-analysis results of potential novel lociNovel loci were defined as loci not reported in Lambert et al.1