Fluid and PET biomarkers for amyloid pathology in Alzheimer's Disease
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is characterized by amyloid plaques and tau pathology (neurofibrillary tangles and neuropil threads).
Amyloid plaques are primarily composed of aggregated and oligomeric β-amyloid (Aβ) peptides ending at position 42 (Aβ42).
The development of fluid and PET biomarkers for Alzheimer's disease (AD), has allowed for detection of A pathology in vivo and marks a major advancement in understanding the role of A in Alzheimer's disease (AD).
In the recent National Institute on Aging and Alzheimer's Association (NIA-AA) Research Framework, AD is defined by the underlying pathology as measured in patients during life by biomarkers (Jack et al., 2018), while clinical symptoms are used for staging of the disease.
Therefore, sensitive, specific and robust biomarkers to identify brain amyloidosis are central in AD research.
Here, we discuss fluid and PET biomarkers for Aβ and their application.
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is characterized by amyloid plaques and tau pathology (neurofibrillary tangles and neuropil threads), together with neuronal and synaptic degeneration, in cortical areas of the brain (Scheltens et al., 2016).
Amyloid plaques are primarily composed of aggregated and oligomeric β-amyloid (Aβ) peptides ending at position 42 (Aβ42).
In the recent National Institute on Aging and Alzheimer's Association (NIA-AA) Research Framework, AD is defined by the underlying pathology as measured in patients during life by biomarkers (Jack et al., 2018), while clinical symptoms (or absence thereof) is used for staging of the disease.
Following these criteria, brain amyloidosis is a key factor in AD, since it is the earliest change found in the Alzheimer's continuum, and the presence of biomarker signs of amyloidosis, with normal cognition and often, normal tau and neurodegeneration biomarkers, allows for a diagnosis of preclinical Alzheimer's pathologic change (or preclinical AD).
Therefore, sensitive, specific and robust methods to identify brain amyloidosis are central in AD research,
drug development and clinical management.
In addition to early diagnosis, amyloid biomarkers can be used to monitor treatment effects of drugs targeting Aβ, and are essential in clinical and epidemiological studies exploring AD pathophysiology and factors related to both genetic and environmental risk.
AD research and development currently benefit from the availability of both fluid and positron emission tomography (PET) biomarkers to assess brain amyloidosis.
Fluid and PET biomarkers provide overlapping, but partially independent, information that can be used to test hypotheses and make inferences about the neurophysiology underlying the initiation of amyloid deposition and disease progression.

Fluid biomarkers for Aβ pathology
The best-established fluid biomarkers for cerebral Aβ pathology are the 42 amino acid form of Aβ (Aβ42) and the Aβ42/40 ratio when measured in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)
Numerous studies have consistently shown a decrease in CSF Aβ42 in the dementia stage of AD, with meta-analysis results across 131 studies showing a mean reduction to 56% of levels found in cognitively unimpaired elderly
The pathophysiological mechanism underlying the reduction of CSF Aβ42 in AD cases is probably that this hydrophobic Aβ peptide aggregates and forms plaques in the brain, lowering the amounts being secreted to the CSF
The CSF also contains numerous other Aβ species (especially C-terminally truncated variants), with Aβ40 being most abundant
Since Aβ40 does not self-aggregate into plaques in the same way Aβ42 does, the use of a CSF Aβ42/40 ratio is a strategy to identify AD-related reductions in brain Aβ42 deposition with improved diagnostic performance compared to the use of CSF Aβ42 by itself
Importantly, CSF Aβ42 and the Aβ42/40 ratio are also effective for identifying brain amyloidosis in the earliest symptomatic stages of AD.
An initial study paper reported that MCI patients who later progressed to AD dementia had low Aβ42 at baseline
A larger study with an extended (4-7 years) clinical follow-up period also showed a very high diagnostic accuracy of CSF Aβ42 to predict progression from MCI to AD dementia, and to differentiate prodromal AD cases from those having stable MCI and those developing other neurodegenerative dementias
This finding was validated in several large multi-center studies
It has been difficult to establish robust blood biomarkers for Aβ pathology in AD.
Aβ peptides can be measured in plasma but historically the correlation with AD and/or cerebral βamyloidosis has been absent or weak (statistically significant but clinically meaningless)
It has been suggested that plasma Aβ concentrations are potentially influenced by production in platelets and other extra-cerebral tissues and these plasma Aβ measurements have been confounded by matrix effects from plasma proteins
Furthermore, the vast majority of peripheral Aβ studies have concentrated on plasma/serum and do not take into account peptides bound to plasma proteins and blood cells.
However, this view is now starting to change.
Recent mass spectrometric studies suggest that a ratio of a certain APP fragment (APP669-711) to Aβ42 or Aβ42/Aβ40 identifies Aβ-positive individuals with high sensitivity and specificity
Nakamura and colleagues have described 91% and 87% accuracy for predicting 11C-PiB in AD/MCI and cognitively normal populations respectively
These results are in line with earlier data obtained using the ultrasensitive Simoa technology by which the sample can be diluted to remove confounding matrix effects in the Aβ measurement
In this study, it was also shown that plasma Aβ42 was decreased in AD compared with MCI, subjective cognitive decline (SCD) and controls, whereas the Aβ42/Aβ40 ratio could distinguish MCI from controls

PET imaging of A Pathology

Topology of A PET Tracer Retention.
While there are many parallels between the data produced by CSF A measurements and PET A measurements, two of the largest differences are: 1) CSF assessments of A deposition probably reflect more proximal "state" phenomena, while PET assessments more closely approximate an integrated measure of A deposition over many years and 2) PET measurements reveal topological information that is not available with CSF.
Thus, PET A measurements can give both quantitative information that can be regionally based (lending itself to definition of cutpoints) and qualitative information about the topology of A deposition in the brain (lending itself to visual reading)
The pattern of deposition in AD and the sequence of regional development of that pattern has proven relatively consistent across individuals and across the various A tracers.
In general, this pattern is consistent with the pattern predicted by neuropathological studies
Figure
A single individual is used rather than a group mean because it emphasizes the few asymmetries that can be seen (and would be masked in group averages such as can be seen in
The pattern of tracer retention in well-established A deposition is clearly much greater in gray matter areas compared to white matter areas and clearly greater in association cortices (frontal, parietal and temporal) compared to primary sensory-motor cortices.
Unlike tangle pathology, the medial temporal lobe and hippocampus are not areas of highest tracer retention.
Early in the application of A PET imaging, this distribution was recognized as mirroring the default mode network
The most notable exception to the above description is the deposition of A in the striatum.
This is clearly seen in the scan from an individual with late-onset AD in Figure
In CAA, where occipital vascular A deposition and resultant occipital hemorrhages are common, occipital A tracer retention is also common, and the ratio of occipital-to-frontal retention is typically near 1.0 whereas this ratio is typically near 0.85 in AD
As with the striatum in ADAD mutations, this occipital predominance can become extreme in early-onset cases of CAA caused by mutations in the APP gene
The sequence of events of A deposition in typical late onset disease is remarkable for a tight correlation between A load across all the cortical association areas and striatum.
This was recognized very early in the evaluation of A tracers
Analytic approaches used by Whittington et al. support the conclusion that "Aβ accumulation starts in all brain regions simultaneously and that its spatiotemporal distribution is due to heterogeneous regional carrying capacities (regional maximum possible concentration of Aβ) for the aggregated protein rather than to longer-term spreading from seed regions."
This statement may seem somewhat counter-intuitive to those used to viewing A PET scans across a wide range of disease severity where there is a clear pattern of early deposition in the medial frontal and medial parietal (i.e., precuneus) cortices.
This apparent early deposition may seem at odds with the Whittington conclusions, but is probably more to do with the detection capabilities of the human eye and effects of brain anatomy.
The brain areas that are destined to develop the highest A deposition will be those that are first noticed as distinct from background by the human eye.
Whittington et al.
In addition, tracer retention on the convex surfaces of the cortex that abut CSF is muted to some degree by partial volume effects that would be less applicable to medial frontal (i.e.
anterior cingulate) and medial parietal (i.e., precuneus) cortices where the two hemispheres nearly touch; being separated only by the thin falx cerebri.
Even quantitative data identifies the anterior cingulate and precuneus as being most useful for distinguishing "positive" from "negative" A PET scans (see below for a discussion of cutoffs)although the other cortical association areas and striatum fall close behind, and all are well above other brain areas
The consistency in the late-stage topology and the sequential development of the topology of A deposition determined by A PET has led to a staging scheme reminiscent of those used in neuropathology
Although still controversial, Grothe et al.
This staging system suggests a progression pattern from: 1) temporobasal and frontomedial areas; 2) the remaining associative neocortex; 3) primary sensory-motor cortex and the medial temporal lobe; and 4) the striatum.
Controversy remains about: 1) the earliest appearance of A deposition in the temporobasal area and 2) primary sensory-motor cortex preceding striatum.
The quantitative methods used in the Grothe et al.
study to define A-positivity may be the explanation for differences in this study and the general description provided above.
In summary, it appears that A deposition behaves more like a rising tide in all brain areas simultaneously, limited by the ultimate capacity of a given brain area to generate and contain A deposition.
This contrasts with the sequential regional spread of tau pathology from medial temporal lobes throughout the neocortex
When viewed with the human eye, or many quantitative approaches, A deposition in certain brain areas becomes detectable before other brain areas.
The late-stage pattern is not homogeneous across the brain and clear differences exist in the regional magnitude of A deposition reflecting what has been termed the "carrying capacity" of the various brain regions
deposition" over "change in time" (i.e., dA/dt: the derivative of the sigmoid curve) will approximate a biphasic, bell-shaped curve.
That is, although the rate of A deposition is expected to accelerate early in the disease course, this rate should slow -and perhaps stoplater in the disease.
There are now three empirical studies that support this model using crosssectional data
In addition, there are longitudinal studies of persons with autosomal dominant AD mutations followed for up to 10 years that support this model on a single-subject basis
The pathophysiological basic of this non-linear, biphasic pattern is not entirely clear.
It is consistent, however, with the concept of "carrying capacity" (discussed above) proposed for modeling A deposition
What's more, the maximum carrying capacity varies across brain regions within an individual and the maximum carrying capacity varies across individuals within a given region.

Biphasic Pattern of Longitudinal
Possible explanations include: 1) decreased production of A as neurons die; 2) clearance of previously deposited A as the brain atrophies; and 3) the apparent plateau of A deposition could be an artifact of changes in the structure of A over time that leave the binding sites for the A tracers less accessible.
The first explanation is supported by a report of decreased in A deposition with neurodegeneration in the amygdala of individuals with Down syndrome in the late stages of AD
Another important finding in all of these reports was that A accumulation could be detected over time in individuals who were cutpoint-defined "A-negative" at baseline
This clearly points out the imperfect nature of all cutpoints given the inevitable tradeoff between sensitivity and specificity in any dichotomous measure.
It also points out the added value of a longitudinal trajectory of an A PET measure compared to any baseline measure of pathology.
Once individuals are adjudicated A-positive, they very rarely revert to A-negative status.
However, in any group of A-negative individuals adjudicated by a cutpoint, there will exist sub-threshold A-positive individuals who will convert to A-positive status over the next few years.
This has implications for correlations of cognition, clinical progression and other measures with dichotomous measures of A deposition and also has implications for clinical trials that focus on "A-  PET, normal or abnormal CSF or PET tau ("T"), and presence or absence of neurodegenerative changes ("N")
Understanding the biological and methodological factors that account for CSF-PET A discordance, however, is an important focus of many comparison studies.
Because CSF A1-42 measures appear to reflect soluble forms of A that precede fibrillary A deposition
However, inconsistencies across studies point to the need for longitudinal CSF and PET measured in the same subjects using consistent methodology in order to understand how their longitudinal trajectories related to each other.
While a few studies have reported longitudinal PET, CSF, and/or clinical followup in the same individuals, data has been limited or incomplete (e.g.
longitudinal PET but not CSF).
Palmqvist and colleagues showed that the rate of florbetapir-PET accumulation was comparable in CSF+ only individuals and those who were abnormal on both, supporting the idea that the CSF abnormality preceded the A accumulation that was subsequently observed in these individuals
Large cohorts that are measuring both CSF and PET longitudinally will be critical for understanding the shapes of their trajectories in concert as well as their clinical significance at different stages of disease.

Detection of the earliest signs of amyloid deposition
Since the initial PiB-PET studies, the focus of many research studies has shifted away from the robust signal seen in symptomatic AD and towards detection of the earliest signs of fibrillar Aβ pathology in cognitively normal individuals.
This shift towards initial detection has generated a need for reliable methods that can distinguish brains free of fibrillar Aβ from brains that have early-stage fibrillar Aβ deposition.
It is important that such methods can be standardized and applied across many centers.

Defining amyloid positivity.
As discussed above, Aβ tracer retention is a continuous measure and need not necessarily be dichotomized into positive and negative.
This approach may be preferred for some applications, however, in other applications it is necessary to dichotomize subjects into Aβ (+) and Aβ (-).
This may be most important in the cognitively normal subjects when attempting to disentangle the effects of normal aging from the effects of preclinical AD
Further, with the recent proposal of the NIA-AA preclinical AD definition and staging, cutoffs for amyloid-positivity will be crucial for appropriate defining disease status
A variety of ad hoc objective approaches have been presented to define an amyloidpositive cutoff using amyloid imaging.
These methods include using one or two standard Each approach has advantages and shortcomings.
Most of these approaches involve subjective choices such as the number of standard deviations above the control mean, the exact location of the natural breakpoints and the interpretation of the visual read.
Others, like ROC analysis or using the low end of the AD range, rely on the composition of the AD group, which can vary widely depending on the nature of the particular control or AD population utilized.
Methods that rely on analysis of the entire control group can result in cutoffs that are unduly affected by the amyloid-positive high outliers in the control group (e.g., control mean + standard deviations).
Additionally, it has also been suggested that, in general, applied thresholds for PiBpositivity are overly stringent and it has been shown that lower thresholds resulted in higher sensitivity without compromising specificity when compared to post-mortem Aβ load
However, it has also been shown that cutoffs for establishing positive and negative Aβ status can be accurately transformed between radioligands and processing methods, with conversion of PiB thresholds for florbetapir largely agreeing with independently established florbetapir thresholds
Subthreshold change in amyloid.
The emergence of longitudinal amyloid imaging data has highlighted the importance of early, sub-threshold changes in Aβ deposition and their clinical relevance.
Indeed, when examining post-mortem correlations of slightly elevated, premortem PiB values many of such individuals show moderate CERAD ratings at autopsy, suggesting that these lower values may be of clinical importance
Interestingly, it has been shown that in individuals with PiB values that were rated as "ambiguous" were primarily in brain regions known to accumulate amyloid, suggesting that longitudinal follow-up is needed in such cases to elucidate the meaning of these small elevations in tracer retention
More recently, it has been shown that among PiB-negative MCI patients, those with slightly elevated PiB in posterior cingulate cortex are more likely to become PiB-positive and convert to AD at followup
Additionally, it has been shown that older APOE e4 carriers have greater longitudinal increases in Aβ than younger, non-carriers, but only in the Aβ-negative group, suggesting that in certain groups at higher risk for AD, small sub-threshold increases in Aβ are present
Such sub-threshold levels of Aβ and the rate of amyloid accumulation predicted early tau deposition in brain regions associated with AD. both the rate of amyloid accumulation and the baseline levels of Aβ predicted early tau deposition in cortical Braak regions associated with AD
In another recent analysis of participants with 10 years of imaging follow-up, it was demonstrated that using a conventional threshold for Aβ-positivity, subtle signs of cognitive dysfunction can be observed more than 10 years prior to Aβ-positivity
Taken together, these data suggest that changes in Aβ that occur below the traditional Aβ thresholds are likely relevant and important to the pathogenic process of AD.

In Vivo versus neuropathological A measurements
CSF A and neuropathological associations.
While amyloid PET gives an estimate of brain amyloidosis, evaluation of plaque and tangle counts at autopsy is commonly regarded as the "gold standard" for AD diagnosis.
The diagnostic accuracy of CSF A42 against neuropathological diagnosis has been evaluated in five studies, showing a mean sensitivity of CSF A42 of around 90% and a ROC value of 0.90
The specificity in these studies were somewhat lower, probably due to the fact that the control groups were based on clinical evaluations and rating scales, and not amyloid pathology, making inclusion of cognitively unimpaired elderly with clinically silent brain amyloidosis possible, thereby reducing specificity estimations.
Another drawback may be the latency between CSF samples taken during life and later post-mortem evaluations of pathology.
For these reasons, clinical studies evaluating the concordance between CSF A42 and amyloid PET have been very important and are reviewed in the section below.

A PET and neuropathological associations. A PET is somewhat unique as a molecular imaging technology because -as a requirement for regulatory agency approval as a clinical tool
-it has been validated by postmortem confirmation of its ability to detect its target pathology
Two issues should be fully understood before evaluating any in vivo-postmortem correlation of A PET.
The first is the fact that no in vivo measure of pathology will be as sensitive as modern postmortem histological and biochemical measures of pathology.
Second, and most important, none of the neuropathological criteria for the diagnosis of AD were designed to be a quantitative measurement of the fibrillar A pathology which is the substrate of A PET tracer retention.
These neuropathological criteria were designed to obtain an accurate clinical diagnosis and/or staging in the most efficient manner and they do a very good job in this regard (Braak and Braak 1991, Hyman and Gomez-Isla 1997,
A PET is a quantitative measure of regional or whole brain fibrillar A deposition.
The requirement for fibrillar A has been demonstrated by formic acid ablation of the binding of A tissue stains which are chemically related to A PET tracers (e.g.,
If one were to design a "gold standard" against which to measure the accuracy of A PET, it would likely rely on a truly quantitative biochemical method such as extraction of whole brain or region-matched insoluble A followed by quantitative analysis by ELISA or mass spectrometry.
This is a very different standard of truth than those offered by the common neuropathological approaches.
By necessity for clinical application, these approaches use only a very small fraction of total brain volume when counting pathology and tend to score pathology based on the most heavily affected regions rather than by averaging across regions.
In addition, the most commonly applied standard of truth for the Phase 3 studies for approval of the three clinically used A tracers (i.e., CERAD;
The take home point is that neither A PET nor neuropathological criteria for AD were designed to validate the other.
The main question answered in the Phase 3 studies is "do they reach the same conclusion regarding clinical diagnosis?"
In the three studies performed to-date the answer is yes with sensitivities in the range of 88-98% and specificities in the range of 88-100%
Aside from the above validation of the clinical diagnostic use of A PET in the Phase 3 studies that were completed between 2012 and 2015 for the three A PET tracers now approved for clinical use, single detailed case reports
In these more basic studies, it is important to choose the method of postmortem analysis that best reflects the in vivo target -fibrillar A.
As mentioned above, the optimal postmortem correlate for in vivo amyloid imaging would be a specific measure of total fibrillar Aβ pathology by the use of sensitive and specific anti-Aβ antibodies or mass spectrometry.
The literature contains reports of 24 cases that had been studied with PiB PET prior to autopsy (n=14) or after biopsy (n=10) that have been previously reviewed
These studies meet these methodological goals to varying degrees but also provide important insights about the sensitivity and specificity of in vivo PiB PET amyloid imaging for detecting the presence of postmortem Aβ pathology
First, in the 12 cases (out of 24 total autopsy or biopsy cases) with positive PiB PET scans in vivo, postmortem analyses confirmed the presence of significant Aβ deposition in all of them.
Thus, the specificity of PiB PET in this small sample was 100%.
However, PiB PET was positive in only 12 of the 15 cases that showed amyloid deposition by immunohistochemical analysis; yielding a sensitivity of 75%.
This is not surprising, given the discussion above that the postmortem measures are expected to be more sensitive than PET measures.
Cairns et al.
In a biopsy study, Leinonen et al. reported "Case #6" with high numbers of plaques by immunohistochemistry (although sparse neuritic plaques) but a negative PiB scan
These may represent an example of non-fibrillar amyloid deposition (i.e., a type of diffuse plaque) or other alterations in the tertiary structure of Aβ, as has been reported in transgenic mice
Thus, as expected, the sensitivity of amyloid imaging for all forms of Aβ deposits will be somewhat less than 100%.
However, it should be noted that none of the PiB-negative cases with postmortem Aβ deposits met criteria for definite AD dementia, so the sensitivity of PiB for Aβ deposition in pathologically proven definite AD dementia is likely to be closer to 100% than its sensitivity for any form of Aβ deposition.
A similar finding has recently been published for the F-18 agent, florbetapir
Although the norm is clearly sensitive and specific detection of fibrillar A deposits both in vivo and especially ex vivo by A tracers, one case has proven to be an interesting exception that remains to be fully explained.
Rosen et al.

described a case of endstage Alzheimer's disease with extensive A deposition but little high-affinity binding of [H-3]
Pittsburgh Compound-B.
This case met histopathological criteria for AD but contained more vascular amyloid, higher levels of insoluble A40 and A42, and a higher ratio of A40:A42 than more typical AD cases.

Standardization of amyloid biomarkers

Standardization of CSF A measures. While implementation of strict quality control
(QC) procedures in a clinical laboratory serves as the basis for correct measurements within analytical runs and over time
Initiatives such as the Alzheimer's Association QC program for CSF biomarkers

Collaborative efforts by the International Federation of Clinical Chemistry and
Laboratory Medicine Working Group for CSF proteins (IFCC WG-CSF),
and the Alzheimer's Association Global Biomarker Standardization Consortium (GBSC) have led to reference methods for Aβ42 The first publication on such assays presented the full validation and analytical performance of the Cobas assay
This assay shows superior performance compared with standard ELISA methods, and minimal batch-to-batch variability, and real-life evaluations of the assay in the Alzheimer's Association QC program show between laboratory coefficients of variations (CVs) of a few percent as compared with 15-20% for the ELISA methods.
Other fully automated assays for CSF Aβ42 and Aβ40, based on the Lumipulse and RA10 instruments also show very high analytical performance and are commercially available.
The Centiloid scale.
As discussed above, the CSF biomarker community has recognized the importance of standardizing the measurement of CSF A.
The measurement of A deposition by PET also faces standardization issues which are due mainly to the use of different tracers and different analysis procedures across labs.
To address this problem, a working group was formed to standardize quantitative A PET imaging outcome measures by scaling the outcome of each particular analysis method or tracer to a 0 to 100 scale, anchored by young controls (<45 years) and typical AD patients
The units of this scale are referred to as "Centiloids."
This process requires an initial scaling of any non-standard method to a standard method which includes several key features: 1) the A PET tracer is PiB and the acquisition period is 50-70 min after injection; 2) a standard large cortical target volume-ofinterest is used; and 3) a standard reference region using whole cerebellum (gray and white matter) is employed.
Any non-standard method can be scaled to this standard method by gathering data from the same subjects using both methods and then doing a linear transformation into Centiloid units as previously described in detail
All
These scaled F-18 tracers can then be used to scale alternative analysis methods using these tracers to Centiloids using the necessary data for any given tracer that is publicly available on the Global Alzheimer's Association Interactive Network (GAAIN;
Although very early in the process of application, Centiloid scaling has been found helpful in several studies
While this standardization method shows promise in the early applications, further work is needed to determine whether scanner effects are important, and more time is needed to determine whether there will be wide adoption of this process.

Prediction of A deposition risk
Age Dependence of Aβ deposition.
It is well known that age is a significant risk factor for both clinical AD and the presence of AD pathology
Studies have demonstrated that the number of Aβ-positive, cognitively normal individuals increases with age from around 6% at around 60 years to 30% or greater in individuals > 80 years
Indeed, it was demonstrated that in 190 non-demented subjects, aged greater than 82, a high proportion of the cognitively normal subjects (51%) and MCI subjects (68%) were PiBpositive
It has also been shown in a large, cross-sectional study that the estimated age at which 10% of non-demented APOEe4 carriers were PiB-positive was 57 years compared with 64 years for noncarriers.
Further, the authors demonstrated that after age 70 the median PiB-PET value was greater in carriers compared to noncarriers
In a similar study, it was shown using the A/T/N (Amyloid/ Tau/ Neurodegeneration) classification, that from the age of 50 onward amyloid positivity increases and that after the age of 75, the A+/T+/N+ group is the most prevalent
In a recent meta-analysis, the prevalence of amyloid pathology increased from age 50 to 90 years from 10% (95% CI, 8%-13%) to 44% (95% CI, 37%-51%) among participants with normal cognition; from 12% to 43% among patients with subjective memory complaints; and from 27% to 71% among patients with MCI
In symptomatic AD, an inverse age dependence has been demonstrated with age decreasing prevalence of amyloid-positivity, in the same meta-analysis it was shown that the prevalence of amyloid positivity decreased from age 50 to 90 years in APOE ε4 noncarriers from 86% at 50 years to 68% at 90 years
It has also been shown the age of onset seems to impact the amount of Aβ observed, in a small study exploring differences between early and late onset AD, significantly higher PiB retention was observed in the early onset group, suggesting that perhaps those with late onset AD are more likely to have concomitant diseases, such as vascular disease, contributing to cognitive decline
Interestingly, no clear age-dependent effects have been reported for CSF Aβ42 in cognitively normal individuals
In NC individuals, estimates of prevalence ranged from 10% to 44%, as age increases from 50 to 90 years, respectively.
The age-associated increase was 27% to 71% among people with MCI, about twice as common, on average, than in NC.
Notably, prevalence estimates for people with subjective cognitive impairment (SCI) were not different from NC (ranging from 12% to 43% as age increases), suggesting this diagnostic category may be too heterogeneous (or too early) for association with reliably detectable increased Aβ pathology.
A population-based study published subsequent to the 2015 meta-analyses
In the Mayo Clinic Study of Aging, nondemented participants in Olmstead County, MN, were selected for study based on a random sampling scheme.
Prevalence estimates were generally lower than reported in clinic-or volunteer-based samples, and the expected effect of cognitive status was not observed: 18% of NC participants across age strata were Aβ-positive, compared to 4% of those with MCI.
Prevalence was strongly associated with age and was higher in women than in men.
Few exceptions notwithstanding, the literature as a whole (and including AD) is consistent with a strong influence of cognitive status on prevalence of Aβ positivity with PET.
Apolipoprotein-E genotype.
Apolipoprotein E (ApoE) is a 299 amino-acid protein involved in lipid transport and metabolism in the periphery and in brain.
ApoE plays a key role in neuronal maintenance and repair (for review see:
The APOE gene, found on chromosome 19, has three common isoforms: ε2 (5%-10% allele frequency), ε3 (allele frequency 65%-70%) and ε4 (15%-20%).
The ε4 allele (APOE ε4) is by far the strongest genetic risk factor for sporadic AD, associated with a 3-fold increased risk in heterozygotes and up to a 15-fold increased risk of AD in homozygotes
Findings in AD patients have been mixed, with some studies demonstrating increased PiB retention in APOE ε4 carriers cross-sectionally

A relationship to cognition

Correlation with cognition within normal controls. Studies of cross-sectional associations
between Aβ imaging and cognitive measures have investigated whether presence or degree of Aβ deposition accounts for some degree of individual differences in pre-symptomatic states or subtle pre-clinical cognitive deficits.
The literature has been mixed on this question, with some studies finding small associations
Addressing the equivocal state of findings, a 2013 meta-analysis by Hedden et al (2013) synthesized data from 34 independent studies across 3,495 NC participants using PET, CSF, plasma and histopathology measures of Aβ.
They reported significant associations with episodic memory, executive functions and global measures of cognition; however, effect sizes were small (r=.05 to .12), the largest being associations with episodic memory.
Working memory, processing speed, visuospatial function and semantic memory did not have significant relationships to Aβ burden.
Thus, these meta-analytic estimates of multi-domain cognitive decline suggest relatively small though reliable effects associated with Aβ deposition in healthy CN older adults.
Low CSF Aβ42 predicts dementia in MCI patients over 10 years with a positive predictive value of 81%, reaching 94% if combined with CSF tau markers

Longitudinal Aβ imaging and cognitive change.
A small number of studies to date have examined how Aβ accumulation corresponds directly to cognitive decline.
Using clinical



Figure 1 .
Figure 1.
The typical topology of A deposition observed with A PET tracers.
This scan of a single individual with mild AD was performed with PiB and is expressed in standardized uptake value ratio (SUVR) units relative to cerebellar gray matter determined 50-70 minutes after injection.
The central gray region of the figure shows 2-dimensional axial (top), sagittal (middle) and coronal (bottom) views at two levels (left and right).
Around this in a clocklike fashion are arranged several 3-dimensional views of the same PiB scan overlaid on the subject's MRI scan rotated in 45 degree increments to show the prominent medial, lateral and inferior frontal, medial and lateral parietal and lateral temporal neocortex and striatum.


but is seldom the first area where A deposition is visually detectable in late-onset disease.
The opposite is often true with early-onset autosomal dominant AD mutations (Bateman et al., 2012, Benzinger et al., 2013, Klunk et al., 2007, Koivunen et al., 2008, Remes et al., 2008, Villemagne et al., 2009a, Yau et al., 2015) and in individuals with Down syndrome (Annus et al., 2016, Handen et al., 2012, Landt et al., 2011, Lao et al., 2016).
In these cases, striatal A deposition is prominent early and, in some cases, can be the only detectable site of A deposition early in the course of the disease.


Change in A Deposition.
The very well-known hypothetical model of dynamic biomarkers of Jack et al. (Jack et al., 2013) describes a sigmoid course of A deposition over time.
The implication of this model is that "change in A


Figure 2).
PET-CSF concordance is further improved with the use of recently-developed automated CSF assays as opposed to ELISA-based immunoassays (Bittner et al., 2016, Schindler et al., 2018) and the use of the CSF A1-42/A1-40 ratio in order to account for individual differences in total A production (Leuzy et al., 2016, Lewczuk et al., 2017, Pannee et al., 2016, Schindler et al., 2018), although use of the ratios did not increase concordance in all studies (Zwan et al., 2014, Zwan et al., 2016).
Overall, however, the reasonably high CSF-PET concordance has provided justification for merging PET and CSF measures of A status in order to create larger and/or more heterogeneous study samples (Donohue et al., 2017, Ewers et al., 2012, Jansen et al., 2015a).
Indeed, the updated NIA-AA Research Framework advocates for interchangeable use of PET-CSF in the ATN system for classifying subjects based on normal or abnormal A status ("A") as measured by either CSF or



Figure 2 .
Figure 2. Cortical florbetapir PET SUVRs (relative to whole cerebellum) and CSF A1-42 (Roche Elecsys® automated immunoassay platform; see adni.loni.usc.edu/methods) for 888 Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative participants (192 cognitively normal, 93 subjective memory complaint, 273 early MCI, 119 late MCI, 152 AD) who had a lumbar puncture and florbetapir-PET scan within 1 year.
Thresholds (1.11 for florbetapir and 980 pg/mL for CSF A1-42) are described in in the ADNI Study Data methods documents (ida.loni.usc.edu).


, CSF-PET comparison studies have provided insight into the earliest stages of pathological change.
Among individuals who are discordant on PET and CSF, a larger proportion of "CSF+ only" compared with "PET+ only" discordant individuals has been frequently reported
Furthermore, A positivity among APOE4-positive individuals has also been observed at earlier ages with CSF measurements compared to PiB-PET
These findings have provided the foundation for the hypothesis that CSF A1-42 becomes abnormal prior to A PET
This temporal offset in PET and CSF changes may play an important role in how these measures are implemented in a clinical setting and in selection of participants for clinical trials of A-targeting drugs, particularly because of the increasing emphasis on A reduction during the earliest possible stage.
CSF and PET measures are frequently assessed as dichotomous variables (e.g.
concordance in +/-status) as opposed to continuous variables (e.g.
correlation) for simplicity because of the bimodal nature of A that facilitates division of individuals into positive and negative groups.
However, while CSF and PET A measurements are both bimodal, and are inversely related, their distributions differ.
PET measurements have little variability in the normal range (low values) and greater variability in the abnormal range (high values)(Klunk et al., 2015), while CSF A1-42 measurements show the opposite pattern: greater variability in the normal range (high values) and lower variability in the abnormal range (low values)(Zetterberg et al., 2007) (Figure 2).
While elevated PET has been associated with greater pathology at autopsy (Clark et al., 2011, Sabri et al., 2015) and more abnormal CSF measurements are linkedto greater pathology at autopsy
Continuous PET and CSF values at the low and high ends of their dynamic range appear to be unrelated
This indicates that among individuals who are A on both CSF and PET, for example, continuous PET and CSF measurements within the Arange are not related, even as dichotomous PET and CSF measures agree.
This absence of a continuous PET-CSF association among individuals who are A (or among individuals who are A calls into question whether variability within the negative range or within the positive range is clinically meaningful.
For example, it is unclear how to interpret the clinical and biological significance of a highly elevated A PET with only borderline positive CSF A1-42, occurring in 15-20% of subjects.
This question further reinforces the observation that PET and CSF assess fundamentally different features of A pathology.A number of methodological issues influence the degree of CSF-PET concordance.
First, differences in PET ligands and CSF analysis platforms likely influence the dynamic range of measurements and perhaps their sensitivity within the positive or negative ranges.
Second, the sensitivity and specificity of the selected threshold for each measure determines who is categorized as positive or negative.
The gold standard for determining A positivity is autopsybased validation of PET and/or CSF measurements carried out close to the end of life, but these studies are relatively rare
A positive/negative status, determined by either pathology or visual reads on PET data, is often used to validate a CSF positivity threshold
Finally, the makeup of the sample affects whether the entire dynamic range of A is sampled as opposed to just the negative or positive range.
CSF-PET concordance is frequently lower among cognitively normal subjects, with a larger proportion of "CSF+ only" than "PET+ only"
However, "PET+ only" individuals have also been observed across samples that include both cognitively normal and impaired subjects
Cases of abnormal CSF A in the absence of elevated A PET have also been reported in unusual clinical cases such as early onset AD related to the Arctic APP mutation
soluble, fibrillary) likely contribute to CSF-PET concordance.


deviations above the mean of the control data (Edison et al., 2008, Kemppainen et al., 2007, Klunk et al., 2004a, Okello et al., 2009); inspection of quantitative PET data for natural breakpoints in the distribution of tracer retention in combinations of young controls, elderly controls and/or AD patients,(Edison et al., 2008, Hedden et al., 2009, Jack et al., 2008, Maetzler et al., 2009, Mintun et al., 2006, Mormino et al., 2011, Morris et al., 2010, Roe et al., 2008, Rowe et al., 2007); the low end of the range of tracer retention in clinically (Sperling et al., 2009) or pathologically defined AD patients (Fleisher et al., 2011); receiver operating characteristic (ROC) analyses of PET data from control and AD subjects (Devanand et al., 2010, Mormino et al., 2009, Ng et al., 2007, Pike et al., 2007); visual reads (Clark et al., 2012, Engler et al., 2007, Gomperts et al., 2008, Johnson et al., 2007b, Joshi et al., 2012, Ng et al., 2007, Rabinovici et al., 2007, Sabri et al., 2015, Suotunen et al., 2010); and cluster analysis methods using both PiB(+) and PiB(-) elderly control subjects (Bourgeat et al., 2010, Cohen et al., 2013).



(
Korecka et al., 2014, Leinenbach et al., 2014) .
These methods have been formally certified by the Joint Committee for Traceability in Laboratory Medicine (JCTLM database accession numbers C11RMP9 and C12RMP1), have been validated against amyloid PET, and a reference material for CSF Aβ42 was recently released (ERM®-DA480/IFCC, ERM®-DA481/IFCC and ERM®-DA482/IFCC)(Kuhlmann et al., 2017).
Importantly, fully automated routine clinical chemistry assays for CSF Aβ42 and Aβ40 are now available for clinical chemistry laboratories and for use in clinical routine diagnostics.


commonly used F-18-labelled A PET tracers have been scaled to PiB including [F-18]NAV-4694 (Rowe et al., 2016), [F-18]florbetaben (Rowe et al., 2017), [F-18]florbetapir (Navitsky et al., 2018) and [F-18]flutemetamol


Diagnosis dependence: normal cognition, MCI and AD.
Aβ-imaging positivity is strongly associated with cognitive status along the AD-spectrum.
Single investigations since the first human studies with PiB-PET in 2004 have consistently shown highest proportions of Aβpositivity in AD, lowest in groups with normal cognition (NC), and intermediate in mild cognitive impairment (MCI) (Jack et al., 2008, Johnson et al., 2013, Rowe et al., 2010, Vandenberghe et al., 2010).
Two recent meta-analyses from the Aβ PET Study Group contributed comprehensive syntheses of Aβ-positivity prevalence in dementia syndromes



Figure 3 .
Figure 3. Prevalence of APOE ε4 positivity by age, diagnosis, and Aβ status.
Curves were plotted using the point estimates generated by generalized estimating equations and are within the age limits of the diagnostic groups.
The models were adjusted for study (site) effect (from Mattsson et al., 2018).



A
more recent meta-analysis, synthesizing data across a larger pooled sample (n = 5005 across 30 cross-sectional datasets) and using studies of PET or CSF,
Consistent with the Hedden et al. meta-analysis, cross-sectional association effect sizes were small, ranging from Cohen's d = .15
(episodic memory) to d =.32 (global cognition).
A third and most recent meta-analysis
Among n=2908 persons with normal cognition, amyloid positivity was associated with low memory scores only after age 70; there was no association with low MMSE scores.
All three metaanalyses support a general consensus that cross-sectional relationships between Aβ deposition and cognitive abilities among healthy older adults is small to very small, measurable only with sufficient power.
It is important, however, to keep in mind the obvious presence of selection bias in these cross-sectional studies.
The requirement for "normal cognition" does two things to bias these studies: 1) it selects against those people who are susceptible to the negative effects of A on cognition and 2) it compresses the range of cognitive scores that can be correlated with A deposition.Prediction of cognitive change.Compared to cross-sectional associations, there is clearer evidence and consensus that Aβ deposition on imaging is a predictor of future change in cognition.
In studies of diagnostic change, this is most evidenced in studies of MCI reporting presence and degree of Aβ predicts higher risk for, and shorter time to, progression to AD (Huijbers et al., 2015, Jack et al., 2010, Koivunen et al., 2011, Okello et al., 2009, Wolk et al., 2009, Zhang and Shen 2012).
Among older adults with NC, progression to MCI is higher with baseline presence of Aβ (Petersen et al., 2016, Roberts et al., 2018, Rowe et al., 2013, Vos et al., 2013).
For example, in a recent large population-based study including n=1377 older adults without cognitive impairment, incident amnestic MCI risk associated with Aβ-positivity was more than twice that with Aβ-negativity (Hazard Ratio (HR) 2.26; Roberts et al., 2018).
While significant, the authors note this is a smaller effect on clinical progression compared to clinic-or volunteer-based CN cohorts (e.g., OR of 4.8 reported by Rowe et al, 2013; HRs of 4.6 -33.8 reported by Vos et al., 2013), which often report, or enrich with, a higher proportion of APOE e4 carriers (Petersen et al., 2016, Rowe et al., 2013).
As with prevalence estimates, this underscores the importance of study setting and selection variables on clinical progression risk associated with Aβ-positive imaging.
Baseline Aβ-positive scans in CN cohorts also predict greater decline over time on cognitive test scores (Donohue et al., 2017, Mormino et al., 2014a, Petersen et al., 2016, Vemuri et al., 2015, Zhao et al., 2018).
The decline has been reported over a range of follow-up times, e.g.
median of 2 years (Mormino et al., 2014a) to mean of 12 years (Zhao et al., 2018), and across both memory, e.g., (Resnick et al., 2010) and nonmemory domains, e.g., (Papp et al., 2016, Zhao et al., 2018).
An example of Aβassociated executive function decline is shown in Figure x, depicting worse (higher) scores on Trail Making Test B over 15 years in an oldest old cohort (Zhao et al., 2018).
Aβassociated cognitive decline is moderated (i.e., further enhanced) by presence of the APOE*4 allele (Lim et al., 2015); SCD (Vogel et al., 2017); and neurodegeneration markers.
e.g., (Mormino et al., 2014b).
The 2017 Baker et al. meta-analysis aggregated cognitive decline data across 2584 CN participants from 14 studies over an average of approximately 5 years.
Aβrelated decline was observed in episodic memory, semantic memory, visuospatial function, and global cognition; effect sizes ranged from d = .24
(episodic memory) to .30
(global cognition).



Figure 4 .
Figure 4. Performance (higher scores = decline) on Trail Making Test B, an executive function measure, over 15 years in n=175 oldest-old adults (mean age at time of imaging, 86 years) without dementia, by biomarker group.
Aβ= amyloid-beta; ND = neurodegeneration, defined by hippocampal volume.
From (Zhao et al., 2018).


. In AD dementia, integrating data across 1359 patients, mean prevalence was 88%.
Notably, prevalence estimates of Aβ-positivity in AD dementia decreased with age from 93% at age 50, to 79% at age 90.
This inverse age effect was driven by APOE e4 status: among e4 carriers, prevalence remained at least 90% regardless of age, whereas prevalence in noncarriers declined with increased age to 68% by age 90.
Lower prevalence among older APOE e4 noncarriers may reflect non-A pathologies (e.g., vascular, tau, alpha-synuclein and TDP-43) combined with aging-associated diminished threshold for cognitive impairment (i.e., diminished resilience).
Among non-AD dementias, mean prevalence ranged from 51% in dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB), to 30% in vascular dementia, to 12% in frontotemporal dementia.
Prevalence increased with age in most non-AD dementias, as well as with APOE e4 carriership.
(Ossenkoppele et al., 2015)


(Mishra et al., 2018), Morris et al., 2010)coded E4 isoform of ApoE has been implicated in multiple aspects of AD pathogenesis, including Aβ fibrillization and clearance (Mahley and Huang 2006).Autopsy studies have demonstrated an increased likelihood of AD pathology in cognitively normal individuals who are APOE ε4 carriers (Kok et al., 2009).Similarly, PiB-PET studies have found that APOE ε4 genotype is associated with higher PiB retention in cognitively normal elderly in a dose-dependent manner (Jack et al., 2015, Morris et al., 2010, Reiman et al., 2009), and APOEε4 carriers are more than twice as likely to convert from PiB(-) to PiB(+) over time(Vlassenko et al., 2011).Additionally, on average, APOE ε4 carriers have been show to develop amyloid pathology at an earlier age and demonstrate faster accumulation over time(Mishra et al., 2018).Conversely, APOE ε2 has been associated with lower PiB retention in normal elderly(Grothe et al., 2017b, Morris et al., 2010).
MCI patients who are APOE ε4 carriers consistently show higher PiB retention than MCI non-carriers, though this is at least in part because the presence of APOE ε4 increases the likelihood that MCI symptoms are due to underlying AD


al., 2004b, Rabinovici et al., 2010, Rowe et al., 2007).
However, in a recent study of APOE ε4 prevalence in Aβ-positive individuals across the AD spectrum, it was demonstrated that the prevalence of APOE ε4 was 66% in AD, 64% in MCI, and 51% in cognitively normal, and that the prevalence decreased with advancing age in cognitively normal and MCI but not in AD (Mattsson et al., 2018, Figure XX).
CSF Aβ42 concentration is lower in APOE ε4 carriers but this is simply explained by the higher prevalence of Aβ positivity as determined by Aβ PET in such individuals and there is no constitutional effect of APOE genotype on CSF Aβ42 levels in age groups that are definitely in pre-amyloid ages (below 40 years of age) (Lautner et al., 2014).