White matter alterations in early‐stage Alzheimer's disease: A tract‐specific study
Introduction: Diffusion magnetic resonance imaging may allow for microscopic characterization of white matter degeneration in early stages of Alzheimer's disease.
Methods: Multishell Diffusion magnetic resonance imaging data were acquired from 100 participants (40 cognitively normal, 38 with subjective cognitive decline, and 22 with mild cognitive impairment [MCI]).
White matter microscopic degeneration in 27 major tracts of interest was assessed using diffusion tensor imaging (DTI), neurite orientation dispersion and density imaging, and q-space imaging.
Results: Lower DTI fractional anisotropy and higher radial diffusivity were observed in the cingulum, thalamic radiation, and forceps major of participants with MCI.
These tracts of interest also had the highest predictive power to discriminate groups.
Diffusion metrics were associated with cognitive performance, particularly Rey Auditory Verbal Learning Test immediate recall, with the highest association observed in participants with MCI.
Discussion: While DTI was the most sensitive, neurite orientation dispersion and density imaging and q-space imaging complementarily characterized reduced axonal density accompanied with dispersed and less restricted white matter microstructures.

Introduction
Alzheimer's disease (AD)-associated changes in the brain begin decades before symptoms become evident
The long presymptomatic stage of AD provides a valuable window for early intervention with disease-modifying therapy if the mechanisms of AD can be detected using reliable biomarkers.
Among neuroimaging biomarkers, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is a safe, noninvasive, and nonradiating technique suitable for preclinical screening and monitoring disease progression in AD.
Volumetric measurements using T1-weighted MRI are used extensively to detect AD and other dementia-associated brain atrophy, which could include a combination of microscopic degenerative processes, such as neuronal death, myelin degeneration, and loss of neurites or axons
Such microscopic alterations may be assessed by diffusion MRI (dMRI), an imaging method for probing human brain microstructures.
Diffusion MRI provides imaging metrics of the cellular organization by measuring water diffusion properties under the influence or restriction of biological barriers.
Cellular microarchitectures create restricted environments that shape the diffusion probability function of water molecules.
Therefore, the shape, size, and properties of the diffusion function estimated by dMRI allow for quantitative assessment of ADassociated microscopic degeneration.
For example, diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) produces two summary metrics, fractional anisotropy (FA) and mean diffusivity (MD), and two orthogonal metrics, axial diffusivity (Da) and radial diffusivity (Dr).
FA, the variance of Da and Dr, indicates how elongated the diffusion is and reflects the coherence of underlying tissue or the fiber organization.
MD, the mean diffusion in three directions, describes the general freedom of diffusion in the tissue regardless of the directionality.
FA and MD have been the main focus in DTI studies of AD, whereas Da and Dr, associated with axonal and myelin integrity in animal studies
DTI is sensitive to white matter degeneration in the early stages of AD, including in subjective cognitive decline (SCD), a potential preclinical stage of AD
Diffusion metrics in SCD have been shown to be intermediate between cognitively normal (CN) older adults and individuals with MCI
Across the disease continuum, the direction of changes in DTI metrics are as follows: (1) decreased FA, indicating loss of tissue organization and/or (2) increased mean and radial diffusivities, suggesting a breakdown of neurobiological barriers (myelin degeneration or cell membrane deterioration) or cytotoxic edema
In addition to classic DTI approaches, a recent advance in dMRI is the ability to assess axonal density and cellularity among other microstructural features
Diffusion microstructural features are obtained through nonparametric q-space analyses and parametric compartment modeling.
The q-space analyses provide a metric for tissue restriction (P 0 ) associated with myelination in animal studies of dysmyelination
Parametric diffusion modeling further decodes the diffusion signal into multiple compartments (e.g., extracellular and intracellular) and provides neurobiological metrics.
Since 1997, many diffusion models have been proposed and applied to animal
One of the diffusion compartment models, called neurite orientation dispersion and density imaging (NODDI), proposed that white matter tissue comprises three diffusion compartments detectable by using modern clinical MRI scanners with a reasonable scan time
The NODDI approach provides the intra-axonal volume fraction (ICVF) as a proxy for axonal density and an orientation dispersion index that describes the axonal organization.
While DTI provides a general assessment of averaged microstructures within an imaging voxel, NODDI provides diffusion metrics with a finer granularity that further decipher intracellular and extracellular microscopic properties.
We believe that the NODDI-derived axonal density may provide explanation and details on potential disease mechanisms of why and how changes in the AD white matter were observed by DTI.
The NODDI approach has been validated with histologic evidence reported in the literature.
The NODDI-derived axonal density (ICVF) is almost identical to values obtained from electron microscopy of ex vivo mouse brain and in good agreement with previously reported fiber densities of the human brain obtained by electron microscopy
In addition, ICVF correlates with an animal model of tau pathology in AD
In vivo applications suggest that NODDI can detect white matter changes in the aging brain
Here, we used complementary diffusion metrics (i.e., DTI, NODDI, and q-space) to study white matter alterations in early-stage AD.
We focused on individuals with objective cognitive impairment (MCI) and individuals with only SCD assessed via the Cognitive Change Index (CCI), a comprehensive measure of perceived neuropsychological function focusing on the memory, executive, and language domains
To investigate AD-related anatomical variations, we performed tract-specific analyses focusing on 27 major white matter bundles across the entire brain.
The tracts of interest were generated by crossing fiber model-based probability tractography rendered by a coregistered white matter atlas
This study identified the best diffusionanatomical classifiers and their associations with clinical outcomes.
We hypothesized that besides commonly reported hippocampal fiber tracts (e.g., limbic system), additional white matter fiber tracts outside the limbic system can significantly differentiate cognitive impairment and that the deteriorations in these fiber tracts are associated with neuropsychological assessment scores.

Methods

Participants
Indiana Alzheimer's Disease Center (IADC) funded by NIA P30s since 1991 has screened approximately 2000 subjects and created an extensive longitudinal clinical database.
In 2008, the Neuroimaging Core was added, and it recruits approximately 50-100 subjects per year to be available for neuroimaging studies.
An advanced multishell diffusion imaging technique, hybrid diffusion imaging (HYDI), was added to the IADC routine MRI protocol in April 2015.
All IADC participants received the Uniform Data Set version 3 battery (as used in all NIA AD Centers)
Exclusion criteria for neuroimaging were significant cerebrovascular disease or malformations; a history of chemotherapy or radiation therapy; current major depression; a history of schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, developmental disability, Parkinson disease, brain surgery, brain infection, or significant head injury (loss of consciousness .
30 min); and/or excessive alcohol consumption.
All participants provided written informed consent according to procedures approved by the Institutional Committee for the Protection of Human Subjects at Indiana University School of Medicine (IRB no.: 1604443276).
IADC participants who received HYDI were included in the study.
No other specific selection or screening on the IADC participants were performed.
By the time of data processing for the study in 2017, there were 100 participants who had HYDI scans.
Among them, 40 were CN, 38 had SCD, and 22 had amnestic MCI.
The data on age, sex, education level, and diagnoses for the subjects were extracted from their annual clinical assessments in the same year of the HYDI scans.

Clinical and neuropsychological assessment
Participants were evaluated using a detailed neuropsychological battery, including measures of memory, attention, executive function, language, visuospatial ability, general intellectual ability, and psychomotor speed.
These psychological tests included the Rey Auditory Verbal Learning Test (RAVLT), the Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA) for dementia severity
Additional items listed in Uniform Data Set version 3 were also administrated including: Craft Story 21, Benson complex figure copy and recall, number span test, multilingual naming test (MINT), phonemic test, animal and vegetable list generation, and Trail Making Test (executive function)
Group classifications (CN, SCD, MCI) were based on the neuropsychological assessment by two board-certified neurologists (L.G.A. and M.R.F.) and two neuropsychologists (F.W.U. and A.J.S.).
Subjects with amnestic MCI were identified based on the National Institute on Aging-Alzheimer's Association criteria
The subjects with SCD were subsequently identified from CN subjects if their self-reported CCI score on the first 12 memory items was 20
Psychological tests scores included in this study to associate with imaging findings were the RAVLT immediate recall (RAVLT-IR) and delayed recall (RAVLT-DR), MoCA, CDR-SB, adjusted GDS, and CCI.

MRI acquisition
All brain MRIs were performed on a single Siemens Prisma 3T scanner with standard Siemens 64-channel RF receiver head coil.
All subjects received anatomical T1weighted and T2-weighted fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) imaging and dMRI.
The imaging sequences and parameters of the anatomical scans followed the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative 2 protocols (
The dMRI protocol used a single-shot spin-echo echoplanar imaging sequence with a HYDI scheme that contained three zero diffusion-weighting (i.e., b-value 5 0 s/mm 2 ) and five concentric diffusion-weighting shells (b-values 5 0, 250, 1000, 2000, 3250, 5000 s/mm 2 ) with 142 diffusionweighting gradient directions
The field of view was 240 !
240 mm with an imaging matrix of 120 !
120 and 68 slices of 2-mm slice thickness, yielding 2-mm isotropic voxels.
An additional b 5 0s/mm 2 with reversed-phase encoding was acquired for geometric distortion correction.

Diffusion image processing, model fitting, and tractography
Image processing included preprocessing followed by computation of diffusion metrics and tractography.
The diffusion-weighted images were first denoised using the local principal component analysis approach
With a pair of reverse phase-encoded b0 images as reference, the denoised diffusion-weighted images were corrected for static-field geometric distortion, motion, eddy current artifacts using the TOPUP and EDDY tool from FMRIB software library (FSL) (
The preprocessed HYDI data were used to compute diffusion metrics of DTI, NODDI, and q-space imaging
The DTI metrics were computed using the FSL DTIFIT command on the first (b-value 5 250 s/mm 2 ) and second shells (b-value 5 1000 s/mm 2 ) of the HYDI data, including FA (the coherence of microstructure water diffusion), MD (the magnitude of overall water diffusion), and supplementary analyses of axial (Da, along the principal water diffusion direction) and Dr (perpendicular to the principal water diffusion direction).
All five HYDI shells were used in the NODDI analysis with the AMICO toolbox (
Unlike the classic diffusion tensor model, the NODDI model proposes specific assumptions about the way in which local microarchitecture affects the diffusion properties.
In particular, it models the water diffusion signal according to one of three different pools: (1) free-water diffusion (such as in cerebrospinal fluid); (2) intracellular restricted diffusion inside dendrites and axons, and (3) extracellular hindered diffusion.
The resultant indices included in the analysis are the ICVF, a measure of neurite density, and neurite orientation dispersion index (OD, the degree of fanning in neurite orientation).
In addition to DTI and NODDI, zero-displacement probability (P 0 ) was estimated by integrating the volume of the q-space signals, which reflects water mobility or tissue restrictions.
This q-space approach is model free, as it does not use any assumptions of the underlying diffusion properties
Supplementary Table
Parallel to metrics fitting, a within-voxel multifiber tract orientation structure was modeled using BEDPOSTx followed by probabilistic tractography (with crossing fiber modeling
For each subject, automatic mapping of the 27 major white matter tracts was conducted in the native diffusion space.
The start/stop region-of-interest masks of the 27 major white matter bundles were first rendered and identified in a coregistered standard Montreal Neurological Institute space before being reversely transformed to the native diffusion space (as implemented in the AutoPtx plugin for FSL)
Tractspecific measures of diffusion metrics (i.e., FA, MD, Da, Dr, ICVF, OD, P 0 ) were derived for the following 27 tracts of interest

Statistical analysis
Statistical analyses were conducted using R-3.3.3.
For demographic and cognitive variables comparisons, analyses of variance (ANOVA) were used.
For the diffusion variables, between-group analyses were performed using two approaches.
First, we examined overall group differences among the three groups using F-tests, followed by ANOVA tests for pair-wise group differences.
Bonferroni correction was used to adjust the P value for multiple comparisons among all 27 tracts of interest for each diffusion parameter.
Second, we studied which combination of diffusion metrics within tract of interests can best classify the disease stage.
To do so, we used an extension of the regularization approach called least absolute shrinkage and selection operator (LASSO)
The classification was performed via the penalized logistic regression using the function glmnet (an R library "glmnet").
To select the optimal predictors in the training phase, we run 100 iterations.
In each iteration, predictors that gave a cross-validated error within one standard error of the minimum were selected.
The predictors that appeared in the majority of the iterations (greater than 50%) were entered into the prediction phase.
The final prediction and receiver operating characteristic curves were obtained using a prediction method with a general linear model.
Linear regression was used to assess the relationships between neuropsychological performance and diffusion variables on tracts identified in the LASSO analysis.
To identify the best-correlated pairs between neuropsychological scores and diffusion variables, sparse canonical correlation analysis was performed (function "CCA" in R library "PMA").
Briefly, permutation analysis was performed to produce the optimal tuning parameters for sparse canonical correlation using the penalized matrix decomposition using the R function "CCA.permute".
Afterward, sparse canonical correlations were applied with the optimal tuning parameters to produce the most correlated pair(s) between the diffusion metrics and neuropsychological measures using the R function "CCA".
All regression analyses mentioned previously were controlled for age, sex, and education level.
The LASSO and CCA approaches inherently account for multiple comparisons.

Results

Subject characteristics and clinical outcomes
The three groups of participants did not differ significantly with respect to age, sex, or education level (ps .
0.05, Table
As expected by design, the subjects with MCI demonstrated significantly worse cognitive function, including lower RAVLT-IR, RAVLT-DR, and MoCA and higher CDR-SB scores (ps , 0.001).
Compared with the CN group, the SCD group had a higher CCI by design ( ps , .001), but did not differ in objective neuropsychological test scores, including the RAVLT-IR, RAVLT-DR, MoCA, and CDR (ps .
0.05).
While the adjusted GDS scores of all subjects were normal and below the clinical cutoff for depression (i.e., .9), the MCI and SCD groups had higher GDS scores than the CN group (ps , 0.05).

Tract characteristics and group-wise differences
In Supplementary Fig.
Among the 27 tracts of interest, the forceps major (fma) had the highest FA and lowest OD, as expected.
The high FA in the forceps major was mostly driven by high Da with relatively low Dr.
The bilateral parahippocampal cingulum (cgh) had the lowest FA and highest OD, which was driven by high Dr.
Also, the bilateral parahippocampal cingulum (cgh) had the lowest neurite density (ICVF) and the lowest tissue restriction (P 0 ).
In most tracts, the SCD group demonstrated diffusion values that were intermediate between those of the CN and MCI groups.
Following the F-tests for overall group effects (Supplementary Table
In general, the MCI group had a relatively lower coherence of water diffusion (decreased FA and increased dispersion, OD), neurite density (ICVF), and tissue restriction (P 0 ), but a relatively higher magnitude of water diffusion (MD, Da, and Dr) across the tracts of interest.
Compared with the CN, the SCD group had lower Da in the forceps major (fma) and left superior longitudinal fasciculus (slf).
With the Bonferroni correction (Supplementary Fig.
Dr was significantly higher in MCI, whereas Da was not (Fig.
Consequently, FA was lower and MD was higher in the MCI group relative to the CN or SCD group.
Tracts exhibiting FA and Dr changes are shown in Fig.
The amount of difference in the MCI group compared with that in the CN and SCD groups was approximately 8-15% for FA and 7-10% for Dr (Supplementary Fig.
Among the non-DTI metrics, only OD in cgh and P 0 in fma were significantly different in MCI relative to CN or SCD after the Bonferroni correction.
The differences between the SCD and CN groups were no longer significant after the correction.

Penalized logistic regression and prediction accuracy
The penalized logistic regressions analysis (LASSO) identified three tracts of interest, the parahippocampal cingulum (cgh), posterior thalamic radiation (ptr), and forceps major (fma), as the best classifying predictors of the disease groups (Fig.
In particular, the best predictors for discriminating between SCD and MCI were Dr in the left parahippocampal cingulum, MD in the forceps major, and FA in the left posterior thalamic radiation (Fig.
The area under the receiver operating characteristic curves was 0.83 using all three predictors (bold black line), 0.82 using Dr in the left parahippocampal cingulum and MD in the fornix major (gray line), and 0.80 using Dr in the left parahippocampal cingulum alone (light gray line).
The best predictors for discriminating between CN and MCI were FA in the left posterior thalamic radiation and OD in the left parahippocampal cingulum.
The areas under the receiver operating characteristic curves were 0.88 using both predictors (bold black line) and 0.82 using FA in the left posterior thalamic radiation alone (gray line) (Fig.
Although each tract is paired with one specific diffusion parameter in the LASSO results, the trend of diffusion changes across the three groups (from CN to MCI) was common in all three tracts of interest, including decreased FA and increased MD, Dr, and OD (Fig.
No predictors were significant for discriminating between CN and SCD.
The three tracts of interest that had the best predicting power were used to study associations with the clinical outcome measures described in the next section.

Clinical associations
We studied associations between the diffusion metrics and the neuropsychological scores within all three groups combined (n 5 100), within CN 1 SCD (n 5 78), and within MCI (n 5 22) (Supplementary Table
In general, worse neuropsychological assessments were consistently associated with lower FA, ICVF, and P 0 and higher MD, Dr, and OD in all three tracts identified with LASSO in Section 3.4 (i.e., the left parahippocampal cingulum, forceps major, and left posterior thalamic radiation).
When all three groups were combined, more regressions were significant with mild to moderate correlation coefficients, that is, r , 0.5 (as in square root of the adjusted R 2 ), because of group effects, as expected.
Within the combined CN 1 SCD groups, the diffusion metrics had minimal clinical associations, except that Da had a significant negative association with selfreported CCI (P , .01,
r 5 0.43) in the forceps major.
The correlations were strongest within the MCI group with all the correlation coefficients (r) ranging from 0.5 to 0.82 with P , .05.
Among all neuropsychological scores and diffusion variables, sparse canonical correlation analyses consistently identified RAVLT-IR and Dr as the principal correlative pair.
Fig.
Note that while the MCI group had higher correlation coefficients (r) describing the "tightness" or goodness of the fit, it had a lower slope than all the groups combined because of the expected smaller dynamic range of RAVLT-IR scores in MCI.

Discussion
White matter alterations in aging individuals with memory complains and deficits were characterized by a series of complementary diffusion metrics derived from nonparametric q-space analysis and parametric analyses with the diffusion tensor and NODDI model.
Significantly lower DTI FA, lower P 0 , higher radial and MD, and higher fiber orientation dispersion were observed in the cingulum, thalamic radiation, and forceps major of participants with MCI.
These tracts of interest also had the highest predictive power to discriminate groups.
Dr was significantly associated with cognitive performance, particularly Rey Auditory Verbal Learning Test immediate recall, with the highest association observed in participants with MCI.
Consistent with previous DTI studies
With relatively stable Da, the differences in FA and MD were mostly driven by the increase in Dr, suggesting deterioration in the axonal membrane and/or myelin sheathes
This implication is supported by decreased P 0 , a measure of tissue restriction, which is sensitive to myelination in animal and human studies
In addition, decreased ICVF and increased OD, a proxy for axonal density and orientation dispersion, respectively, suggested more advanced axonal degeneration and loosened axonal bundles
Although the effect size of the NODDI-derived axonal density metric, ICVF, did not survive the adjustment for multiple comparisons, these emerging results warrant further studies with a larger sample size.
The tract-specific studies presented here are different from the tract-based spatial statistical analyses.
Tractbased spatial statistical analysis is a voxel-based analysis on DTI-FA-defined white matter skeleton in a standard  space.
It relies on high-quality registration across subjects, which could be challenging in some cases
Alternatively, the tract-specific analyses use tractography to render entire fiber bundles in the subject diffusion space and take account for all the voxels within the fiber bundle.
Previous tract-specific AD studies focused on a single preselected tract, such as the uncinate fasciculus
Similar to previous findings, the parahippocampal cingulum exhibited significant sensitivity and predictive accuracy between the three groups.
The significant decrease in FA and increase in Dr suggest microstructural disruption in the parahippocampal cingulum in the MCI group.
The parahippocampal cingulum bundle is highly related to MCI and AD as it connects the hippocampus to the rest of the brain area
Deteriorations in the parahippocampal cingulum are associated with episodic memory in nondementing elderly adults
In addition, we identified two other major fiber bundles, the posterior thalamic radiation and forceps major, that consistently demonstrated significant sensitivity and classification accuracy in both the ANOVA and penalized logistic regression analyses.
The posterior thalamic radiation connects the caudal parts of the thalamus with the occipital and parietal lobes, while the forceps major facilitates interhemispheric communication.
Although not previously reported in AD studies, the pulvinar nuclei of the caudal thalamus play a role in selective attention, particularly visual attention filtering and focusing
Similarly, not previously reported in AD, the microstructures detected by DTI in the forceps major are associated with visuospatial working memory in the developing brain
Overall, the identified fiber bundles are located at the posterior part of the brain, suggesting a posterior-anterior gradient.
Such gradients support the Braak staging and recent evidence of spatial distribution of tau deposition across AD stages
Furthermore, these fiber bundles were all significantly associated with auditory verbal learning performance with a trend of higher correlation coefficient in the MCI group (not tested), supporting the earlier hypothesis of accumulating cognitive deficits
Overall, the diffusion measurements in individuals with SCD were intermediate between the CN and MCI groups (Supplementary Fig.
Despite the known etiological heterogeneity and modest group sample sizes, we detected emerging signals, although weak at this point, of sensitivity in diffusion metrics for differentiating SCD from CN. Notably, Da in the forceps major and superior longitudinal fasciculus differed significantly between CN and SCD at uncorrected P ,.05 (Supplementary Fig.
Moreover, Da in the forceps major was also significantly associated with performance in the assessment of perceived cognitive change (i.e., CCI) for the CN and SCD groups (Supplementary Table
Future large-sample studies may provide sufficient power to determine the significance of the small effect size between CN and SCD.
Owing to the spatial heterogeneity of the initial pathophysiological changes (e.g., varying locations of amyloid-beta-triggered neuronal apoptosis and degeneration
Thus, alternatively, subjectspecific analytical approaches
In this study, no significant differences between CN and SCD were observed.
Widespread, but inconsistent, changes in diffusion metrics in SCD have been reported, with higher MD and Dr
The SCD in these previous studies, however, was categorized differently with significantly decreased AVLT scores
In this study, the SCD group was classified more stringently with no significant differences from the CN controls in any objective cognitive assessments (e.g., RAVLT-IR, RAVLT-DR, and MoCA).
The term SCD, which has also been variously referred to as cognitive complaints
Limitations of the present study include preclinical cerebrovascular disease affecting white matter, a cross-sectional study design with progression to AD not yet known, modest group sample sizes, a lack of AD subjects as the benchmark, and potentially the choice of the diffusion model.
Although NODDI provides a clinically feasible approach with robust nonlinear data fitting for probing axonal density in vivo, NODDI estimates may deviate in severe disease conditions where white matter microstructures are highly distorted
We considered the subtle white matter microscopic changes in early stage AD may still satisfy NODDI model assumptions.
Alternative options may be to use white matter track integrity based on diffusion kurtosis imaging
These options, however, require different sets of diffusion constraints, ill-fitted voxels resulting in "black holes" requiring imaging smoothing, many more diffusion encoding directions, or special MRI pulse sequences (non-product sequences).



Fig. 1 .
Fig. 1. White matter tracts of interest in one cognitively normal subject generated using probabilistic tractography rendered in sagittal (left), coronal (center), and axial (right) views.
The 27 tracts of interest were grouped into five categories: the brainstem (not shown here), limbic fibers connecting the limbic system (first row), projection fibers (second row), thalamic radiations (third row), and association fibers (fourth row).



Fig. 2 .
Fig. 2. Tracts exhibiting significant differences after the Bonferroni correction.
(A) Tests showing significant differences are highlighted in orange (higher in disease group) or blue (lower in disease group).
(B) Tracts exhibiting significant differences in FA, with color labeling indicating different significance levels.
Rendered in sagittal (left), coronal (center), and axial (right) views.
(C) Tracts showing significant differences in Dr. Abbreviations: SCD, subjective cognitive decline; CN, cognitively normal; MCI, mild cognitive impairment; FA, fractional anisotropy; MD, mean diffusivity; Da, axial diffusivity; Dr, radial diffusivity; ICVF, intra-axonal volume fraction; OD, orientation dispersion; P 0 , zero-displacement probability; cgh_l, left parahippocampal cingulum; cgh_r, right parahippocampal cingulum; fma, forceps major; ifo_l, inferior fronto-occipital fasciculi left; ptr_l, left posterior thalamic radiation.



Fig. 4 .
Fig. 4. Linear regression analyses between Rey Auditory Verbal Learning Test immediate recall (RAVLT-IR) and radial diffusivity (Dr) in the left parahippocampal cingulum, posterior thalamic radiation, and forceps major.
The correlation coefficient as in goodness of fit (r) is labeled in black for all subjects combined (n 5 100, black regression line) and with red for MCI (n 5 22, red regression line).
Significance level is labeled as: * for P , .05,
** for P , .01, and *** for P , .001.
Abbreviations: SCD, subjective cognitive decline; CN, cognitively normal; MCI, mild cognitive impairment.



Fig. 3 .
Fig. 3. Best predictors identified by penalized logistic regression (LASSO).
(A) The receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves for each combination of predictors (i.e., diffusion and tract of interest pairs) selected by LASSO for discriminating between SCD and MCI.
The best predictors for SCD and MCI were Dr in the left parahippocampal cingulum (cgh_l), MD in the forceps major (fma), and FA in the left posterior thalamic radiation (ptr_l).
The area under the ROC curve (AUC) was 0.83 with all three predictors (bold black line), 0.81 with Dr-cgh_l and MD-fma (gray line), and 0.80 with only Dr-cgh_l (light gray line).
(B) The ROC curves for each combination of predictors selected by LASSO for discriminating between CN and MCI.
The best predictors for CN and MCI were FA-ptr_l and OD-cgh_l.
The areas under the ROC curve were 0.88 using both predictors (bold black line) and 0.82 using only FA-ptr_l (gray line).
(C) Anatomical locations of the three most sensitive tracts of interest: left parahippocampal cingulum (cgh_l), left posterior thalamic radiation (ptr_l), and forceps major (fma).
(D) Boxplots of LASSO-selected diffusion parameters (vertical axes) in the three most sensitive tracts of interest (horizontal axes) for all groups.
Abbreviations: LASSO, least absolute shrinkage and selection operator; SCD, subjective cognitive decline; CN, cognitively normal; MCI, mild cognitive impairment; FA, fractional anisotropy; MD, mean diffusivity; Dr, radial diffusivity; OD, orientation dispersion.



Table 1