Assessment of Alzheimer’s Disease Based on Texture Analysis of the Entorhinal Cortex
Alzheimer's disease (AD) brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) biomarkers based on larger-scale tissue neurodegeneration changes, such as atrophy, are currently widely used.
Texture analysis evaluates the statistical properties of the tissue image quantitatively; therefore, it could detect smaller-scale changes of neurodegeneration.
Entorhinal cortex is the first region affected, and no study has investigated texture analysis on this region before.
This study aims to differentiate AD patients from Normal Control (NC) and Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI) subjects using entorhinal cortex texture features.
Furthermore, it was evaluated whether texture has association to MCI beyond that of volume, to evaluate if atrophy development may precede.
Texture features were extracted from 194 NC, 200 MCI, 84 MCI who converted to AD (MCIc), and 130 AD subjects.
Receiving operating characteristic curves determined the performance of the various features in discriminating the groups, and a predictive model was used to predict conversion of MCIc subjects to AD.
An area under the curve (AUC) of 0.872, 0.710, 0.730, and 0.764 was seen between NC vs. AD, NC vs. MCI, MCI vs. MCIc, and MCI vs. AD subjects, respectively.
Including entorhinal cortex volume improved the AUCs to 0.914, 0.740, 0.756, and 0.780, respectively.
For the disease prediction, binary logistic regression was applied on five randomly selected test groups and achieved on average AUC's of 0.760 and 0.764 on the training and validation cohorts, respectively.
Entorhinal cortex texture features were significantly different between the four groups and in many cases provided better results compared to other methods such as volumetry.

INTRODUCTION
Alzheimer's disease (AD) represents the first disease in the top 10 disease leading cause of death in the United States (US), and it cannot be prevented, slowed, or cured.
It represents the most common form of dementia, which affects memory, language, and other cognitive skills and eventually leads to an inability of everyday activities.
Despite continuous advances in exploring the nature of AD, according to the World Health Organization (WHO), there are 47 million patients worldwide, and by 2030, this number is projected to increase to 75 million.
There are still many unresolved issues regarding the pathophysiology of this highly heterogeneous disease in terms of diagnosis and follow-up.
In an attempt to understand better the disease, studies have been examining the neuropathology and cognitive impairment in animal models such as transgenic mice (see
However, it seems that AD is a uniquely human disease.
With no doubt, animal models offer the advantage of in vivo testing, which in humans is available only post-mortem; however, they lack main disease pathological features such as neuronal loss or neurofibrillary tangle (NFT) development, which is the neuropathological hallmark of AD
The diagnosis of the disease still remains probable and only post-mortem biopsy can confirm AD as it reveals deposits of amyloid-β (Aβ) plaque deposition and tau protein (NFTs) in the brain tissue
However, due to brain inaccessibility, the diagnosis is based on other factors such as medical and family history, input from the family members regarding the behavior of the subject, blood test, imaging, and cognitive tests.
Cognitive tests such as the Mini Mental State Examination (MMSE)
However, an important limitation of clinical and cognitive assessment is the diagnosis of probable AD after structural changes have occurred within the brain
Furthermore, when cognitive assessment is not used in combination with other biomarkers, the former suffers from low sensitivity
Indeed, decades before the first clinical symptoms become apparent, there is an inevitable progression of atrophy, which initially affects the medial temporal lobe (MTL)
MTL is highly associated with memory, and as the neurons get affected, cognitive and functional deficits start to appear.
Post-mortem studies
Mild cognitive impairment (MCI) represents the transitional stage between normal aging and AD, and it cannot be easily identified by cognitive tests.
MCI subjects may have decreased memory function beyond the normal level based on a given person's age and education; however, they do not fulfill the criteria for dementia, as their cognitive function is comparable to Normal Control (NC) subjects.
Most of these subjects will remain stable even after 10 years of follow-up
Therefore, due to cognitive assessment limitations especially for MCI subjects, the research community has been actively searching for diagnostic imaging biomarkers especially the ones derived from quantitative T1-weighted MRI.
The importance of structural MRI in the assessment of AD was underlined by its inclusion in the new diagnostic criteria
However, PET studies are not easily accessible, due to several factors such as cost, radiopharmaceutical limitations (availability, targeting amyloid or tau proteins), and exposure to ionizing radiation.
On the other hand, structural MRI has no ionizing radiation; thus, it is preferable in longitudinal investigations, and it provides highresolution images.
However, radiologists cannot perceive subtle changes of neurodegeneration, especially in the early stages of the disease by the naked eye observation.
Even if they could, without any quantitative measurements, it would be impossible to predict the patient's progress.
Therefore, research on quantitative MRI-derived biomarkers of AD is an active research area, which can reveal the cerebral atrophy and they are used as a biomarker in the assessment of AD.
In the literature, several MRI quantitative methods are described for use in the assessment of AD.
Such methods are: (i) voxel-based morphometry (VBM), which describes global changes or atrophy of the deep cerebral structures (ii) volume analysis (iii) thickness analysis (iv) shape, and (v) texture analysis.
Volumetry remains the most popular technique to assess AD especially in the area of MTL
Apart from the MTL, other studies chose to assess the whole brain
Multimethod studies
The accumulation of NFTs and Aβ plaques is present prior to atrophy, and these plaques could affect image intensity structure and distribution.
Texture analysis statistical properties of the image intensities might represent changes in MRI image pixel intensity due to NFTs and Aβ plaques.
Furthermore, MRI biomarkers based on texture might be able to detect earlier stages of AD than biomarkers that use larger-scale changes, such as thickness or atrophy.
The establishment of such biomarkers will allow the identification of individuals with MCI at an earlier stage.
This might lead to a better management of the MCI group targeting in slower progression or even prevention to conversion to AD.
Although hippocampus represents the most established region of interest (ROI) used in the assessment of AD, the earlier involvement of the entorhinal cortex was proved by many studies
In two comprehensive reviews
Table
Furthermore, for the disease prediction, entorhinal cortex provided better predictive accuracies compared to hippocampus.
Although volumetry represents the most commonly used method to date, there is lack of research in the assessment of AD using texture analysis.
The study of
Therefore, we hypothesized that through the earlier involvement of entorhinal cortex and by using texture, it is likely to detect microscopic alterations of the disease before atrophy spreads.
Since we wanted to evaluate the classification and prediction value of MRI, other related to AD features such as CSF Tau, Aβ biomarkers, or ApoE genotyping were not included in the analysis, as they are not generally available in population samples.
However, age and gender as main risk factors for developing AD were included.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study that used texture analysis on the entorhinal cortex.
The main objective in this study was to determine whether MRI entorhinal cortex texture features could detect early cognitive decline in MCI and AD subjects.
In addition, we compared entorhinal cortex results to the gold standard method, hippocampal volume, to evaluate which method could provide the best results.
We emphasize here that the goal of our research was to investigate the usefulness of entorhinal cortex texture in AD assessment.
Then, through a follow-up period of 18 months, we did a comparison between volume and texture measures to evaluate the hypothesis that texture changes may precede the development of atrophy.
Finally, we evaluated if entorhinal cortex texture features can be used in the prediction of conversion from MCI to AD.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

The Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative
Data were acquired from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI).
The goal of the ADNI study is to determine biological biomarkers of AD through neuroimaging, genetics, neuropsychological tests, and other measures in order to develop new treatments and monitor their effectiveness, and lessen the time of clinical trials.

Subjects
All subjects selected for this study were from standardized data collections (see
All data acquired as part of this study are publicly available.
Enrolled subjects were all between 55 and 90 years of age, and each subject was willing, able to perform all test procedures described in the protocol, and had

Cognitive Measures
All subjects underwent through clinical and cognitive assessment at the time of baseline scan to determine their diagnosis.
Inclusion criteria for NC were MMSE scores between 24 and 30; CDR of zero; absence of depression, MCI, and dementia.
Inclusion criteria for MCI were MMSE scores between 24 and 30; CDR of 0.5; objective memory loss, measured by education adjusted scores on Wechsler Memory Scale Logical Memory II
Inclusion criteria for AD were MMSE scores between 20 and 26; CDR of 0.5 or 1.0; National Institute of Neurological and Communicative Disorders and Stroke and the Alzheimer's Disease and Related Disorders Association (NINCDS/ADRDA) criteria for probable AD
Definitive autopsy-based diagnosis of AD was not possible, and detailed description of inclusion/exclusion criteria can be found in the ADNI protocol.

MRI Data
All the subjects had a standardized protocol on 1.5-T MRI units from Siemens Medical Solutions and General Electric Healthcare.
MR protocols included high-resolution (typically 1.25 × 1.25 × 1.25 mm 3 voxels) T1-weighted volumetric 3D sagittal magnetization prepared rapid gradient-echo (MPRAGE) scans.
MRI data acquisition techniques were standardized across different sites according to the ADNI protocol.

Segmentation Algorithm and Volumetry
ROI segmentation was performed using the Freesurfer image analysis suite (Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, United States), which is documented and freely available for download online.
The Freesurfer pipeline conforms the MRI scans to an isotropic voxel size of 1 mm 3 , and the MRI intensity was normalized using the automated N3 algorithm
Details of these have been discussed in previous publications
Cy-Tera supercomputer of the Cyprus Institute was used to run FreeSurfer.

Texture Analysis
Texture features were calculated using KNIME Analytics platform
The following Haralick texture features

Statistical Analysis
Demographic data along with cognitive tests, texture and volume features of subjects at baseline scans were compared with one-way ANOVA to determine statistical differences between the groups (NC, MCI, MCIc, AD).
Then, post-hoc tests using the Bonferroni correction were applied to determine if there were significant differences in texture features between the groups.
There were no outliers in the data, as assessed by inspection of a boxplot.
Texture features and volume were combined as predictor variables in a logistic regression model in order to investigate the potential of combined value of the two MRI biomarkers.
Backward elimination methods were used to select the most suitable variables.
Apart from texture and volume, we included age and gender as covariates.
Through receiving operating characteristic (ROC) curves, we determined the performance of the various variables, and their ability to discriminate NC from MCI and AD subjects, as well as to classify the conversion status.
The resulting area under the curve (AUC) was used to determine the capability for diagnosis.
The significance of an AUC was determined using DeLong, Delong, and Clarke-Pearson's test
Then, through a repeated measures ANOVA, we compared entorhinal cortex and hippocampal volume changes with texture changes within 18 months and evaluated if there were significant texture changes during follow-up period.
Data were checked for outliers and normal distribution, as assessed by boxplot and Shapiro-Wilk test (p > 0.05).
When sphericity was violated, as assessed by Mauchly's test, the Greenhouse-Geisser correction was applied.
Then, post-hoc tests using the Bonferroni correction was used to compare the volume and texture changes.
To evaluate the prognostic power of our model, we also used AUC curves on MCI and MCIc subjects.
Specifically, the MCI group was randomly divided into both a training set (∼70% of the participants) and a trial set (∼30%) of the participants.
This was iterated five times to provide five unique training and test groups.
The training sets were used to fit two binary logistic regression models: the first model included entorhinal cortex volume, MMSE scores, age, and gender as covariates, and the second model had the same features, plus entorhinal cortex texture to determine if the addition of texture-based metrics could improve the accuracy.
For a more robust prediction model, the colinearity between the predictor variables was evaluated, and only those for which the colinearity was acceptable were included in the final model.
The estimated logistic regression model was then applied to the validation cohorts.
Statistical analysis was performed with IBM SPSS Statistics Version 24 (IBM Corp. Released 2011; IBM SPSS Statistics for Windows, Version 20.0.
Armonk, NY: IBM Corp.) or MedCal Version 19 (MedCalc Software bvba, Ostend, Belgium). 6
The significance level of all statistical tests was set at P < 0.05.

RESULTS
Baseline demographics including gender, age, and MMSE scores are shown in Table
All baseline variables (except the age) were significantly different between the four groups based on oneway ANOVA.
Estimations of hippocampal and entorhinal cortex volumes are in cubic millimeter (left and right averaged).
As expected, AD patients had smaller volumes than MCI subjects, and both had smaller volumes than NC subjects.

Between-Group Differences
A one-way ANOVA was conducted to determine if there were significant texture features between the groups for baseline scans (Table
For NC vs. AD and NC vs.
MCI groups, entorhinal cortex revealed statistically significant differences in more features compared to hippocampus.
Specifically, hippocampus did not show any significant changes for NC vs.
MCI group, apart for volume.
However, hippocampal texture revealed statistical significant differences in more features between MCI vs. MCIc group.
Between MCI vs. AD, both structures had similar results with entorhinal cortex showing statistically significant differences in the texture feature contrast, correlation, sum variance, and entropy, whereas hippocampus for the texture feature ASM, sum average, and entropy.

Texture Differences Between Groups -Classification
To determine the classification between the groups, a binary logistic regression model was calculated for each individual variable, and using ROC curves, we determined their AUC.
The combination model included raw single MRI variable scores as 6
2019 well as age and gender as covariates.
In most of the cases, all eight texture features revealed significant differences between groups (see Tables
Then, all the variables were combined together, and the backward elimination method selected the more important predictor variables.
For NC vs. AD group, the AUC for entorhinal cortex texture values ranged from 0.540 to 0.824 (Table
When texture features were combined into a single classification model, the AUC reached 0.872, which was similar to hippocampal volume (AUC 0.869) and entorhinal cortex volume (AUC 0.888).
When entorhinal cortex texture and volume were combined, the AUC reached 0.914.
Between NC and MCI subjects, features combination showed a lower AUC (0.710) compared to entorhinal and hippocampal volume (Table
The entorhinal cortex texture and volume combination raised the AUC to 0.740.
Between MCI and MCIc subjects, features combination provided a higher AUC (0.730), compared to entorhinal cortex and hippocampal volume (Table
The entorhinal cortex texture and volume combination raised the AUC to 0.756.
Between MCI and AD subjects, features combination showed a higher AUC of 0.764 compared to entorhinal cortex and hippocampal volume (Table
The entorhinal cortex texture and volume combination raised the AUC to 0.780.

Measures Between Different MRI Scan Intervals
A one-way repeated measures ANOVA was conducted to determine whether there were statistically significant differences in entorhinal cortex (texture and volume) over the 18month observation (baseline, 6, 12, and 18 months).
For comparison, hippocampal volume was also included in this analysis.
At each time point, a diagnosis was made based on the NINCDS-ADRDA Alzheimer's Criteria to identify conversion of MCI to probable AD and vice versa, and only MCI and MCIc subjects were included in this part of the analysis.
Specifically, longitudinal data of 141 MCI and 77 MCIc subjects were included in this analysis.
The means and standard deviations for volume are presented in Table
We reported the F-statistic from the repeated measures ANOVA test as F(df time , df error ) = F-value, P = P-value.
For entorhinal cortex volume in both MCI and MCIc subjects, there was a significant effect for time [F(2.837,
383.0) = 45.62,
P < 0.0005] and [F(3, 186) = 45.06,
P < 0.0005], respectively.
Furthermore, the mean difference was statistically significant at the 0.05 level between all-time points for both MCI and MCIc subjects with the exception of 12-18 time points for MCIc subjects.
Post-hoc tests using the Bonferroni correction showed that entorhinal cortex volume in the MCI subjects was reduced by an average of 20 ± 6.9 mm 3 6 months after the baseline scan, then by an additional 19 ± 6.0 mm 3 between 6 and 12 months' time and 36 ± 6.1 mm 3 between 12 and 18 months' time.
As expected, the entorhinal cortex degeneration was more pronounced in the MCIc subjects.
Their entorhinal cortex volume was reduced by an average of 55 ± 10.5 mm 3 6 months after the baseline scan, then by an additional 25 ± 9.5 mm 3 between 6 and 12 months' time and 40 ± 10.3 mm 3 between 12 and 18 months' time.
For hippocampal volume in both MCI and MCIc subjects, there was significant effect for time
P < 0.0005] and
P < 0.0005] respectively.
Furthermore, the mean difference was statistically significant at the 0.05 level between all-time points for both MCI and MCIc subjects with the exception of 12-18 time points for MCIc subjects.
Interestingly, hippocampal volume reduction in the MCIc subjects was similar to MCI stable subjects.
Specifically, post-hoc tests using the Bonferroni correction revealed that hippocampal volume in the MCI subjects was reduced by an average of 49 ± 12.6 mm 3 6 months after the baseline scan, then by an additional 45 ± 11.5 mm 3 between 6 and 12 months' time and 38 ± 11.3 mm 3 between 12 and 18 months' time.
A similar pattern was seen in MCIc subjects as well as hippocampal volume reduction was 45 ± 15.8 mm 3 after 6 months from the baseline scan, and then reduced by an additional 40 ± 14.0 mm 3 between 6 and 12 months' time and an additional 38 ± 16.6 mm 3 between 12 and 18 months' time.
Remarkably, repeated measures ANOVA in the entorhinal cortex texture features of MCIc subjects revealed that there was significant effect for time for all features (except for cluster shade), whereas in stable MCI subjects, there was significant effect for time only for sum variance and entropy.

Prediction of Conversion to AD Within 18 Months
To evaluate entorhinal cortex texture in the prediction of conversion from MCI to AD, all the MCI subjects were divided into two categories: the MCI subjects who remained stable and did not convert to AD within 18 months (n = 200) vs. the MCIc subjects who converted to AD within 18 months (n = 84).
First, we run a prediction model, which included entorhinal cortex volume, MMSE scores, and gender with age as covariates.
Then, a second model was run where entorhinal cortex texture features (contrast and cluster shade) were included as well, to evaluate if texture metrics could improve accuracy.
The selected variables were also evaluated for colinearity between them, and their degree of correlation was acceptable.
Then, the MCI group was divided into a training set (∼70) and a trial set (∼30%).
We randomly generated five of these sets, with each training set having a total of n = 133 MCI and n = 55 MCIc, whereas the trial set had total of n = 67 MCI and n = 29 MCIc.
Independent sample t-test and chi-square analysis showed no statistical difference between the baseline demographics in the training and trial sets in each iteration.
For each of the two models, five binary logistic regression models were determined, corresponding to one for each training set (Table
The model including texture performed better and achieved AUCs of 0.795, 0.725, 0.745, 0.786, and 0.750, respectively.
Then, the logistic regression coefficients from the final model developed from the training cohorts were applied to the validation cohorts, and AUCs of 0.780, 0.780, 0.790, 0.735, and 0.735 were seen.

DISCUSSION
The main objective of this study was to evaluate entorhinal cortex texture as a new biomarker of AD from T1-weighted MR images.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study that used texture analysis on the entorhinal cortex for the assessment of AD.
Thus, our results are not directly compared to the same method and ROI previously used in other AD studies, but mainly to hippocampal volume, which represents the most frequently used method in the assessment of AD.
In the analysis, apart from entorhinal cortex texture features, we calculated also its volume, and we combined them in a binary logistic regression model, which included age and gender as covariates.
For entorhinal cortex, one way-ANOVA showed that contrast, correlation, and volume were the features that showed statistical significant differences between all groups and, for hippocampus, sum average, cluster shade, and volume (see Table
For the NC vs.
MCI group, one-way ANOVA showed that were statistically significant differences in more features for the entorhinal cortex compared to the hippocampus, whereas the hippocampus showed significant differences in more features between MCI vs. MCIc group.
Perhaps, these differences are correlated with the fact that entorhinal cortex is the region affected first by the disease
In the literature, the entorhinal cortex and hippocampus have shown a significant role in the assessment of AD
Similarly, in the present study, results of the ROC curve analysis showed that for the entorhinal cortex, there were significant differences between NC subjects and AD patients.
Specifically, there were significant texture changes in six texture features (apart from variance and cluster shade), and their combination provided an AUC of 0.872 (P < 0.001) for the discrimination between NC and AD subjects (Table
This was similar to entorhinal cortex or hippocampal volume, which showed AUC of 0.888 (P < 0.001) and 0.869 (P < 0.001), respectively.
When entorhinal cortex texture features and volume were combined into the same model, the diagnostic result was improved, showing an AUC of 0.914 (P < 0.001).
Compared to a study that used hippocampal texture such as from
However, their dataset included severely affected AD subjects (MMSE 5.53 ± 4.47 compared to 23 ± 1.9 for the ADNI data in the present study).
Compared to the study of
On the other hand, the study of
Compared to other ADNI volumetric studies where hippocampus was used, NC subjects were classified from AD patients with AUC levels of 0.750-0.887
when hippocampal subfields only were used
This is comparable to our hippocampal volume results (AUC 0.869), which is close to entorhinal cortex texture (AUC 0.888).
In other studies
In the study of
Between NC vs.
MCI subjects, the combination of entorhinal cortex texture features in the logistic regression model provided an AUC of 0.710 and their combination with entorhinal cortex volume raised the AUC to 0.740 (Table
This is comparable to the AUC (0.764) in the study of
In the study of
The study by
85%, Sp. 95%); however, their analysis was based on 3-Tesla (T) images.
Compared to other studies
Between MCI and MCIc subjects, the combination of entorhinal cortex texture features and volume provided an AUC of 0.756, whereas entorhinal cortex or hippocampal volume provided lower AUCs of 0.642 and 0.685, respectively.
Our result for this group was similar to the study of
These findings suggest that the entorhinal cortex texture changes precede neuronal atrophy of the hippocampus, which is consistent with the most widely used staging scheme proposed by
Specifically, Stage I is associated with NFT deposition in the entorhinal-perirhinal cortex, and in Stage II, the NFTs become more prominent, and the entorhinal cortex is eventually involved.
In Stage III, the entorhinal cortex is fully involved, whereas between Stages III and IV, NFTs appear in the hippocampus.
Eventually, in Stages V-VI, apart from the MTL, NFTs are also widely distributed in the isocortex.
Between MCI and AD subjects, the combination of entorhinal cortex features showed better diagnostic capability (AUC of 0.764) compared to entorhinal cortex and hippocampal volume (AUCs of 0.726 and 0.711, respectively).
The combination of entorhinal cortex texture and volume raised the AUC to 0.780 (Table
For this group, other studies
In the one-way repeated measures ANOVA, the entorhinal cortex volume reduction was more pronounced in the MCIc subjects, whereas hippocampal volume atrophy rate was similar in both MCI and MCI subjects.
Similar finding was seen in the study of
Regarding entorhinal cortex texture features (Table
Perhaps, this finding indicates that through entorhinal cortex texture features, we could identify that MCI subjects in the future could develop the disease.
Furthermore, we determined whether entorhinal cortex texture could be used to predict conversion of MCI to AD within 18 months.
For the discrimination of stable MCI from MCIc subjects, our prediction model including entorhinal cortex features, volume, MMSE scores, age, and gender performed better rather than volume alone and demonstrated an average AUC of



TABLE 1 |
Selected quantitative magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) studies where entorhinal cortex was used for the classification of AD and the prediction of conversion from MCI to AD. study partner who is able to provide an independent evaluation of functioning.
Overall, 455 subjects were included in the study: 153 NC (73 males and 80 females), 141 MCI (95 males and 46 females), 77 MCI subjects that converted to AD (MCIc; 43 males and 34 females), and 84 AD (40 males and 44 females).



TABLE 2 |
Baseline demographics and hippocampal and entorhinal cortex volume.



TABLE 3 |
Mean differences at baseline scans for entorhinal cortex and hippocampus.



TABLE 4 |
Entorhinal cortex texture and volume in classifying NC vs. AD.



TABLE 5 |
Entorhinal cortex texture and volume in classifying NC vs. MCI.



TABLE 6 |
Entorhinal cortex texture and volume in classifying MCI vs. MCIc.



TABLE 7 |
Entorhinal cortex texture and volume in classifying MCI vs. AD.



TABLE 8 |
Statistically significant difference in entorhinal cortex and hippocampal volume over an 18-month intervention.



TABLE 9 |
Statistically significant difference in entorhinal cortex texture over an 18-month intervention.