Differential default mode network trajectories in asymptomatic individuals at risk for Alzheimer's disease
The longitudinal trajectories of functional brain dynamics and the impact of genetic risk factors in individuals at risk for Alzheimer's disease are poorly understood.
Methods: In a large-scale monocentric cohort of 224 amyloid stratified individuals at risk for Alzheimer's disease, default mode network (DMN) resting state functional connectivity (FC) was investigated between two serial time points across 2 years.
Results: Widespread DMN FC changes were shown in frontal and posterior areas, as well as in the right hippocampus.
There were no cross-sectional differences, however, apolipoprotein E ε4 (APOE ε4) carriers demonstrated slower increase in FC in frontal lobes.
There was no impact of individual brain amyloid load status.
Discussion: For the first time, we demonstrated that the pleiotropic biological effect of the APOE ε4 allele impacts the dynamic trajectory of the DMN during aging.
Dynamic functional biomarkers may become useful surrogate outcomes for the development of preclinical targeted therapeutic interventions.

Background
Individuals at risk for complex, nonlinear dynamic diseases, such as Alzheimer's (AD), have active adaptive responses and compensatory mechanisms to maintain homeostasis
Stratifying individuals according to the genetic risk factors for AD is a crucial step to attain reliable measures essential for identifying distinctive endophenotypes.
Breakthrough technological advances have facilitated synergistic research alliances between geneticists and neuroscientists to determine how genomic factors affect brain structure, function, and metabolism.
Overall, robust evidence is mounting, indicating several genes associated with an increased risk of AD
The apolipoprotein E (APOE) ε4 allele is considered the most relevant genetic risk factor for late-onset AD and is observed in up to 50% of all cases of sporadic AD
APOE gene is involved in many different processes: it regulates amyloid b (Ab) oligomerization, aggregation, and receptor-mediated clearance, brain lipid transport, glucose metabolism, neuronal signaling, and neuroinflammation
In vivo pathophysiological or topographic biomarkers (e.g., reduced metabolism
In the past decade, brain functional connectivity (FC) has become a promising candidate biomarker for early identification of brain functional changes related to AD pathophysiology
Functional neuroimaging genetics offers an efficient strategy for characterizing intermediate phenotypes of AD and improving the understanding of genetic pathways that interact with brain functioning
Although the field is relatively young, the number of studies investigating possible downstream effects of risk genes on brain functional dynamics is rapidly growing.
Particularly, APOE ε4 carriers show specific and consistent alterations in the default mode network (DMN)
Increases in resting state FC (rsFC) at the early stages of AD have been interpreted as either upstream or downstream brain compensatory mechanisms between brain regions typically affected in AD
Whether different aging trajectories occur in the DMN in cognitively intact APOE ε4 carriers and noncarriers, however, is currently unknown and requires longitudinal investigations at the individual level.
This will be an essential step forward for the functional neuroimaging genetic field because, to date, studies have been almost exclusively conducted using cross-sectional designs, exploring DMN alterations over time by comparing cross-sectional groups with increased genetic risk across different severity stages
Longitudinal methods are particularly sensitive in detecting individual functional changes in neural networks.
Long-term follow-up studies performed on cognitively intact individuals at risk for AD would enable researchers to trace pathophysiological trajectories from health to late dementia stages and identify critical windows for failing compensatory mechanisms.
This is of special interest for older individuals with subjective memory complaints (SMC), a condition at increased risk of developing AD
Such memory complaints may represent early signs of a wider cognitive impairment and be considered as a valid measure of self-reported memory decline
Both memory complaints and the presence of at least one APOE ε4 allele predict cognitive decline at an early stage of AD
However, no evidence of longitudinal alterations in functional networks has been established so far in asymptomatic individuals at risk for AD.
We compared longitudinal DMN rsFC between two time points (24 months apart) in a large-scale standardized observational university expert center-based monocentric cohort of 224 cognitively intact individuals with SMC, devoid of any objective cognitive impairment.
Given (1) the critical role of APOE in regulating Ab-related processes

Materials and methods

Participants
Data used in the preparation of this article were obtained from the "INveStIGation of AlzHeimer'sPredicTors in Subjective Memory Complainers" (INSIGHT-preAD) study [detailed method is available in
The INSIGHT-preAD study includes 318 cognitively intact Caucasian older adults recruited from the community in the wider Paris area, France, aged 70 to 85 years, with SMC, defined as follows: (1) Participants answered "YES" to both questions "Are you complaining about your memory?" and "Is it a regular complaint that has lasted now more than 6 months?";
(2) participants present intact cognitive functions based on Mini-Mental State Examination
Written informed consent was obtained from all participants.
The study was approved by the local Institutional Review Board and has been conducted in accordance with the Helsinki Declaration of 1975.
For the present study, we had considered only participants who underwent the resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging (rs-fMRI) acquisition both at the first time point (M0) and after 24 months (M24).
Demographic characteristics, cognitive performance, and APOE genotype of the final subset (224 participants) are shown in Table

Clinical and neuropsychological assessments
A comprehensive neuropsychological battery was administered to all participants of the INSIGHT-preAD cohort to assess they were cognitively intact in all relevant cognitive domains

APOE genotype
Participants were divided into two groups based on the APOE status: individuals carrying at least one APOE ε4 allele (genotype ε4/ε4 and ε4/ε3) were classified as APOE ε4 carriers (APOE ε41); the others (genotype ε2/ε2, ε2/ε3, and ε3/ε3) were classified as APOE ε4 noncarriers (APOE ε42) [detailed method is available in

Amyloid status definition
Reconstructed positron emission tomography images were analyzed with a pipeline developed by the Centre Acquisition et Traitement des Images (CATI), a neuroimaging platform funded by the French Plan Alzheimer (
Our cohort was divided into two subgroups based on their cortical standardized uptake value ratio value, that is, amyloid positive (Amy1) and amyloid negative (Amy2) individuals
The standardized uptake value ratio threshold of 0.79 to determine abnormality uptake was extracted performing linear correlation between our method

MRI acquisition and preprocessing
MRI images were acquired using a Siemens Magneto-mVerio (Erlangen, Germany) 3T scanner, equipped with a quadrature detection head coil with 12 channels (transmitreceive circularly polarized-head coil).
Three-dimensional (3D) TurboFLASH sequences were performed (orientation sagittal; repetition time 2300 ms; echo time 2.98 ms; inversion time 900 ms; flip angle 9 ; 176 slices; slice thickness 1 mm; field of view 256 !
240 mm; matrix 256 !
240; bandwidth 240 Hz/Px).

rs-fMRI acquisition and preprocessing
Both baseline and follow-up scanning were performed on a 3 T MRI scanner qualified by the central MRI analysis core at the Cogimage Team, ICM (Paris, France).
During the rs-fMRI scan, participants were instructed to keep their eyes closed and stay as still as possible.
The rs-fMRI images were collected by using an echo-planar imaging sequence (repetition time 2460 ms, echo time 30 ms, slice thickness 3 mm, matrix 64 !
64, voxel size 3 !
3 !
3 mm 3 , number of volumes 250, number of slices 45, run 1) sensitive to blood oxygenation level-dependent contrast (T2* weighting).
The rs-fMRI data were preprocessed using the Brain Connectivity and Behaviour toolkit v4.0.0 (available at
Each participant's first 10 volumes were excluded to avoid potential noise related to the equilibrium of the magnet and participant's adaptation to the scanner.
After individual correction for movement, the remaining 240 volumes were first motion corrected using a motion-correction tool based on FMRIB's Linear Image Registration Tool, then corrected for slice timing, smoothed with a full half width maximum equal to 1.5 times the largest voxel dimension, and finally filtered for low temporal frequencies using a Gaussian-weighted local fit to a straight line.
These steps are available in Feat as part of FMRIB Software Library package.
fMRI images are linearly registered to the T1 structural images.
Estimated motion parameters, the first eigenvariate of the white matter and cerebrospinal fluid and their first derivatives were regressed out from the functional data.
We used masks based on the T1 derived three-class segmentation thresholded to a probability value of .9,
registered to the rs-fMRI images and binarized.
Finally, the first derivative of the motion parameters, white matter, and cerebrospinal fluid signal was calculated by linear convolution between their time course and a [21 0 1] vector.
Given that rs-fMRI signal can be severely affected by motion, a strategy based on the independent component analysis for Automatic Removal of Motion Artifacts (ICA-AROMA) was used to estimate the signal fluctuation associated with motion and then to regress it out from the fMRI data
ICA-AROMA performs an ICA decomposition of the data and estimates which components reflect motion-related noise in the fMRI signal on the basis of a robust set of spatial and temporal features because of the distinctiveness of the motionrelated components
This approach outperforms other methods, such as the regression of the motion parameter estimates, while limiting at the same time the loss in degrees of freedom
Compared with spike removal methods such as scrubbing

rs-fMRI independent component analysis
Analysis of the rs-fMRI data was carried out using probabilistic ICA as implemented in Multivariate Exploratory Linear Optimized Decomposition into Independent Components, part of FMRIB's Software Library.
Multivariate Exploratory Linear Optimized Decomposition into Independent Components was used to decompose the original concatenated 4D rs-fMRI data set into different spatial and temporal components
The preprocessed functional data for each participant were temporally concatenated into a single 4D data set, which was analyzed using ICA.
In this analysis, the data set was decomposed into 20 independent components.
However, it should be noted that there is no consensus yet on how to choose the optimal number of components
The dual regression analysis was performed to identify subject-specific time courses and spatial maps
In the first step, the 20 components were used in a linear model fit against each individual subject's fMRI data set to create the average time course within each network for every subject (spatial regression), ultimately resulting in 20 z-score maps per individual per visit.
In the second step, the personalized time courses were regressed back onto that participant's fMRI data set to create personal spatial maps (temporal regression).
This gives 20 3D images per individual per visit, with voxelwise the z scores of FC to each of the templates.
The first step (group ICA) was performed using the first time point (M0) of all individuals.
To keep the spatial patterns consistent across analyses, the resulting 20 independent components were used in the next dual regression steps to analyze the second data point (M24).
The DMN was finally selected by visual inspection based on the previous literature

Statistical analyses
To perform longitudinal analyses, we calculated the change in rsFC (i.e., DFC) after 24 months (M24) as the change in rsFC from the first acquisition (M0).
The FSL's randomized permutation-testing tool (5000 permutations) was used to detect statistically significant differences within the DMN, correcting for age.
Familywise error (FWE) correction for multiple comparisons was performed, implementing threshold-free cluster enhancement (TFCE) using a significance threshold of P , .05.

Effect of time
The resulting DFC values were compared with the null hypothesis of no change in DMN FC after 24 months by using one simple t test on DFC.

Effect of APOE
Given the pattern of results described in previous works
Cross-sectional group differences between APOE ε41 and APOE ε42 participants were firstly identified using two sample t tests in FSL for M0.
Then, we evaluated the longitudinal impact of being APOE ε41 versus APOE ε42, using a two independent t test on DFC.

Impact of the amyloid status
Finally, we investigated any potential effect of amyloid on the longitudinal brain dynamics changes.
To this aim, a 2 (amyloid status, Amy1 vs. Amy2) ! 2 (APOE genetic risk, APOE ε41 vs. APOE ε42) repeated measure analysis of variance was performed in fMRI Expert Analysis Tool (available at
Results were corrected for multiple comparisons using correction for FWE rate and TFCE, which is similar to cluster-based thresholding, but generally more robust and without the identification of the arbitrary initial cluster-forming threshold.
TFCE is recommended when randomization is performed

Results

Participants
From the INSIGHT-preAD cohort, we included only 242 participants.
See Fig.

DMN extraction
After individual correction for movement, an ICA identified the group level DMN, as depicted in Fig.
Individual maps were subsequently extracted using a dual regression approach

Main longitudinal effects
Fig.
The widespread increase in rsFC concerned the medial prefrontal, frontal, and posterior DMN regions, including the ACC extending to the anterior medial frontal cortex, the PCC, the Pcu, and the left hippocampus and parahippocampus (Fig.
Significant decrease in rsFC was minimal involving the most dorsal portion of the Pcu (Fig.

APOE ε4 genotype effect
We asked the question whether carrying the APOE ε4 allele affected the DMN rsFC.
First, we compared Fig.
Widespread increased (green-red voxels) DMN rsFC was found in our participants, including bilateral frontal and prefrontal regions, ACC, PCC, Pcu, angular gyrus, left hippocampus, and parahippocampus.
Pcu also showed decreased rsFC in time (blue voxels).
The statistical maps were thresholded using TFCE and P , .05 familywise error corrected, cluster .15
voxels.
All results are described in Table
the rsFC at the initial time point (M0): cross-sectional comparisons between APOE ε4 carriers (APOE ε41) and APOE ε4 noncarriers (APOE ε42) revealed that the presence of the ε4 allele did not significantly modulate the DMN rsFC.
Second, we assessed the genetic impact of the APOE ε4 allele on the rate of individual aging of the DMN rsFC: the longitudinal analysis indicated that individuals carrying the ε4 allele presented a slower increase in rsFC in the frontal lobes (P , .05
TFCE corrected), specifically in Brodmann area (BA) 9, BA10, BA46, bilaterally (Fig.
Hence, although the level of FC between APOE ε41 and APOE ε42 is comparable, the rate of increase in FC in APOE ε41 is significantly slower than APOE ε42.

Impact of amyloid status on functional dynamics of the APOE ε4 genotype
Whether individuals' amyloid status may further influence connectivity dynamics changes linked to the presence of APOE ε4 allele is still unknown.
Therefore, we perform a 2 ! 2 repeated measures analysis of variance to evaluate the presence of an interaction effect between APOE and amyloid status.
Results showed that neither the amyloid nor the APOE !
amyloid interaction were significant on the longitudinal changes (P , .05
FWE corrected).

Discussion
In summary, brain network dynamics were examined in a standardized large-scale, observational monocentric university expert center cohort of 224 cognitively intact individuals with SMC, devoid of any objective cognitive impairment.
Consistent with our a priori hypothesis, rsFC changes within the DMN were found 2 years after the first rs-fMRI evaluation.
In addition, we provided in vivo evidence that the APOE ε4 genotype leads to distinct DMN functional alterations regardless of the individual amyloid status.
At the group level, DMN changes were particularly evident in the posterior, frontal, and prefrontal cortices, as well as in the right hippocampus.
Consistently with previous findings
The increased brain activity during aging and at early stages of AD may serve as a compensatory mechanism and may reflect the enhanced metabolic demand engaged by an adaptive brain to cope with disruptive signals affecting specific vulnerable neural regions.
This increased resilient response has frequently been observed in the frontal lobes
Overall, in our population, compensatory mechanisms seem to involve a posterior-anterior shift
Consistent with this model, we found decreased rsFC in the most dorsal part of the Pcu.
However, we also showed the presence of increased activity in the more ventral Pcu extending to the PCC.
The presence of distinct expression of posterior alterations might originate from many sources.
First, owing to the functional heterogeneity of the Pcu
Here, we found decreased rsFC in the dorsal Pcu, which showed positive rsFC with the superior parietal cortex, and negative rsFC with the orbital and frontal cortices, the amygdala, and the cerebellum
Additional functional studies are needed to clarify whether specific Pcu subregions are differently affected across the whole AD continuum.
Second, rsFC might start decreasing in a narrow subregion of the Pcu and slowly perturbing other adjacent  neurons before spreading the functional impairment to the rest of the brain through a mechanism of diaschisis
We hypothesize that spatiotemporal changes across brain networks, in the context of complex and nonlinear dynamic diseases such as AD, may have a stepwise evolution from an "intra-network phase" to a whole-network and, ultimately, a multinetwork compensation phase.
Spreading of pathophysiological processes during brain disease phases are mediated by complex mechanisms
However, two longitudinal data points are insufficient to investigate the potential spreading of the functional impairment in time.
Future follow-up acquisitions of the INSIGHT-preAD cohort may provide us with key evidence in this regard.
The implementation of multimodal approaches, such as neuroimaging genetics integrated with computational biology, will provide the basis to establish whether the trajectories of molecular/cellular pathways are linked to dynamic patterns of neural network reorganization, thus potentially mapping compensatory or adaptive strategies.
We can argue that methodological choices may also have affected the results.
For instance, although SMC represents per se a condition at risk of developing AD
Moreover, although the application of ICA in rs-fMRI studies is a powerful analytic method to separate bold signal from physiological noise induced by the cardiac pulse and respiration, some residual noise might still be present in the components
Finally, we focused our attention on the DMN; however, early dysfunctions may involve further large-scale networks
More complex methods will allow us to extend the analyses to all the brain networks that are normally affected in neurologic disorders, including AD.
Finally, it is worth to note that the INSIGHT-preAD cohort includes well-educated individuals, which may be able to compensate more effectively.
As a consequence, our cohort may be affected by a selection bias that comes from errors in selecting the study participants and/or from factors affecting the study participation.
Successively, the impact of the APOE ε4 genotype was investigated.
In the present study, no significant results were found between APOE ε42 and APOE ε41 at the first time point (M0).
The reason why cross-sectional findings on the DMN connectivity do not consistently demonstrate differences between APOE ε42 and APOE ε41 is still debated in the literature
It has been previously shown that the inclusion of a wide age range in the same sample generated conflicting results: both decreased
In this regard, Staffaroni et al.
Our data might be similarly affected by the inclusion of different endophenotypes whose differences are exacerbated later in time.
It has been also demonstrated that different neural dynamics are detectable in mutation carriers of several additional genes, such as phosphatidylinositol binding clathrin assembly protein (PICALM), clusterin (CLU), and bridging integrator 1 (BIN1) genes across the lifespan
Liu et al.
Several additional pathophysiological mechanisms, epigenetic factors, and interactions with other genes might need to be considered and integrated in future studies.
For the first time, we demonstrated in vivo evidence that carrying the APOE ε4 allele leads to a different aging trajectory of DMN.
According to our results, we suggest that carrying the APOE ε4 allele leads to different longitudinal changes: APOE ε41 showed a slower increase in rsFC in the frontal and prefrontal areas compared with APOE ε42.
Future studies including neuropsychological outcome measures will disclose whether such dynamics represent compensatory mechanisms to cope with pathophysiological processes driven by APOE ε4 genotype.
Given the established association between APOE ε4 genotype and the impairment of Ab metabolism with subsequent extracellular accumulation
Our data suggest that APOE ε4 leads to DMN rsFC changes regardless of the Ab brain accumulation, indicating that other biological mechanisms, besides Ab, are driven by the APOE ε4 allele.
Such finding is in line with both animal and human studies reporting a pleiotropic effect of APOE ε4 on several molecular pathways, including, among others, tau hyperphosphorylation, inhibition of neurite outgrowth, and axonal sprouting.
Interestingly, a recent study showed that brain Ab deposition seems to be associated with specific network dysfunction even in the absence of neural hypometabolism
However, individuals were not genotyped for APOE, thus leading to potential ambiguous results.
Given that APOE ε4 has a powerful effect on cerebral Ab metabolism
Consequently, the DMN dysfunction might be a cause, rather than a consequence, of Ab aberrant pathways
It has been previously shown that the neuronal components of the DMN have an increased vulnerability to bioenergetic failure because of their highly persistent activation
Thus, a reorganizational pattern of connectivity within the DMN may ensure adaptation for bioenergetic cellular stress.
The dramatic rate of failures of large-scale clinical trials has suggested that novel target and outcome measures are needed to overcome insufficient clinical trial design
The new challenge in pharmacologic Research and Development programs is to reconsider previous traditional hypotheses and to better define how preclinical data can support novel data-driven hypotheses, how to perform a convincing and evidence-driven "preclinical to clinical" translation, how to chart the biological effect of a candidate drug over time, and, finally, how to assess whether such a biological effect is truly correlated with functional and clinical improvement.
Connectomics within the DMN have increasingly been recognized as established biomarkers for several contexts of use even in preclinical stages of the disease
Alterations in connectivity, which extend beyond the DMN
Novel technologies and sophisticated computational analyses will soon enable integrating clinical, genetic/epigenetic, and neurodynamic/neuroimaging data, providing a full individual biological makeup.
Biomarker-guided predictive trajectories will further permit researchers to identify and stratify preclinical biologically defined ''at risk'' populations.
The new conceptual paradigm of precision medicine operates in this context and aims at tailoring medical treatments to the individual genetic drivers, pathophysiological, and clinical characteristics of the disease for the single patient
In this perspective, the future precision medicine will ensure the successful achievement of innovative personalized therapeutic strategies to prevent, halt, and cure AD and other complex neurodegenerative diseases.
1. Systematic review: We reviewed the literature using traditional (e.g., PubMed) sources and meeting abstracts and presentations.
Although the longitudinal brain functional trajectories of Alzheimer's disease (AD) have not been studied yet, recent publications describing the cross-sectional aspects of the brain functional dynamics are appropriately cited.
2. Interpretation: Consistently with previous findings, there might have been a reorganization of brain functional connectivity induced by age-related mechanisms and/or disease pathophysiological progression.
In addition, we demonstrated that the pleiotropic biological effect of the APOE ε4 allele impacts the dynamic trajectory of the default mode network over time 3. Future directions: These results may generate early and modifiable functional outcomes in the perspective of individualized and targeted therapeutic preclinical interventions.
Further studies may evaluate (1) the functional changes in either physiological or pathophysiological conditions, such as AD, (2) the functional dynamics associated with conversion to AD, and (3) the inclusion of functional outcomes in clinical trials.



Fig. 1 .
Fig. 1.
Flow diagram shows participant inclusion process for the present study from the initial INSIGHT-preAD cohort.
Abbreviation: fMRI, functional magnetic resonance imaging.



Fig. 3 .
Fig. 3. Effect of APOE on the longitudinal DMN changes.
The comparison of the DMN changes over time between APOE ε42 and APOE ε41 showed a significant increased rsFC in the frontal and prefrontal areas over time [245 voxels, [30 50 28], P FWE , .001].
No effects of global amyloid load or an interaction effect between the amyloid status and APOE were found.
The statistical maps were thresholded using TFCE and P , .05 familywise error corrected.



Table 1
Demographic characteristics, global cognitive performance, and APOE genotype of the final subset, including 224 cognitively intact individuals with SMC



Table 2
Peak of maximal increased and decreased connectivity in the DMN related to the longitudinal differences at M24 with respect to M0 in all 224 participants