Ultrasensitive Detection of Plasma Amyloid-β as a Biomarker for Cognitively Normal Elderly Individuals at Risk of Alzheimer's Disease
Introduction: Plasma amyloid-β (Aβ) is being investigated as a surrogate marker for brain Aβ deposition.
Methods: Plasma Aβ40 and Aβ42 concentrations were measured using the ultrasensitive Single Molecule Array (Simoa) assay in 95 cognitively normal elderly individuals, wherein all participants underwent positron emission tomography (PET) to assess brain Aβ deposition.
Based on the standard uptake value ratios (SUVR) obtained from PET imaging, 32 participants were assessed to have low brain Aβ load (Aβ-, SUVR<1.35) and 63 were assessed to have high brain Aβ load (Aβ+, SUVR≥1.35).
Results: Plasma Aβ42/Aβ40 ratios were lower in the Aβ+ group compared to the Aβgroup.
Plasma Aβ40 and Aβ42 levels were not significantly altered between Aβ-and Aβ+ groups, although a trend of higher plasma Aβ40 was observed in the Aβ+ group.
Additionally, plasma Aβ42/Aβ40 ratios along with the AD risk factors, age and APOE ε4 status, resulted in an area under the receiver operating characteristic curve of 78% in distinguishing Aβ+ participants from Aβparticipants.
Observations from the current study indicate that plasma Aβ ratios are a potential biomarker for brain Aβ deposition and therefore, for preclinical AD, characterised by high brain Aβ load, prior to cognitive impairment.
However, more sensitive and clinically feasible plasma Aβ measurement assays need to be developed to increase the accuracy of this potential Alzheimer's disease blood biomarker.

Introduction
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the most common form of dementia.
Presently, more than 50 million people worldwide are living with dementia and this statistic is expected to rise to over 150 million by 2050, if there is no medical breakthrough
Given that the onset of aberrant amyloid-β (Aβ) deposition in the brain occurs about two decades prior to the manifestation of clinical symptoms
Preclinical AD diagnosis employing the gold standard markers are facilitating the recruitment of participants for clinical trials investigating potential drugs within the preclinical phase of AD, prior to extensive neuronal damage.
Additionally, preclinical AD diagnosis may also encourage the implementation of protective lifestyle changes
However, the uneconomical nature of PET makes its usage unfeasible for population wide screening and therefore, blood markers that reflect brain Aβ deposition are being investigated.
While several studies have investigated plasma Aβ in AD
The study by
Further, Nakamura and colleagues reported that plasma Aβ40/Aβ42 ratios were higher in Aβ+ versus Aβparticipants.
Additionally, the composite scores they obtained from the amyloid precursor protein fragment, APP669-711, to Aβ1-42 ratio and the Aβ1-40 to Aβ1-42 ratio predicted Aβ+ versus Aβparticipants with approximately 90% accuracy
However, both studies employed immunoprecipitation using monoclonal anti-Aβ antibodies (HJ5.1, anti-Aβ13-28
Additionally, both studies included participants with mild cognitive impairment and dementia in their Aβ-and Aβ+ groups.

Fandos and colleagues measured plasma Aβ in cognitively normal Aβ+ individuals compared
to Aβindividuals, utilising an enzyme linked immunosorbent assay (employing monoclonal antibody 1F3 specific to the Aβ N-terminal and polyclonal antibodies pAB002 and pAB031 specific to the C-terminal end of Aβ40 or Aβ42 respectively) and observed lower plasma Aβ42/Aβ40 ratios in the Aβ+ group
Further, Verberk and colleagues utilised the Single Molecule Array (Simoa) technology and observed lower plasma Aβ42/Aβ40 ratios in cognitively normal individuals with subjective cognitive decline (SCD; referring to selfreported decline in cognitive performance
Janelidze et.
al. also reported that plasma Aβ42/Aβ40 ratios inversely correlated with brain Aβ load (assessed via PET) in cognitively normal individuals with SCD
The current study aimed to validate the above studies utilising the ultra-sensitive Simoa technique to investigate whether plasma Aβ42/Aβ40 ratios are significantly different between Aβcognitively normal participants compared to Aβ+ cognitively normal participants assessed by PET in the Kerr Anglican Retirement Village Initiative in Ageing Health (KARVIAH) cohort.
Additionally, the current study also evaluated the potential of plasma Aβ42/Aβ40 ratios in differentiating Aβ-and Aβ+ participants.

Methods

Participants
Study participants were from the KARVIAH cohort, at baseline.
All cohort volunteers (N=206) were screened for the inclusion and exclusion criteria to be eligible.
The inclusion criteria comprised an age range of 65-90 years, good general health, no known significant cerebral vascular disease, fluent in English, adequate/corrected vision and hearing to enable testing, and no objective cognitive impairment as screened by a Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA) score ≥26.
MoCA scores lying between 18-25 were assessed on a case by case basis by the study neuropsychologist following stratification of scores according to age and education
The exclusion criteria comprised, the diagnosis of dementia based on the revised criteria from the National Institute on Aging -Alzheimer's Association
While 134 volunteers met the inclusion/exclusion criteria, 105 participants underwent neuroimaging, neuropsychometric evaluation and blood collection since the remaining participants declined undergoing neuroimaging or withdrew from the study.
Within these 105 participants, 100 participants were considered to have normal global cognition based on their Mini-Mental State Examination score
Both plasma Aβ40 and Aβ42 concentrations were measured in 95 of these 100 participants.
Additionally, participants with a Memory Assessment Clinic -Questionnaire (MAC-Q) score between 25-35 were considered as subjective memory complainers (SMC, n=72; a specific form of SCD defined by selfreported memory complaints) while those with a MAC-Q score ≤24 were considered as noncomplainers (n=23) (See Figure
All volunteers provided written informed consent prior to participation, and the Bellberry Human Research Ethics Committee, Australia, and the Macquarie University Human Research Ethics Committee provided approval for the study.

Evaluation of neocortical amyloid-β load via PET
All study participants were imaged within three months of blood collection wherein participants underwent PET using ligand 18 F-Florbetaben (FBB) at Macquarie Medical Imaging in Sydney.
Participants were administered an intravenous bolus of FBB slowly over 30s, while in a rested position.
Images were acquired over a 20 min scan, in 5 min acquisitions, beginning 50 min post injection.
Brain (neocortical) amyloid-β load was calculated as the mean standard uptake value ratio (SUVR) of the frontal, superior parietal, lateral temporal, lateral occipital, and anterior and posterior cingulate regions using the image processing software, CapAIBL

Blood collection, measurement of plasma Aβ and APOE genotyping
All study participants fasted for a minimum of 10 hours overnight prior to blood withdraw employing standard serological methods and processing
EDTA-plasma Aβ concentrations were measured employing the ultra-sensitive Single Molecule Array (Simoa, Quanterix) platform.
Plasma samples were diluted eight times for Aβ40 and four times for Aβ42.
For Aβ40, the quality control (QC) sample had a concentration of 219 pg/mL with repeatability 6.9 % and intermediate precision 7.9 %.
For Aβ42, the QC sample had a concentration of 12.9 pg/mL with repeatability 2.4 % and intermediate precision 5.6 %.
Apolipoprotein E (APOE) genotype was determined from purified genomic DNA extracted from 0.5 ml whole blood as previously described

Statistical analyses
Descriptive statistics including means and standard deviations were calculated for Aβ-and Aβ+ groups, with comparisons employing t-tests or Chi-square tests as appropriate.
Linear models were employed to compare continuous variables between Aβ-and Aβ+ groups corrected for covariates age, gender and APOE ε4 carrier status.
Plasma Aβ concentrations and their ratios were log transformed to better approximate normality and variance homogeneity as required.
Logistic regression with Aβ-/+ as response was used to evaluate predictive models and receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves constructed from the logistic scores.
All analyses were carried out using IBM ® SPSS ® Version 23 and receiver operating characteristic curves were generated using the package Deducer on R (version 3.2.5).

Results

Cohort characteristics
Demographic characteristics of study participants have been presented in Table
No significant differences were observed in gender, age, body mass index, MMSE scores and the number of SMC between Aβand Aβ+ cohort participants.
However, the APOE ε4 carriage frequency was significantly higher in the Aβ+ group compared to Aβgroup as expected

Comparison of plasma Aβ40, Aβ42 and Aβ42/Aβ40 ratios in Aβ-versus Aβ+ participants
Plasma Aβ40 and Aβ42 concentrations and plasma Aβ42/Aβ40 ratios, measured in the study participants have been presented in Table
While no significant differences were observed in plasma Aβ40 and Aβ42 concentrations between the Aβ-and Aβ+ groups, significant differences in plasma Aβ42/Aβ40 ratios were observed between the two groups, wherein Aβ42/Aβ40 ratios were lower in the Aβ+ group compared to the Aβgroup with and without correcting for covariates age, gender and APOE ε4 status (Figure
On stratifying study participants into subjective memory complainers (n=72) and noncomplainers (n=23), plasma Aβ42/Aβ40 ratios continued to remain significantly lower in the Aβ+ SMC compared to Aβ-SMC with and without correcting for covariates age, gender and APOE ε4 status (Table
However, no significant difference was observed in plasma Aβ42/Aβ40 ratios between Aβ+ and Aβnon-SMC.

Evaluation of plasma Aβ42/Aβ40 ratio as predictor of brain Aβ status
Plasma Aβ42/Aβ40 ratios were evaluated as potential markers to predict Aβ+ status using logistic regression with Aβ+/-as response.
A 'base' model incorporating the major risk factors for AD, namely age and APOE ε4 allele status, was generated and compared to the 'base+ Aβ42/Aβ40 ratio' model wherein plasma Aβ42/Aβ40 ratios were added to the base model (Figure
The area under the curve (AUC) of the 'base+ Aβ42/Aβ40 ratio' model (AUC=77.6%,
specificity=67% at sensitivity=78%, 95% CI= 68-88%) outperformed the 'base' model (AUC=75.3%,
specificity=56% at sensitivity=78%, 95% CI= 65-86%) in distinguishing Aβ+ from Aβparticipants.

Discussion
The current study found that while plasma Aβ40 and Aβ42 concentrations were not significantly altered between Aβ-and Aβ+ participants, the ratio of Aβ42/Aβ40 was significantly lower in Aβ+ participants compared to Aβparticipants.
Further, on stratifying cohort participants into SMC and non-SMC, the ratio of Aβ42/Aβ40 was significantly lower in Aβ+ SMC compared to Aβ-SMC.
While the mean of the ratio of Aβ42/Aβ40 was lower in Aβ+ non-SMC compared to Aβnon-SMC, it did not reach statistical significance, which could be due to the small sample size following stratification based on self-reported memory complaints.
Further, plasma Aβ42/Aβ40 ratios along with AD risk factors age and APOE ε4 status in all participants predicted Aβ+ individuals with approximately 78% accuracy.
Interestingly, Nakamura et al. employed Aβ40/Aβ42 ratios to predict individuals with aberrant brain Aβ deposition while Ovod et al. employed Aβ42/Aβ40 ratios.
Within the current study we observed similar AUCs for both ratios (Supplementary figure
Two relatively recent studies also investigated plasma Aβ as a surrogate marker for abnormal brain Aβ deposition in cognitively normal individuals
Fandos and colleagues measured plasma Aβ levels using enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISA) (Araclon Biotech Ltd.

Zaragoza, Spain) in individuals with normal and abnormal brain Aβ deposition classified by
PET and reported that plasma Aβ42/Aβ40 ratios were lower in individuals with abnormal brain Aβ deposition
Further, employing the ultra-sensitive Simoa assay (Quanterix) to measure plasma Aβ, Verberk and colleagues also observed significantly lower plasma Aβ42/Aβ40 ratios in individuals with abnormal brain Aβ deposition defined by cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) Aβ42 levels (≤813pg/ml)
Along with AD risk factors, age and APOE ε4 carriage, Fandos et al. reported an AUC of 79% and Verberk et al. reported an AUC of 83% in distinguishing between individuals with abnormal brain Aβ deposition and those with normal brain Aβ deposition
However, only a trend of lower plasma Aβ42/Aβ40 ratios (p=.057) was observed in individuals with abnormal brain Aβ deposition (n=23) defined by PET, in the subset of participants that underwent PET (n=69) in the Verberk et al. study
This observation could be attributed to the modest sample size of individuals who underwent PET and the multiple PET ligands employed in the study.
Additionally, while the study by Fandos and colleagues accounted for employing multiple PET ligands using the "Before the Centiloid Kernel Transformation" (BeCKeT) scale, they employed a plasma Aβ measurement assay with a relatively lower sensitivity (lower limit of quantification, LOQ; Aβ40: 7.60 pg/ml, Aβ42: 3.60 pg/ml)
The current study utilised the ultrasensitive Simoa assay, to measure plasma Aβ concentrations, along with PET data (using a single ligand), to identify individuals with abnormal brain Aβ deposition, and validated findings from the above two studies wherein plasma Aβ42/Aβ40 ratios were lower in individuals at risk of AD (Aβ+).
Several previous studies have investigated plasma Aβ in AD, however findings have been inconsistent.
For example, a number of studies reported that lower plasma Aβ42 and higher plasma Aβ40 were associated with increased AD or dementia risk
Further, several other studies also reported that lower plasma Aβ42/Aβ40 ratios were significantly associated with increased AD risk
These inconsistencies could be attributed to poorly characterised cohorts, non-sensitive plasma Aβ assays, variations between study designs (fasting bloods, time of blood collection and processing time) and inadequate sample sizes.
While the current study endeavoured to address these issues by employing a highly characterised cohort that has undergone PET to measure brain Aβ deposition (with a single Aβ specific ligand), an ultra-sensitive plasma Aβ measurement assay and a sample collection and processing design similar that used by Fandos and colleagues
To conclude, while our current observations together with those of



Figure 2 .
Figure 1.
Flow chart representing the Kerr Anglican Retirement Village Initiative in Ageing Health (KARVIAH) cohort participants included within the current study.
MMSE: Mini-mental state examination score, SMC: subjective memory complainers



Figure 3 .
Figure 3. Receiver operating characteristic curves for the prediction of Aβ+ versus Aβparticipants.
The 'base' model comprising major risk factors age and APOE ε4 allele status (A) was outperformed by the 'base + plasma Aβ42/Aβ40 ratio' model (B).
Logistic regression models were employed to perform the analyses.
AUC: area under the curve.
95% CI for A= 65-86%, 95% CI for B= 68-88%.



Table 1 . Demographic characteristics of cohort participants.
[6,7]nd Verberk et al. validate that plasma Aβ ratios (Aβ42/Aβ40) are altered in cognitively normal individuals with aberrant brain Aβ deposition, the accuracy to identify aberrant brain Aβ deposition attained by the methods employed to measure plasma Aβ ratios by Ovod et al. and Nakamura et al. makes plasma Aβ ratios a promising marker [6-8, 10].However, given that the assays employed by Ovod et al. and Nakamura et al. cannot readily be implemented in a clinicalsetting, more sensitive and clinically feasible assays to measure plasma Aβ are still required to be developed[6,7].Baseline characteristics including gender, age, body mass index (BMI), APOE ε4 status, mini mental state examination (MMSE) scores, subjective memory complainer status and brain Aβ load represented by the standard uptake value ratio (SUVR) of ligand18F-Florbetaben (FBB) in the neocortical region normalised with that in the cerebellum, have been compared between Aβ-(SUVR<1.35) and Aβ+ (SUVR≥1.35)
study participants.
Chi-square tests or linear models were employed as appropriate.



Table 2 . Comparison of plasma Aβ40, Aβ42 and Aβ42/40 ratios between Aβ-and Aβ+ participants.
Plasma Aβ concentrations and their ratios were compared between cognitively normal individuals with low brain Aβ load (Aβ-) and high brain Aβ load (Aβ+) using linear models.
All participants were further categorised into subjective memory complainers (SMC, n=72) and non-SMC (n=23).
† represents p-values obtained from log transformed plasma Aβ concentrations and ratios to better approximate normality.
p a represents p-values adjusted for age, gender and APOE ε4 status.