Cognitive markers of preclinical and prodromal Alzheimer's disease in Down syndrome
Introduction: Down syndrome (DS) is associated with an almost universal development of Alzheimer's disease.
Individuals with DS are therefore an important population for randomized controlled trials to prevent or delay cognitive decline, though it is essential to understand the time course of early cognitive changes.
Methods: We conducted the largest cognitive study to date with 312 adults with DS to assess agerelated and Alzheimer's disease-related cognitive changes during progression from preclinical to prodromal dementia, and prodromal to clinical dementia.
Results: Changes in memory and attention measures were most sensitive to early decline.
Resulting sample size calculations for randomized controlled trials to detect significant treatment effects to delay decline were modest.
Discussion: Our findings address uncertainties around the development of randomized controlled trials to delay cognitive decline in DS.
Such trials are essential to reduce the high burden of dementia in people with DS and could serve as proof-of-principle trials for some drug targets.

Background
Down syndrome (DS), caused by trisomy of chromosome 21, has a UK incidence of approximately one in 1000 live births
The cumulative incidence of dementia has been suggested to be 95.7% by the age of 68 years with a mean age of diagnosis of 55 years
This increased de-mentia risk is driven by the overexpression of genes on chromosome 21, in particular the amyloid precursor protein (APP) gene; deposits of its protein product, amyloid-b, are a characteristic feature of AD and are found in the brains of adults with full trisomy 21 by the mid-30s
DS may therefore be viewed as a genetic cause of AD alongside known autosomal dominant pathogenic mutations in the APP, presenilin-1 (PSEN1), and presenilin-2 (PSEN2) genes (autosomal dominant AD [ADAD])
Understanding the time course of AD in DS is essential to improving detection and monitoring of decline and will aid in designing intervention studies
Given their AD burden, individuals with DS are an important population for clinical trials of treatments to prevent or modify AD, particularly for drugs targeting amyloid overproduction or deposition.
We therefore aimed to understand neuropsychological changes across the time course of AD development at a population

General cognitive abilities
Subtests assess participants' verbal abilities (verbal knowledge and riddles) and nonverbal abilities (matrices).
Verbal raw score (0-108); Nonverbal raw score (0-46) Memory CANTAB paired associates learning (PAL)
Participants were required to remember locations of an increasing number of patterns hidden behind boxes on a computer screen.
First trial memory score (0-26); Number of stages completed (0-8)
CAMCOG orientation
Total score (0-12)
Object memory test
Immediate recall (0-14); Delayed recall (0-7)
Dementia Questionnaire for People with Learning Disabilities (DLD)
Cognitive abilities (0-44)
Observer Memory Questionnaire (OMQ)
Total score  Executive function CANTAB intra-/extra-dimensional set shift (IED)
Participants were required to learn rules about which was the "correct" of two presented patterns on a computer screen, with a rule change after 6 consecutive correct trials.
Number of stage 1 errors (0-50); Number of stages completed (0-9)
Verbal fluency

Number of unique animals (0-N/A)
Tower of London
Participants were required to move beads on a board to match presented configurations.
Total score (0-10)
Behavior Rating Inventory of Executive Function-Adult version (BRIEF-A)
Total score (70-210); Behavioral Regulation Index (30-90); Metacognition Index (40-120) Attention CANTAB simple reaction time (SRT)
Total number of correct responses (0-100); Mean latency (N/A); Latency standard deviation (N/A) Motor Finger-nose pointing
Total number of times the circle is touched (0-N/A) Developmental NEuroPSYchological Assessment-II (NEPSY-II) visuomotor precision
Train and car score (0-30); Car and motorbike score (0-52) Adaptive Short Adaptive Behavior Scale (short ABS)
Total score (0-113); Personal selfsufficiency (0-33); Community self-sufficiency (0-48); Personalsocial responsibility (0-32) Dementia Questionnaire for People with Learning Disabilities (DLD)
Social abilities (0-60) level in adults with DS using data from a large, ongoing, indepth phenotyping study of the development of AD in DS
We aimed to estimate the effect of the apolipoprotein E (APOE) ε4 allele, the best known genetic risk factor for AD aside from variations in APP, PSEN1, and PSEN2, on performance for outcomes most sensitive to cognitive changes.
Using such outcomes as hypothetical clinical trial primary outcomes, we also aimed to estimate sample sizes for randomized controlled trials (RCTs) to delay cognitive decline either 10-15 years before the mean age of dementia diagnosis or alternatively around the mean age of diagnosis.

Methods

Participants
We recruited 312 individuals with a clinical diagnosis of DS aged 161 years across England and Wales.
Full details regarding participants and the assessment can be found in the study by
Ethical approval was obtained from the North West Wales Research Ethics Committee (13/WA/0194).
Where individuals had capacity to consent for themselves, we obtained written informed consent.
Where individuals did not have capacity to consent, a consultee was asked to approve the individual's inclusion based on their knowledge of the individual and his/her wishes, in accordance with the UK Mental Capacity Act 2005.

Genetic analysis
DS was confirmed genetically in 299 individuals using saliva or blood samples.
The APOE genotype was determined using a Thermo Fisher Scientific TaqMan assay for SNPs rs7412 and rs429358 (Waltham, MA).

Assessment
Our assessment battery (Table
Informant measures are important for adults who cannot engage in cognitive assessments, who have vision or hearing difficulties, or who are at floor on cognitive tests.
Our battery has previously been validated and adapted for use in older adults with DS, including those with little verbal ability

Missing data
Some adults, in particular those with dementia, had difficulty engaging in cognitive tests
Excluding such adults could bias analyses.
We therefore imputed scores (see Supplementary Table
For IED stage 1 errors, a score of 25 was given (representing performance by chance).
For SRT total correct, the minimum obtained score in our sample was given, whereas for SRT mean latency and SRT latency standard deviation, the maximum obtained scores in our sample were given (representing the poorest performance observed); these values were 13, 2500.61
ms, and 980.98 ms, respectively.
Finally, when the KBIT-2 riddles subtest was incomplete, this score was imputed based on the linear relationship between the riddles and verbal knowledge subtest scores in our sample (r 5 0.869, P , .001), and the KBIT-2 verbal raw score was calculated using this imputed score.
Missing items from the Dementia Questionnaire for People with Learning Disabilities (DLD), Observer Memory Questionnaire (OMQ), and Behavior Rating Inventory of Executive Function-Adult version (BRIEF-A) were imputed for up to 15% of items within each domain with the nearest integer to the mean value of completed scores.
Questionnaire domains containing more than 15% of missing items were excluded from analyses.

Statistical analysis
SPSS, version 22, was used for analyses.
Age and demographic factors were compared between groups using two-sample t-tests and c 2 tests, respectively.
To account for multiple comparisons, P , .01 was used to determine statistical significance.

Earliest cognitive markers of AD-related neuropathology
Because virtually all individuals with DS develop AD neuropathology as they age, we hypothesized that ageassociated differences in outcome measures would be related to the progression of AD pathology, and this effect can be used to identify the earliest markers of cognitive decline.
Based on the presence of amyloid neuropathology by the mid-30s
We compared individuals' performance regardless of dementia status in 5-year age bands
h 2 values determined the overall effect size of age group.
Pairwise comparisons with Bonferroni corrections determined age groups for whom performance was significantly poorer than that of those aged 16-30 years.

Markers associated with clinical stage of AD
Preclinical (asymptomatic) AD can be defined as the stage when biomarker changes are present, but clinical symptoms have not yet developed, whereas prodromal AD is usually defined as the earliest symptomatic stage when cognitive symptoms are present, but the threshold for dementia diagnosis has not yet been reached
Owing to postmortem studies indicating amyloid neuropathology in DS by the mid-30s
For participants aged 361 years with no clinical dementia diagnosis, two ID psychiatrists independently reviewed detailed information on dementia symptoms using the Cambridge Examination of Mental Disorders of Older People with Down's syndrome and others with Intellectual Disabilities (CAMDEX-DS)
A consensus decision was made to allocate those with cognitive symptoms associated with AD but no evidence of decline in functional abilities and no other significant cause of decline to a prodromal dementia group, and asymptomatic individuals to a preclinical group.
We then compared performance for adults aged 361 years in a preclinical state to those in a prodromal state, and that of those in a prodromal state to those with a clinical diagnosis of dementia using ANCOVAs to identify markers of AD progression while controlling for age, premorbid ID severity, and multimorbidity, with h 2 values to estimate the effect size of group.

Sensitivity of cognitive markers to APOE genotype
To determine the effect of an APOE ε4 allele on performance for selected outcomes that were most sensitive to cognitive changes in adults aged 361 years, we compared performance for those with genotype APOE ε3/ε3 and APOE ε3/ε4 using ANCOVAs while controlling for age, premorbid ID severity, and multimorbidity, with values of h 2 to estimate the effect size of genotype.

Sample sizes for RCTs using cognitive markers
We estimated sample sizes for two hypothetical diseasemodifying RCTs using our participant sample and potential primary outcome measures, with the aim to delay individuals' abilities declining.
Both trials were hypothesized to last 5 years, with the aim to prevent performance of adults aged 36-40 years declining to that of adults aged 41-45 years (i.e., delaying early decline) or to prevent performance of adults aged 46-50 years declining to that of adults aged 51-55 years (i.e., delaying later decline).
Mean scores for the two relevant age groups were used to determine expected group differences (excluding individuals with clinical dementia in the younger age group as these individuals would be ineligible for such a trial), and expected group differences used with the associated pooled standard deviation (SD) to estimate the potential sample sizes needed for RCTs with P , .05 and 90% power.
Owing to small sample sizes resulting in large confidence intervals for mean group differences, sample sizes were also estimated using the midpoint between mean group differences and their lower 95% confidence interval as a more cautious estimate for expected group differences.
All sample size estimates were calculated by
where n is the sample size needed per group, F is 10.51 (based on P , .05 and 90% power), s is the pooled SD, and d is the expected group difference.

Results

Earliest cognitive markers of AD-related neuropathology
Demographic information and scores for each outcome measure for 297 individuals aged 16-60 years split into age groups can be seen in Table
All outcomes aside from BRIEF-A scores had a significant (P , .001) overall relationship with age group, with poorer performance in older age groups (see Fig.
Age group showed the greatest effect size as determined using h 2 values for measures from the paired associates learning (PAL), object memory, SRT, and Developmental NEuroPSYchological Assessment-II explaining more than 30% of variance in scores for each outcome (Table
Comparing the older age groups with those aged 16-30 years (Table
and P 5 .001,
respectively).
Performance for the majority of other outcomes became significantly poorer for adults aged 46-50 years, with the exception of several informantrated adaptive ability scores and BRIEF-A scores.
By 51-55 years, all measures except BRIEF-A scores showed significantly poorer performance.

Markers associated with clinical stage of AD
Ages and scores for each outcome measure for 170 adults aged 361 years split into preclinical, prodromal, and clinical dementia groups can be seen in Table
Participants with no CAMDEX-DS data (n 5 8) or when decline was potentially due to another cause such as depression (n 5 10) were excluded from analyses.
Adults with prodromal dementia performed significantly poorer than those with preclinical dementia for several memory, executive function, and attention outcomes.
The largest effect sizes were found for the PAL first trial memory score, SRT latency SD, OMQ score, and BRIEF-A Metacognition Index, where group accounted for more than 12% of variance in scores for each outcome.
Adults with clinical dementia performed significantly poorer than those with prodromal dementia on all outcomes aside from verbal fluency, BRIEF-A total score and Behavioral Regulation Index, and Developmental NEuroPSYchological Assessment-II car and motorbike score.
The largest effect sizes were for memory measures (object memory, OMQ, and DLD cognitive scores) and short ABS total score, where group accounted for more than 20% of variance in scores for each outcome.

Sensitivity of cognitive markers to APOE genotype
Based on preceding analyses, we identified PAL first trial memory score and SRT latency SD as outcomes most sensitive to early AD progression.
We compared performance for these outcomes between adults aged 361 years with genotype APOE ε3/ε3 and APOE ε3/ε4.
Performance for both outcomes was significantly poorer for adults with genotype APOE ε3/ε4, with genotype accounting for approximately 8% of variance in scores (PAL: APOE ε3/ε3 M 5 5.12, SD 5 5.

Discussion
We have investigated cross-sectional changes in cognitive abilities associated with AD development in over 300 adults with DS.
Memory and attention measures were most sensitive to aging, with significantly poorer performance starting in the early 40s.
Similarly, performance for memory and attention outcomes was most sensitive to progression from preclinical to prodromal dementia, whereas performance for memory outcomes was most sensitive to progression from prodromal to clinical dementia.
Using outcomes identified as sensitive to AD progression, we estimated possessing an APOE ε4 allele accounted for approximately 8% of variance in scores, and modest sample sizes would be sufficient to detect a significant treatment effect to delay cognitive decline in an RCT.

Strengths and limitations
We report results from the largest study of cognitive decline in DS worldwide, using deep cognitive phenotyping to understand progression associated with the development of AD.
A major strength of our study is that we have recruited a large, diverse, community sample of adults with DS, with various stages of AD-related decline.
Based on prevalence data from Wu and Morris
We used a validated, sensitive battery of cognitive tests and took account of potentially confounding vision and hearing difficulties.
We used a cross-sectional approach, with analyses based on the strong rationale of AD neuropathology being increasingly present in adults with DS with aging; nevertheless, our results need to be confirmed with longitudinal assessments as cross-sectional approaches are vulnerable to cohort ef-fects.
However, we controlled for age where possible.
Furthermore, missing data from cognitive outcomes were not missing at random; adults with clinical dementia were more likely to have scores missing
We reduced this limitation through imputing scores for cognitive tests when adults had not understood test instructions.
In addition, while we used a thorough approach to categorize individuals into preclinical and prodromal dementia, the information used relied on retrospective judgments of carers, which may be subject to recall bias.
Finally, there are no standardized thresholds of preclinical and prodromal dementia in DS.
We adapted concepts from Dubois et al.
Owing to the presence of amyloid neuropathology in all adults with DS from the mid-30s
We were able to show clear cognitive differences between groups defined in this way, providing some validation for our classification.
Dementia diagnosis in people with DS may be complicated by variable premorbid ID, in addition to health comorbidities including depression and hypothyroidism, which may present with cognitive changes.
Fully understanding the time course of dementia development in DS is essential for better detection and monitoring of cognitive decline, to detect reliable biomarkers for the progression of decline, and for the development of clinical trials.
Previous studies have also demonstrated poorer performance associated with aging, cognitive decline, and dementia in adults with DS for various tasks within our battery
Study results have however differed regarding the sequence of cognitive changes.
Similar to our results which suggest that changes in memory and attention are the earliest changes associated with dementia development, other studies have reported memory decline as an early change
In contrast, a recent systematic review suggested executive dysfunction with behavioral and personality changes, caused by early frontal lobe involvement, may precede memory loss
Although these carer-reported changes in behavior and personality are likely to occur relatively early in the course of dementia in DS, it is possible that carers observe such changes earlier than memory changes that may be less obvious in those with more severe IDs and with communication impairments.
Differences in test sensitivity may also explain conflicting results.
The earliest changes in both ADAD
The early memory impairments in adults with DS support similar underlying neurological changes in the development of dementia to these other forms of AD and indicate the importance of the population with DS for clinical trials of treatments to prevent or modify AD.

Implications for clinical trials
The recent failure of clinical drug trials directed at amyloid, including anti-amyloid antibodies and BACE inhibition, has been a considerable disappointment given the genetic evidence suggesting reduced BACE cleavage over a lifetime protects against AD
The most prevalent explanation for this failure is that treatments targeting amyloid may only be effective during the extended prodromal phase of AD
The predictable onset of pathology and high incidence of dementia in DS suggest this is a key population for trials in the preclinical or prodromal stage of AD to prevent or delay decline.
To date, individuals with DS have been excluded from such trials despite having the most common genetic cause of AD and a considerable burden of disease, in part due to the lack of reliable cognitive outcome data.
Intervention studies to prevent or delay AD-related decline in those with DS depend on determining the optimal age for treatments to be given, outcome measures that are most sensitive to decline, and relevant effect sizes for such outcome measures to determine adequate sample sizes.
Our results address these uncertainties, and although longitudinal studies are needed to confirm our findings, they provide valuable data to plan trials to prevent or delay decline.
We found that changes in memory and attention, specifically in the CANTAB PAL and SRT tests, are most sensitive to AD progression.
These tests have standardized computerized administrations and so would be suitable measures for use in a multicentre clinical trial.
RCTs would likely use several outcomes, both assessed directly and via informant report (with the latter particularly important for those with more severe ID
We estimate modest samples will be sufficient to detect a significant treatment effect to delay cognitive decline, with treatment started in the mid-late 30s to delay early decline (i.e., before the development of amyloid PET pathology
Accounting for the effect of APOE ε4 in the trial design may further sharpen effect sizes, as may accounting for amyloid or tau PET pathology
However, these calculations are based on 5-year age bands; a shorter time frame may require larger sample sizes, while interim analyses may help to shorten trial length.
Furthermore, trial samples would need to be larger at entry to account for dropout.
Nevertheless, our data and previous studies suggest that even when accounting for this, the number of individuals required for a preventative RCT would be feasible to recruit


42, n 5 84, APOE ε3/ε4 M 5 2.26, SD 5 5.18, n 5 35, F(1,114) 5 9.08, P 5 .003,
h 2 5 0.074; SRT: APOE ε3/ε3 M 5 579.42,
SD 5 295.63, n 5 87, APOE ε3/ε4 M 5 739.49,
SD 5 290.28, n 5 32, F(1,114) 5 9.85, P 5 .002,
h 2 5 0.080).



3. 4 .
Sample sizes for RCTs using cognitive markers Using PAL first trial memory score as a primary outcome measure for an RCT to delay early cognitive decline with scores for adults aged 36-40 years without clinical dementia and for those aged 41-45 years (M 5 10.63, SD 5 6.72, n 5 19; and M 5 5.90, SD 5 5.97, n 5 21, respectively; pooled SD 5 6.69), an RCT to delay decline in those aged 36-40 years would need 43 individuals per group to detect a significant treatment effect with 90% power.
Using a more cautious group difference of 2.70, 130 individuals per group would be required.
Based on short ABS total scores showing later significant age-related decline, we used this as a primary outcome measure for an RCT to delay later cognitive decline.
Using scores for adults aged 46-50 years without clinical dementia and for those aged 51-55 years (M 5 70.87,
SD 5 23.03, n 5 39; and M 5 54.64, SD 5 27.56, n 5 36, respectively; pooled SD 5 26.43), an RCT to delay decline in those aged 46-50 years would need 56 individuals per group to detect a significant treatment effect with 90% power.
Using a more cautious group difference of 10.41, 136 individuals per group would be required.



Fig. 1 .
Fig. 1.
Mean PAL first trial memory scores for (A) different age groups and (B) preclinical, prodromal, and clinical dementia groups (error bars represent 95% confidence intervals).



Table 1



Table 2
Demographic information and scores for each outcome for participants split by age group, with the overall effect of comparing all age groups



Table 2
Demographic information and scores for each outcome for participants split by age group, with the overall effect of comparing all age groups (Continued ) 459.80 767.75 6 526.72 1041.84 6 778.43 1154.79 6 553.89 1274.22 6 764.30
1738.96
6 763.32 2017.53 713.45 F(6,232) 5 21.84, P , .001,
h 2 5 0.361 SRT latency standard deviationz 323.48 6 229.30
317.83 6 174.02 426.61 6 296.51 536.88 6 217.02 568.74 6 295.18 733.28 6 259.83 807.48 244.49
F(6,232) 5 23.42, P , .001,
h 2 5 0.377



Table 3
Summary heat map demonstrating age groups where scores are significantly poorer than those for adults aged 16-30 years Results are obtained from post hoc comparisons of ANCOVA results comparing age groups and including premorbid ID severity and multimorbidity as covariates.Abbreviations: ABS, Adaptive Behavior Scale; BRIEF-A, Behavior Rating Inventory of Executive Function-Adult version; DLD, Dementia Questionnaire for People with Learning Disabilities; ID, intellectural disability; IED, intra-/extra-dimensional set shift; KBIT-2, Kaufmann Brief Intelligence Test 2; NEPSY-II, Developmental NEuroPSYchological Assessment-II; OMQ, Observer Memory Questionnaire; PAL, paired associates learning; SRT, simple reaction time.



Table 4
Ages and scores for each outcome for adults aged 361 years split into preclinical, prodromal, and clinical dementia groups, with results of group comparisons for preclinical and prodromal dementia, and prodromal and clinical dementia



Table 5
Summary heat map demonstrating effect sizes of group differences comparing adults aged 361 years with preclinical and prodromal dementia, and prodromal and clinical dementia .0.10, y h 2 .0.15, and z h 2 .0.20.Group comparisons included age, premorbid ID severity, and multimorbidity as covariates.Abbreviations: ABS, Adaptive Behavior Scale; BRIEF-A, Behavior Rating Inventory of Executive Function-Adult version; DLD, Dementia Questionnaire for People with Learning Disabilities; ID, intellectual disability; IED, intra-/extra-dimensional set shift; KBIT-2, Kaufmann Brief Intelligence Test 2; OMQ, Observer Memory Questionnaire; NEPSY-II, Developmental NEuroPSYchological Assessment-II; PAL, paired associates learning; SRT, simple reaction time.