Ineffective levels of transforming growth factors and their receptor account for old age being a risk factor for Alzheimer's disease
After the midninth decade of age, the incidence rates of Alzheimer's disease (AD) and the presence of active TGF-b1 show comparable increases.
The hypothesis is proposed that the reason why advanced age is a major risk factor for AD is a progressive decrease with advancing age in the numbers of TGFR2 receptors in the brain, with the consequence of a decline in the neurotrophic efficacy of TGF-b1 and 2 despite their already increased levels in older persons.
Alternative, possible reasons are discussed but rejected because either those reasons may also affect young persons or because they cannot be validated in a clinical trial.
The proposed hypothesis may be validated in persons with aMCI after raising their brain levels of TGF-b1 and 2 by using a combination of three drugs, lithium, memantine, plus either glatiramer or venlafaxine, and then assessing their progression to AD.

Introduction
Its escalating occurrence with increasing age is one of the most remarkable features of nonfamilial Alzheimer's disease (AD) but as of yet is inadequately explained.
Its correct explanation would have heuristic value.
Although it has been held that age is a necessary factor merely by virtue of the gradual accumulation of many deleterious events
Thus, it might be worthwhile to make an attempt to account for why spontaneous AD largely occurs after age 70.
1.1.
Clues obtained from other conditions that also are seldom seen in persons less than age
Temporal arteritis seldom occurs be-tween ages 50 and 60 and is mostly seen after age 70.
Brack et al.
With regard to prostate cancer, Steiner and Barack injected cells that overexpressed TGF-b into animals transfected with a prostate cancer cell line and saw that those animals had 50% larger tumors and 52% more lung metastases, than had control animals
dos Reis et al.
higher expression level of TGF-b in patients with prostate cancer having Gleason scores 7 than in those with Gleason scores ,7.
1.2.
The above reports draw attention to the possibility of TGF-b as being related to the association of Alzheimer's disease with advanced age In the nervous system both TGF-b1and TGF-b2 benefit nerves, microglia, and astrocytes, all of which participate in the pathogenesis of AD
In nondemented persons, levels of TGF-b2 rise with increasing age up to age 1001; and so also are levels of TGF-b increased in AD as age advances.
But in that respect, the important difference between nondemented persons and AD patients, is that in the AD brain the receptor for TGF-b, that is, TGFR2, is about 50% lower than normal, which minimizes the downstream neurotrophic benefits of the high levels of TGF-b.
Thus, even higher levels than those observed in AD are required to overcome the bottleneck effect of low TbR2 levels.
The above data suggest a hypothesis that low levels of brain TGFR2 plus an inadequately high level of TGF-b1 and TGF-b2, account for the strong correlation between AD and age.
The heuristic value lies in the fact that drugs are available that will increase the levels of TGF-b.
Following is the detailed evidence providing for the above statements.
1.3.
Levels of TGFb-1 and TGFb-2 are stable until age approximately 85 then increase up to age 1001.
Likewise, it is at age 86 when the annual incidence of Alzheimer's disease suddenly also increases Young et al.
In healthy Japanese, there is either a slight fall in TGF-b levels between ages 40 and 79
However, at later ages, data reported by Forsey et al.
Likewise, Carrieri et al.
Male centenarians had 60% higher levels of TGF-b, and female centenarians had 27% higher levels, than had the younger males and females.
In brief, in nondemented persons, there is a sudden rise in levels of TGF-b at the age of about 86, the same approximate age when there is also a sudden rise in the annual incidence of AD.
Hebert et al.
There was a 14-fold higher incidence at age 851 than at age 65-69, and a 2.6-fold higher incidence at age 851 than at age 80-84.
Other data from Gao et al.
The inflection point is in the midninth decade of life.
1.4.
TGF-b1 and TGF-b2 are neurotrophic TGF-b1 and TGF-b2, interact with a receptor complex of ALK5 and TGR2; their binding to TGR2 causes its phosphorylation that in turn activates Smads, which are signal transducers that translocate to the nucleus and regulate gene expression.
Most, but not all, reports show that in the brain, TGF-b1 and TGF-b2 cause neurotrophism, neural protection, synaptic transmission, and neural plasticity.
Caraci et al.
Kandasamy et al.
Wachs et al.
TGF-b1 markedly inhibited growth of those cells, whereas TGF-b2 did not do so.
Cell cycle analysis showed that TGF-b1 induced a shift from the G2/M-and S-phases toward the G0/1 phase.
However, TGF-b1 did not affect expression of differentiating markers such as nestin, TGF-R2, or GFAP.
Finally, a recent study showed that decrease in circulating TGF-b1 prevented remyelination in toxin-induced demyelination and administration of exogenous TGF-b1 promoted remyelination; and in an animal model of multiple sclerosis, TGF-b1 restored neurologic function
Related to this, Tarkowski et al.
Thus, the net overall effect of TGF-b1 and TGF-b2 is neurotrophic.
An important effect of Smads is to effect transcription of genes that regulate micro-RNA formation which, as will be seen (below) determine, via TGFR2, whether local levels of TGF-b are adequate to support neurotrophism.
For more details of TGF-b's complex mechanism of action in the brain, the reader is referred to refs
1.5.
Even in the face of neuronal loss, TGF-b1 and TGF-b2 are paradoxically increased in the Alzheimer's disease brain Neuronal loss is a critical early element in the genesis of AD, and although observations in patients with AD show varying blood levels of TGF-b
Nevertheless and an apparent paradox, Buckwalter et al.
It is necessary to address this paradox, that is, that TGF-b1 is neurotrophic, yet with high levels it impairs neurogenesis.
1.6.
Explanation of the paradox.
Levels of both Smads and TGFR2 in the brain of Alzheimer's disease are reduced, each of which serves to minimize the downstream, neurotrophic benefits of high levels of TGF-b1 and TGF-b2
In their review, von Bernhardi et al.
Tesseur et al.
Compared with controls, the level of TGFR2 in AD brains was 50% less; and AD patients with MMSE scores 0-25 had significantly lower levels of TGFR2.
Tesseur et al. also found in a mouse model of AD that reducing neuronal TGF-b signaling in mice resulted in age-dependent neurodegeneration and promoted Ab accumulation and dendritic loss.

TGF-b1, TGF-b2, astrocytes, microglia, and age
Astrocytes produce both TGF-b1 and TGF-b2; Dhandapani et al.
Astrocytes and microglia both have a unique signature that is dependent on TGFb signaling
Moreover, in the hippocampus, signaling by microglial TGF-b1 via the Smad3 pathway is impaired in aging
Mosher and Wyss-Coray pointed to the commonalities between the effects of aging and AD and suggested that "microglia may thus be primed such that additional stimuli cause them to become overreactive leading to neurodegeneration and AD"

MicroRNAs and Alzheimer's disease
What determines that TGF-b is increased with age in both nondemented persons and AD? MicroRNAs (miRNAs) may be the explanation.
MiRNA are noncoding RNAs containing only 22 nucleotides that can affect posttranscriptional expression of genes either positively or negatively; they are widely expressed in the brain and thus influence multiple brain functions.
In Satoh's summary of 14 published studies of various miRNAs in the brains of 222 AD patients, downregulation of miRNA was 1.4-times more frequent than upregulation
In a systematic review of the literature, Swarbrick et al.
A particular miRNA, 106b, was noted by Hebert et al.
1.9.
Which all leads to a hypothesis that one reason for the association of Alzheimer's disease with advanced age is that the decrease in TGFR2, possibly determined by deregulated miRNA, leads to reduced efficacy of TGF's neurotrophic effect
The hypothesis suggested here is that the basis of AD and its dependence on advanced age is the progressive decrease with advancing age in the numbers of TGFR2 receptors in the brain possibly caused by effects of an mRNA such as 106b.
Its consequence is that the neurotrophic benefits of TGF-b1 and TGF-b2 are impaired and that in AD the compensatory increases of their levels in plasma and CSF are inadequate.
The hypothesis may be supported by raising to adequate levels, for example, to double existing ones, TGF-b1 and TGF-b2, in patients with amnestic MCI and showing that this increase impedes the progression of MCI to AD.

Counterpoints to the proposed mechanism
Highlighted in this section are competing hypotheses relating age and AD together with counter-points.
There are many factors with an undoubted pathogenetic effect yet few correlate with age.
Notable suggestions to account for the age factor include roles for oxidative and free radical stress, mitochondrial dysfunction, insulin resistance, inflammation involving microglia and astrocytes, telomere shortening and other genetic aberrancies, and environmental inputs.
There are counterweights for many of those suggestions.
Against oxidative stress is that healthy centenarians had lower oxidative stress compared with subjects aged 70-99, as shown by lower levels of malondialdehyde and higher levels of GSH
Others have examined mitochondrial dysfunction and insulin resistance as accounting for the role of age in AD; but in fact those indicate participation of TGF-b1, because Bohm et al.
They studied the effects of TGF-b1 on metabolic parameters of human skeletal muscle cells in culture and showed significantly decreased amounts of mRNA for PPARGC1A, PRKAA2, the mitochondrial transcription factor TFAM, and key regulators of oxidation, HADHA and CPT1B.
Those decreases were prevented by cotreatment with the TGF-b1 receptor 1 antagonist SB431542.
It is notable that TGF-b1 treatment of myotubes also had an inhibitory effect on insulin signaling since it reduced insulin-stimulated phosphorylation of Akt/protein kinase B. Hoffmann et al.
Next, the role of inflammation in the brain has been examined quite extensively in connection with age and AD.
Blasko et al.
Mosher and Wyss-Coray have provided data that support a major role for changes in microglial functions in both the healthily aging brain and the AD brain, and this overlap could account for the association between age and AD
A counterpoint to that suggestion is that Hoozemans et al.
They examined the presence of both microglia and astrocytes in many areas of the brains using antibodies against CD68 and HLA-DP/DQ/ DR to identify microglia and against GFAP to identify astrocytes In AD, they saw (Fig.
fewer microglia in those aged .80 as in those younger than age 80, and threefold fewer astrocytes in those aged .80 as in those younger than age 80. Further, a role for TGF-b1 in the formation and function of microglia was established in extensive studies made by Butovsky et al.
Environmental inputs to the pathogenesis of AD are well known and supported by the prevalence of AD in Africans living in Africa as being significantly less than in African Americans
As already indicated, most of the above factors may apply at any age, not just in advanced age.
Concerning the role of genetic inputs, Pedersen et al.
In a prevalence study of twin pairs aged 65 or older, Gatz et al.
In an incidence study, Pedersen et al.
There were 26 monozygotic twins among which at least one twin developed AD that in 5 (19.2%) of them was concordant; and there were 44 dizygotic twins among which at least one twin developed AD that in 2 (4.5%) of them was concordant.
Their results based on incident cases suggest a lower heritability and greater influence of environmental influences than reported in previous twin studies of prevalent cases, and their results provided no evidence that heritability is lower in those older than 80 years of age than in younger ages.
Although heritability estimates for incident disease were far lower than those for prevalent disease, the importance of genetic factors for liability to AD is considerable even late in life.
Whether calculations of genetic influences are based on incidence or prevalence, their importance is indisputable; and it is relevant that the hypothesis proposed here incorporates genetic influences via the role of Smads in the transcription of mRNAs, and the effect of miRNA on gene expressions.
Finally, it is the issue of telomere shortening in AD, shown by Forero et al.
It is unclear, however, if telomere shortening is anything more than a biological indicator, that is, a surrogate, of the aging process.
Together, the factors mentioned in this section may be regarded as forming a complex system in which, as explained elsewhere
It might be argued, based on complexity theory, that the reason why age is involved is because after a certain number of years, one or more interactions become more intense and exceed a critical threshold, causing the equilibrium to partially collapse, leading to MCI; and later, additional factor(s) or a heightened intensity of existing ones, results in complete system collapse and dementia.
Nevertheless, that scenario is inadequate because it does not explain precisely why the time duration causing changes in cognition, whether MCI or AD, does not apply to far younger persons-of age, for example, 30-40 years-than is observed.
An explanation suggested by Gatta et al.
Supporting this, Podtelezhnikov et al.
brains from nondemented controls, patients with Huntington's disease, and patients with AD, representing .31,000
unique genes.
Their analysis indicated that the same expressions of genes and the major biological processes initiated thereby, started in the PFC of normal brains and continued in AD brains; although principal component analysis showed significant correlation with normal aging (r 5 .58),
that correlation did not exist in AD brains (r 5 .10).
They found that the BioAge of the most advanced AD brains corresponds in nondemented subjects to an extrapolated age of 140 years.
In brief, the aggregate of genetic studies suggests strongly that gene expression is a possible reason why age is a major risk factor for AD.
The pragmatic problem with this, however, is twofold.
First, it recalls the statement attributed to Albert Einstein, "everything should be made as simple as possible, but not simpler"; the gene expression hypothesis is anything but simple because of the large number of genes that it invokes.
Second, even though it cannot be made simpler, the multiplicity of gene expressions inherent in the explanation prevents it from the requisite of being validated.
A different and far simpler argument, consistent with Einstein's dictum, is basically the hypothesis proposed here, that places TGF-b1 as the single element determining outcome because it controls so many of the other participating factors.
Two observations together explain both the deteriorated cognition leading to AD and old age as being the dominant risk factor.
First that TGF-b1 increases dramatically in normal aging, especially after age 86 in humans
Second, that a decreased number of TGF-b receptors with advancing age of the brain, reduces the effective neurotrophism of TGF-b despite its increased level.

Validation of the hypothesis
The hypothesis could be validated by increasing the levels of TGF-b and demonstrating that this prevents progression of aMCI to AD.
Several drugs are available that increase the levels of TGF-b: those known to act in the brain and not only in peripheral blood include glatiramer, lithium, memantine, and venlafaxine.
Lithium and memantine are interesting because they are among the drugs suggested elsewhere as potentially useful in decreasing the progression from aMCI to AD (Fessel J. TRCI 2019, In Press).
002Lithium approximately doubled the production of TGF-b1 by cortical astrocytes
Lee et al.
Glatiramer was shown by Aharoni et al.
Finally, Zepeda et al.
The outline of a clinical trial that could be used to validate the hypothesis was provided elsewhere (Fessel J. TRCI 2019 In Press).
Because there is no basis for knowing by what degree the production of TGF-b needs to be raised a combination of three drugs should be used in a clinical trial: lithium plus memantine, together with either glatiramer or venlafaxine.
That triple combination would be administered to patients with aMCI, and its effect assessed on their progression to AD.

Conclusion
Evidence supports the hypothesis that the reason for the association of older age with AD is a level of TGF-b that is rendered inadequate because of decreased brain levels of its receptor TGFR2.
Validation could be obtained by a clinical trial assessing whether raising brain levels of TGF-b in patients with aMCI, by using lithium and memantine, together with either glatiramer or venlafaxine, impedes progression to AD.

RESEARCH IN CONTEXT
1. Systematic review: Published data show TGF-b is neurotrophic; in healthy individuals, its levels are stable until ~85 years of age then increase up to the age of 1001 years; coordinately, the annual incidence of Alzheimer's disease (AD) also suddenly increases after the age of 85 years; just as TGF-b levels in healthy individuals aged 85-1001 years, its levels are, paradoxically, also increased in the brain of patients with AD; but levels of TGF-b receptor 2 (TGFbR2) is only 50% of the normal level in the brain of patients with AD; compared with the aged controls, microRNAs in AD are deregulated, and there is increasing deregulation with increasing Braak stage.

Interpretation:
The aforementioned data suggest a hypothesis that one reason for the association of AD with advanced age is that the decrease in TGFbR2, possibly determined by deregulated micro-RNAs, leads to reduced efficacy of TGF-b's neurotrophic effect.
3. Future directions: The hypothesis may be validated by increasing the levels of TGF-b and demonstrating that this overcomes the bottleneck caused by diminished TGFbR2 and prevents the progression of amnestic mild cognitive impairment to AD. Glatiramer, lithium, memantine, and venlafaxime are available drugs that increase levels of TGF-b; a triple combination of lithium and memantine plus either glatiramer or venlafaxime might be used in a clinical trial to assess whether this impedes the progression from mild cognitive impairment to AD.