Alzheimer’s Disease and Vascular Aging
Alzheimer's disease, the leading cause of dementia in the elderly, is a neurodegenerative condition characterized by accumulation of amyloid plaques and neurofibrillary tangles in the brain.
However, age-related vascular changes accompany or even precede the development of Alzheimer's pathology, raising the possibility that they may have a pathogenic role.
This review provides an appraisal of the alterations in cerebral and systemic vasculature, the heart, and hemostasis that occur in Alzheimer's disease and their relationships to cognitive impairment.
Although the molecular pathogenesis of these alterations remains to be defined, amyloid-b is a likely contributor in the brain as in the heart.
Collectively, the evidence suggests that vascular pathology is a likely pathogenic contributor to age-related dementia, including Alzheimer's disease, inextricably linked to disease onset and progression.
Consequently, the contribution of vascular factors should be considered in preventive, diagnostic, and therapeutic approaches to address one of the major health challenges of our time.
(
compromised because of hypoperfusion, resulting in deleterious neurological consequences.
Surprisingly, cerebrovascular atherosclerosis has been identified as a prominent pathological feature of AD.
Roher et al.
Leptomeningeal arteries also exhibited extensive atherosclerotic lesions, the severity of which correlated with tangle and plaque load
Although some studies found no association
Moreover, in a substantial cohort, Arvanitakis et al.
The link between atherosclerosis and AD development not only pertains to intracranial vessels but extends to extracranial arteries as well.
For example, the prevalence of AD increases 3-fold in individuals with severe carotid and femoral atherosclerosis, an effect dramatically enhanced in apolipoprotein E4 (ApoE4) carriers
In addition, coronary artery calcifications are linked to higher odds of dementia in elderly individuals
The mechanisms of the association between atherosclerosis and AD may involve impaired Ab clearance, nonresolving inflammation, and vascular effects of ApoE4
Another possibility is that in severe atherosclerosis, hypoperfusion and hypoxia enhance Ab production, which, in turn, promotes the formation of atherosclerotic lesions through inflammation, vascular oxidative stress, and endothelial dysfunction
Indeed, Ab is present in atherosclerotic plaques
String vessels and capillary rarefaction.
Aging leads to reduced cerebral microvascular density, a process known as vascular rarefaction
In advanced AD, this process is exacerbated, and autopsy studies have shown a large number of string (ghost) vessels, consisting of remnants of microvessels that become acellular and collapse
These microvascular alterations occur in 90% of AD brains and are exacerbated in ApoE4 carriers and in the presence of amyloid plaques
Multiple factors may contribute to vascular rarefaction in AD, including Ab toxicity to vascular cells
C e r e b r a l a m y l o i d a n g i o p a t h y .
Amyloid deposition into the walls of cerebral arteries and capillaries gives rise to the so-called cerebral amyloid angiopathy (CAA)
CAA occurs in 85% to 95% of patients with AD, has a significant impact on vessel health, and is an important contributor to cerebrovascular pathology in AD.
CAA starts with Ab deposits in the adventitia and media of the arteries and in the basement membrane of capillaries, probably due to impaired Ab clearance
In more advanced cases, this vascular accumulation of Ab progresses until vascular cells degenerate.
CAA, therefore, weakens the vessel wall, reduces resting cerebral blood flow (CBF) and cerebrovascular reactivity, compromises the integrity of the blood-brain barrier (BBB), and leads to microinfarcts and microbleeds, factors that contribute to cognitive impairment
THE BBB.
The BBB is a unique property of the cerebral circulation that controls the homeostasis of the cerebral microenvironment by tightly regulating the molecular and cellular exchange between blood and brain
Central to the barrier function of the cerebral microvasculature are key features of cerebral endothelial cells that are sealed by specialized intercellular junctions (e.g., tight junctions), have limited vesicular transport, and express a multitude of molecular transporters that regulate the exchange of solutes between blood and brain
Although endothelial cells are the main gatekeepers, the HIGHLIGHTS AD is the major cause of age-related dementia and the fifth leading cause of death worldwide.
Alterations in cerebral and systemic vessels and in the heart often coexist with AD pathology.
The resulting cerebrovascular insufficiency may contribute to the onset and progression of cognitive dysfunction.
Control of vascular risk factors may mitigate the impact of AD and related dementias.
Alzheimer's Disease and Vascular Aging permeability of the BBB is regulated in concert with other cells of the neurovascular unit, such as pericytes, astrocytes, and perivascular cells
The BBB is disrupted in aging and AD; in AD, the disruption occurs early in the disease course, raising the possibility that it may play a role in the mechanisms underlying cognitive impairment
The BBB disruption is associated with endothelial and pericyte degeneration, together with alterations of the basement membrane and astrocytic end-feet, allowing infiltration of blood-borne cells and circulating factors and disrupting Ab clearance
Some of the ECM and basement membrane ECM proteins confer a physical scaffolding to the cells of the BBB.
Basement membrane proteins enable astrocytic end-feet and endothelial cell polarization.
ECM may participate in protein clearance through perivascular and intramural interstitial flow.
Thickening, fragmentation, and degeneration of the basement membrane.
Alterations in content, structure, and organization of ECM proteins.
Ab ¼ amyloid-b; BBB ¼ blood-brain barrier; ECM ¼ extracellular matrix.

Cortes-Canteli and Iadecola
Alzheimer's Disease and Vascular Aging most significant changes in the neurovascular unit and BBB are described in Table
These alterations induced by the pathogenic factors driving AD likely work in concert with the BBB dysfunction that occurs in normal aging
CEREBROVASCULAR DYSFUNCTION IN AD.
Alterations in CBF have long been described in AD
CBF decreases are found in brain regions involved in cognition and affected by AD pathology, such as the hippocampus, entorhinal cortex, amygdala, and anterior cingulum, and are observed in the preclinical stages of the disease
Although these changes in CBF could be secondary to reductions in neuronal activity, which is tightly coupled to CBF (1), the data raise the prospect that vascular insufficiency could be an early contributor to the disease process
In support of this possibility, experimental data suggest that Ab has powerful vasoactive effects
Thus, Thomas et al.
The first demonstration that Ab alters cerebral endothelial function in vivo was provided by Zhang et al.
It was then shown that the endothelial dysfunction is also secondary to vascular oxidative stress in vivo and, as such, could be reversed by ROS scavengers
Studies using recombinant peptides demonstrated that Ab40, but not Ab42, induces vasoconstriction in the cerebral arterioles, an effect also observed in isolated pressurized vessels in vitro, attesting to a direct effect on cerebral vessels
Accordingly, resting CBF is reduced in young AD mice
Ab was also shown to alter In summary, these observations suggest that vascular dysfunction is an early manifestation of Ab accumulation, which, in conjunction with structural alterations to the cerebral microvasculature, may contribute to the disease process.
This conclusion, predominantly based on basic science studies, has received support from a study in the Alzheimer Disease Neuroimaging Initiative

AD, VASCULAR RISK FACTORS, AND VASCULAR ALTERATIONS OUTSIDE THE BRAIN
LARGE ARTERY STIFFENING.
Arterial stiffness is one of the consequences of vascular aging and related diseases, chronic hypertension in particular.
The cerebral microcirculation is particularly vulnerable to high pulsatile forces, and arterial stiffness is considered a risk factor for cerebrovascular disease and dementia
A decade ago, a link between aortic stiffness and worse cognitive function was described in the Rotterdam study
An association has also been detected before patients develop dementia.
For example, a correlation between higher aortic stiffness and mild cognitive impairment was found in a large study of participants without dementia
Interestingly, individuals without dementia with higher arterial stiffness at baseline developed memory decline
Cerebrovascular stiffness may have a profound effect on the brain by decreasing CBF, and arterial stiffness has been proposed to be a robust predictor of cognitive decline
Although the exact mechanism by which arterial stiffness affects cognition is not fully understood, an intriguing association between systemic arterial stiffness and brain Ab accumulation has HYPERTENSION.
Long known to be a cause of vascular cognitive impairment, hypertension has also been recently linked to AD.
Thus, midlife hypertension is a risk factor for late-life dementia, including AD
Furthermore, clinical-pathological studies have shown that hypertension promotes the neurodegenerative pathology underlying AD, that is, amyloid plaques and neurofibrillary tangles

Cortes-Canteli and Iadecola
Hypertension is well known to damage cerebral blood vessels both structurally and functionally, effects mediated mainly by vascular oxidative stress
to its interaction with other amyloidogenic peptides, such as transthyretin, remains to be established.
Moreover, plasma Ab40 is linked to cardiovascular events and arterial aging in patients with coronary heart disease (62) and, intriguingly, in those with subclinical cardiovascular disease as well
The relationship between heart function and AD remains to be fully elucidated, but the possibility that Ab may promote cardiac dysfunction in AD deserves further inquiry.
PROCOAGULANT STATE.
Increasing evidence points to significant Ab-driven alterations of the coagulation cascade in AD, favoring a procoagulant state

CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS
In this review, we have presented evidence that vascular aging may be exacerbated by AD pathology, thereby contributing to the vascular dysfunction present in AD (Central Illustration).
These vascular changes include functional and structural alterations across the entire cerebrovascular tree, from large artery atherosclerosis and CAA to small vessel disease and BBB impairment.
These alterations, in concert with the deleterious effects of Ab vasoactivity, reduce cerebral perfusion and impair the ability of the cerebral circulation to supply energy substrates and oxygen to active brain regions.
Moreover, emerging evidence raises the possibility that vascular alterations outside the brain may also play a role in AD.
Hypertension and systemic atherosclerosis, together with large artery stiffening and a procoagulant state in AD, may cause damage to the cerebral vasculature and further contribute to alterations in CBF, to which the brain is particularly susceptible.
Plasma Ab levels increase during preclinical AD and then diminish as the disease progresses
As discussed in this review, the rise in plasma Ab during the early phases of AD may affect the cardiovascular system in a wide variety of ways and potentially influence the disease process and its clinical manifestations.
The brain and heart are vitally interconnected by neurovascular and humoral pathways, and more efforts should be directed at investigating the relationships between cardiovascular diseases and brain pathologies leading to cognitive dysfunction.
Cortes-Canteli and Iadecola



A
B B R E V I A T I O N S A N D A C R O N Y M S Ab = amyloid-b AD = Alzheimer's disease ApoE = apolipoprotein E BBB = blood-brain barrier CAA = cerebral amyloid angiopathy CBF = cerebral blood flow ROS = reactive oxygen species J A C C V O L .
7 5 , N O .
8


cerebrovascular autoregulation and the increase in CBF produced by neural activity (neurovascular coupling) (37-39), major neurovascular regulatory mechanisms.
These investigations, collectively, provided evidence that Ab reduces resting cerebral perfusion and disrupts all key regulatory mechanisms of the cerebral circulation, effects that occurs before other pathological changes and precede cognitive impairment.
Later investigations focused on the cellular and molecular mechanisms of the vascular dysfunction.
Park et al. (40) demonstrated that the cerebrovascular effects of Ab are mediated by ROS derived from the enzyme nicotinamide-adenine dinucleotide phosphate oxidase and that genetic deletion of the Nox2 subunit of this enzyme fully rescued the vascular and cognitive dysfunction in AD mice without affecting amyloid plaque load.
Ab-generated ROS mediate vascular dysfunction by leading to activation of transient receptor potential melastatin-2 channels, which induce Ca 2þ overload in cerebral endothelial cells (41).
Furthermore, the deleterious neurovascular and cognitive effects of Ab required engagement of the innate immunity receptor CD36 (42) localized to perivascular macrophages (43).


elderly adults without dementia
Indeed, the altered pulsatility due to arterial stiffness may impede proper Ab clearance through the BBB as well as the perivascular and paravascular (glymphatic) pathways.
However, it remains unclear whether arterial stiffness promotes Ab deposition or vice versa, and the involvement in such



Thus, hypertension leads
to changes in the vascular wall (hypertrophy and remodeling), promotes atherosclerosis, and produces focal microvascular alterations in penetrating arterioles arising from the basal ganglia and vascularizing the subcortical and periventricular white matter (arteriolosclerosis and lipohyalinosis), resulting in white matter damage, microhemorrhages, and microinfarcts (1,53).
Functionally, hypertension reduces resting CBF, increases the permeability of the BBB, and alters all of the major factors regulating the cerebral circulation: endothelial vasomotor function, neurovascular coupling, and autoregulation
Less well understood are the biological bases of the relationship between hypertension and AD pathology.
There is evidence that hypertension promotes amyloid accumulation in animal models as in humans
However, hypertension could also promote amyloid accumulation by producing vascular damage and reduced vascular amyloid clearance
Recent evidence implicating perivascular macrophages in the vascular oxidative stress induced by hypertension support this hypothesis
Preliminary data from the SPRINT-MIND (Systolic Blood Pressure Intervention) study suggest that strict blood pressure control may be beneficial to cognitive function
However, further studies are required to define the most effective blood pressures targets, to test for class-specific effects of antihypertensive drugs, and to define the specific contribution of hypertension to AD pathology.CARDIAC ABNORMALITIES.
Diseases of the heart are well known to be associated with cognitive dysfunction, as exemplified by the term cardiogenic dementia coined in the 1970s.
Intriguingly, genetic factors typically associated with AD, such as ApoE4 and presenilin mutations, have also been linked to heart failure and dilated cardiomyopathy, indicating a potential genetic association between AD and cardiovascular diseases
In addition, misfolded proteins play a central role not only in neurodegenerative diseases, such as AD, Parkinson's disease, and Huntington's disease, but also in cardiac hypertrophy and cardiomyopathy
Although the proteins that form the aggregates may differ in nature, increasing evidence points to Ab as a partner in crime in some of the proteinopathies affecting both heart and brain.
For example, compromised diastolic function (60) along with Ab40 and Ab42 aggregates (61) have been reported in the myocardium of patients with AD, suggesting the presence of cardiac amyloidosis in the absence of overt cardiovascular disease.
Whether this type of amyloidosis is due to deposits of cardiac Ab or



Ab42 binds to fibrinogen ( 66 )-5 1
and fibrin
In AD, due to the damage to the BBB, fibrin(ogen) extravasates into the brain parenchyma and, as demonstrated in animal models, results in pericyte degeneration, amyloid accumulation, microglial activation, synaptic dysfunction, dendritic spine loss, and neuronal death
On these bases, a causative role for fibrin(ogen) in AD pathology has been proposed
Moreover, Ab40 and Ab42 activate coagulation proteins, such as factor XII (72) and factor XIIIa (73), and clotting abnormalities strongly correlate with cognitive function in patients with AD (74).
Collectively, this evidence indicates that Ab interacts closely with J A C C V O L .
7 5 , N O .
8 Alzheimer's Disease and Vascular Aging different coagulation factors, promoting a prothrombotic and proinflammatory milieu (64).
This hypothesis is further supported by experimental studies demonstrating that normalizing this procoagulant state halts disease progression.
Experiments in mouse models showed that: 1) blocking the interaction between Ab and fibrinogen normalizes thrombosis, reduces CAA, and improves cognition (75); and 2) depleting factor XII reduces fibrin(ogen) cognitive dysfunction (76).
Less is known about the effect of anticoagulation in patients with dementia.
In patients with atrial fibrillation, anticoagulation decreases dementia risk, but the mechanisms are unclear and may be related to reduced cerebral embolization (77).
Anticoagulants proved to be beneficial in mouse models of amyloid accumulation (78), but they have not moved forward into the AD therapeutic pipeline, probably because of concerns about risk of bleeding.
The introduction of direct oral anticoagulants with decreased risk of intracranial bleeding may change this perception.
Cortes-Canteli et al. (79) recently showed that longterm treatment with one of these agents in a mouse model prevents cerebral fibrin deposition;preserves CBF and BBB integrity; and ameliorates cognitive deficits, amyloid burden, and neuroinflammation
Increasing evidence indicates that a high cognitive reserve, a healthy lifestyle, and the control of modifiable cardiovascular risk factors may reduce the risk of developing dementia, including AD
Recent epidemiological evidence from multiple independent patient cohorts points to a decrease in the incidence of AD, which has been attributed to better control of vascular risk factors (84).
Indeed, the randomized controlled trial FINGER (Finnish Geriatric Intervention Study to Prevent Cognitive Impairment and Disability) confirmed the positive effect of a multidomain lifestyle intervention on cognitive decline prevention.
After a 2-year intervention (nutritional counseling, social stimulation, physical/cognitive training, and management of vascular risk factors), at-risk elderly individuals in the intervention group had a decreased risk of cognitive decline (85) and maintenance of activities of daily living (86).
Other similar multidomain intervention studies also showed promising results, encouraging the recent launch of large-scale AD prevention trials, the results of which will reinforce effective prevention strategies (87



-5 1
For example, little is known about the impact of cardiac function and the vasculature on neurodegenerative pathologies underlying cognitive impairment, which, in addition to plaques and tangles, also include Lewy bodies, TAR DNA-binding protein (TDP)-43 proteinopathy, hippocampal sclerosis, etc.
In addition, although providing nutritional flow is a major role of the cerebral vasculature, neurovascular functions independent of blood flow delivery, such as trophic interactions, proteostasis, and neuroimmune trafficking
For example, a high-salt diet in mice induces a deficit in cerebral endothelial nitric oxide, which leads to dementia independently of cerebral perfusion but through tau phosphorylation and aggregation
Rapid advances in cardiac, vascular, and neurovascular biology, coupled with single-cell genomic, proteomic, and metabolomic approaches, provide the unprecedented opportunity to dissect the cellular crosstalk underling the relationships between the brain and vasculature in health and disease.
The new findings resulting from these efforts would provide new clues on how to best prevent and treat patients with AD and related dementias.
In the absence of disease-modifying treatments, reducing the incidence of dementia by controlling vascular risk factors in middle age remains an attractive and feasible preventive strategy, even if effective therapeutic options become available.



TABLE 1
Cellular Pathobiology of the Neurovascular Unit in Alzheimer's Disease


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS Special thanks to Raquel Toribio-Fernandez for her assistance with the images in Table1, and Carlos Galan-Arriola for his invaluable help with the Central Illustration.ADDRESS FOR CORRESPONDENCE: Dr. Marta Cortes-Canteli, Centro Nacional de Investigaciones Cardiovasculares, Melchor Fernández Almagro 3, 28029 Madrid, Spain.
E-mail: mcortes@cnic.es.