Reciprocal Predictive Relationships between Amyloid and Tau Biomarkers in Alzheimer's Disease Progression: An Empirical Model
There is an urgent need to understand the relationships between amyloid-␤ (A␤) and tau in the progression of Alzheimer's disease to identify treatment targets.
Here we examine reciprocal predictions of brain A␤ burden quantified by positron emission tomography and CSF concentrations of A␤42 and phosphorylated tau (p-tau).
Each biomarker was examined over 48 months in two separate cross-lagged models; one in asymptomatic healthy elderly people (men and women), and one in patients with Alzheimer's disease (AD) dementia or mild cognitive impairment (MCI).
The models examine predictions of each biomarker on the progression of the others, considering each previous and concurrent measure.
In healthy elderly, lower CSF A␤42 predicted A␤ deposition and reciprocally, A␤ burden predicted a decrease in CSF A␤42.
Lower CSF A␤42 predicted an increase in CSF p-tau, and CSF p-tau predicted A␤ deposition.
In AD/MCI, lower CSF A␤42 predicted A␤ deposition and A␤ burden reciprocally predicted CSF A␤42 changes; however, in contrast to healthy elderly, CSF p-tau concentrations did not predict A␤ biomarkers, or vice versa.
In post hoc models examining cognitive status, CSF A␤42 predicted Mini Mental State Examination (MMSE) scores in healthy elderly, whereas A␤ burden and CSF p-tau predicted MMSE scores in AD/MCI.
The findings describe reciprocal predictions between A␤ and tau biomarkers in healthy elderly and they implicate mechanisms underlying low CSF A␤42 in Alzheimer's disease pathogenesis and progression.
In symptomatic Alzheimer's disease, CSF A␤42 and A␤ deposition predicted each other; however, A␤ and CSF p-tau progressed independently and they independently predicted cognitive decline.

Introduction
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is defined by two pathological hallmarks: A␤ plaques and neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs), caused, respectively, by extracellular aggregation of A␤ and intracellular hyperphosphorylation of tau
A longstanding amyloid hypothesis implicates A␤ as the initiator and driver of AD pathological progression
The failure of several antiamyloid therapies to improve clinical symptoms in AD dementia
Genetic evidence supports an initiatory role of A␤ dysregulation in AD; mutations in the amyloid precursor protein (APP) gene
Tau mutations can cause frontotemporal dementia
The temporal evolution of AD biomarkers shows a characteristic decrease in CSF A␤ peptide 42 (A␤42) concentrations, and a subsequent increase in A␤ deposition inferred from positron emission tomography (PET) scans, that precedes increases in CSF tau concentrations or tau deposition in most brain regions
Some evidence opposes this canonical sequence of biomarker staging.
Examining both amyloid and tau PET,
Those findings would be consistent with the suggestion that the predominant role of A␤ may be to exacerbate tau pathology
To date, most biomarker studies have been adynamic, and so an amyloid "cascade" per se, involving reciprocal synergy between A␤ and tau progression, has yet to be empirically proven in living people.
Moreover, existing clinical evidence fails to identify a role of A␤ beyond the initiation of AD pathogenesis, and the nature of its relationship with tau progression has been described only recently as AD symptoms develop and progress
Possibly due in part to a previous lack of long-term clinical data, the AD cascade has remained an enigmatic target for treatment.
The present study takes advantage of repeated measurements collected by the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) investigators to examine the dynamic interplay between biomarkers of A␤ and tau in their progression over 48 months, both in asymptomatic healthy elderly controls (HCs) and in cognitively impaired individuals with AD dementia or mild cognitive impairment (MCI) who have biomarker confirmation of amyloid positivity (AD/MCI).
The predictive relationships between CSF concentrations of A␤42, CSF concentrations of tau phosphorylated at threonine 181 (p-tau), and levels of A␤ deposition obtained from 18 F-florbetapir ( 18 F-AV-45) PET
Specifically, a model was constructed to examine (1) the predictive relationships between CSF A␤42 and CSF p-tau progression; (2) the predictive relationship between amyloid deposition and the progression of CSF A␤42 and CSF p-tau, and the converse predictions of CSF A␤42 and CSF p-tau on amyloid deposition; and (3) amyloid and tau progression in HC and AD/ MCI separately to specify their relationships in asymptomatic and symptomatic people.
Post hoc models were constructed including Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) scores to explore the predictive relationships between these biomarkers and changes in cognitive status.

Materials and Methods
Sample.
Separate analyses were conducted in HC and AD/MCI participants (
Data were used from ADNI GO and 2 because 18 F-AV-45 PET scans on subjects began in these study phases.
ADNI was launched in 2003, as a publicprivate partnership, with the primary goal of determining whether neuroimaging, other biomarkers, and clinical and neuropsychological assessments could be combined to measure the progression of MCI and early AD.
ADNI was conducted according to Good Clinical Practice guidelines, US 21CFR Part 50 -Protection of Human Subjects, and Part 56 -Institutional Review Boards, and pursuant to state and federal regulations.
Written informed consent and HIPAA authorizations for the study were obtained from all participants and/or authorized representatives and the study partners.
Measures.
CSF p-tau concentrations, CSF A␤42 concentrations, and A␤ deposition were included at each of the three waves (baseline, 24 months, 48 months) in the model.
Two biomarkers of A␤ pathology were included because AD-related abnormalities in these biomarkers are thought to initiate at temporally distinct points in AD pathogenesis
Longitudinal CSF p-tau concentrations were chosen over total tau (t-tau) concentrations to represent progression of tauopathy; although both t-tau and p-tau behave similarly in AD progression
Five potential confounders were introduced as covariates: baseline age, baseline MMSE score, baseline whole-brain atrophy, sex, and APOE4 allele presence/absence.
Fully automated Roche Elecsys immunoassays were used to quantify CSF concentrations of all AD biomarkers.
A␤ deposition values were obtained from 18 F-AV-45 cortical summary measures (SUVR) normalized by a composite reference region (made up of whole cerebellum, brainstem/pons, and eroded subcortical white matter), as white mattercontaining reference regions have been shown to produce greater accuracy in longitudinal 18 F-AV-45 measures
As the PET signal was normalized to a composite reference region, the recommended cutoff value for amyloid positivity was 0.79; all AD/MCI subjects with normalized SUVR values above the cutoff at their baseline visit were included in the AD/MCI A␤ϩ group, whereas all HC subjects were included regardless of amyloid status.
Analyses were performed separately in a subgroup of HC subjects with baseline SUVR values below the cutoff (HC A␤Ϫ), and in a subgroup of HC subjects above the SUVR cutoff (HC A␤ϩ).
For magnetic resonance imaging data used to calculate whole-brain atrophy, 3T scans were processed with FreeSurfer 5.1.
All data used for analyses were downloaded from the ADNI database in January 2019.
Whole-brain atrophy was estimated by dividing the total brain parenchymal volume by intracranial volume.
Experimental design and statistical analysis.
The CLPM is a statistical technique used to understand the most likely predictive relationships between variables over time
The CLPM tests predictions of each measure on the progression of the others, considering (1) each previous measure, (2) each concurrent measure, and (3) any relevant covariates
Unlike univariate mediation/predictive models, the CLPM does not assume a particular order in which variables influence each other, and unlike data-driven or descriptive approaches, the CLPM, via fit indices, tests a hypothesis about how well the data fit a specific model structure that is defined a priori
Analyses were conducted in Mplus v8, using three waves of longitudinal data (baseline, 24 months, 48 months), as both CSF and PET data were available at those time points and they are sufficiently distanced in time to detect meaningful changes in each biomarker.
A robust maximum likelihood estimator was used, allowing for inclusion of participants despite missing data without imputation under the assumption of a missing at random mechanism.
Standardized coefficients (␤) and their significance values were estimated for each association tested.
The CLPM approach created nine grand mean centered variables (see Fig.
Briefly, these variables were predicted by their own antecedent measures in an autoregressive manner, and also by each of the other measures at the antecedent time point (i.e., "cross-lagged").
These effects were estimated freely.
The residuals at each wave (latent variables represented by small circles) were allowed to be correlated with each other to account for time-specific correlations between the biomarkers.
Goodness of fit was assessed for all models using: root mean square error of approximation (RMSEA), comparative fit index (CFI), Tucker-Lewis index (TLI), and standardized root mean square residual (SRMR).
Good fit was indicated for values of RMSEA Ͻ 0.06, CFI Ͼ 0.95, TLI Ͼ 0.90, and SRMR Ͻ 0.08.
Because of similarities in CSF p-tau and t-tau measures as AD biomarkers, post hoc analyses substituting longitudinal CSF t-tau for p-tau were conducted.
To explore relationships between the biomarkers and changes in cognitive status over time, MMSE scores from each of the three waves were considered as a fourth cross-lagged variable (instead of as a covariate) in a second set of post hoc models.

Results

Sample
There were 921 subjects in ADNI GO and ADNI 2. Of these subjects, 294 were defined clinically as healthy controls, and 405 were amyloid-positive and defined clinically as having either dementia or MCI.
From these groups, five subjects were excluded due to missing data at every time point for each longitudinal variable, and 31 subjects were excluded because of missing data on at least one covariate since the analytical framework required no missing data in any predictor.
In two instances, the p-tau measurement at a single time point was below the detectable level of the immunoassay, so data were imputed at the sensitivity of the assay.
Therefore, 276 HC and 387 AD/MCI subjects were included in analyses (Fig.
Characteristics of participants in both groups can be found in Table

Testing the models
The data fit the models well for both HC (RMSEA ϭ 0.038, CFI ϭ 0.992, TLI ϭ 0.984, SRMR ϭ 0.020) and AD/MCI (RMSEA ϭ 0.046, CFI ϭ 0.983, TLI ϭ 0.965, SRMR ϭ 0.051) groups.
The data fit the model well for the HC A␤-subgroup (RMSEA ϭ 0.049, CFI ϭ 0.980, TLI ϭ 0.958, SRMR ϭ 0.061), but covariance coverage was insufficient to test a model for the HC A␤ϩ subgroup due to small sample size.
For all significant predictions, ␤ and p values are shown in Figures

Covariate effects, biomarker stability, cross-sectional correlations, and model residuals
In both HC and AD/MCI groups (Fig.
Older subjects in both HC and AD/MCI groups had lower CSF A␤42 concentrations, and older subjects in the HC group also had higher baseline CSF p-tau concentrations and greater A␤ burden.
APOE4 carriers in both HC and AD/MCI groups had higher baseline A␤ burden and lower baseline CSF A␤42 concentrations, and the in HC group APOE4 carriers also had higher baseline CSF p-tau concentrations.
In the AD/MCI group, baseline MMSE scores and wholebrain atrophy were associated with baseline biomarkers; lower MMSE scores were associated with higher baseline A␤ burden, higher CSF p-tau concentrations, and lower CSF A␤42 concentrations, and those with greater baseline atrophy had higher baseline A␤ burden and lower baseline CSF A␤42 concentrations.
CSF A␤42 concentrations, CSF p-tau concentrations, and A␤ burden each displayed strong longitudinal stability (i.e., each measure strongly predicted its own measure at subsequent time points; Fig.
Cross-sectional correlations between cross-lagged variables are identified in the covariance and correlation matrices for HC (Fig.

Cascade characteristics in asymptomatic elderly
In HC (Fig.
Lower CSF A␤42 concentrations at baseline also predicted an increase in CSF p-tau concentrations 24 months later.
Higher CSF p-tau concentrations at baseline predicted higher A␤ burden at Month 24.
CSF p-tau concentrations did not predict CSF A␤42 concentration changes.
In the subgroup of HCs who were PET A␤Ϫ, the same predictive relationships were observed, except that A␤ deposition did not predict CSF A␤42 concentration changes, but instead, it predicted changes in CSF p-tau concentrations (Fig.

Cascade characteristics in AD/MCI subjects
In AD/MCI (Fig.
Neither A␤ biomarker predicted changes in CSF p-tau concentrations, and CSF p-tau concentration changes did not significantly predict changes in either A␤ biomarker.
Results in healthy elderly and AD/MCI groups are summarized in Table

Post hoc analyses Total tau versus p-tau
Post hoc analyses substituting t-tau for p-tau produced identical significant longitudinal predictions and residual correlations in the AD/MCI model (data not shown).
Results were identical in the HC model, except the residual of PET and CSF A␤ biomarkers were no longer correlated at month 24, and instead the residuals of CSF A␤42 and p-tau were correlated at month 48 (data not shown).

Progression of cognitive status
Post hoc models were tested with MMSE scores included as longitudinal variables instead of as a covariate, to discern which biomarkers predicted changes in cognitive status in HC and AD/MCI groups.
The models returned good fit indices for HC (RMSEA ϭ 0.048, CFI ϭ 0.986, TLI ϭ 0.966, SRMR ϭ 0.044) and for AD/MCI (RMSEA ϭ 0.056, CFI ϭ 0.975, TLI ϭ 0.940, SRMR ϭ 0.053) groups.
In both models, all covariate relationships, longitudinal predictions, cross-sectional correlations and residual correlations between biomarkers were unchanged from the previous set of models and additionally, in the AD/MCI group, APOE4 predicted higher baseline CSF p-tau, and A␤ burden and CSF p-tau concentration at month 48 were correlated (Fig.
In the HC group, lower baseline CSF A␤42 concentrations predicted a subsequent decline in MMSE scores between baseline and 24 months (Fig.
In the AD/MCI model, A␤ burden at both baseline and month 24, and higher CSF p-tau concentrations at month 24 (trending also at baseline; p ϭ 0.07), predicted subsequent MMSE scores (Fig.
The complete covariance and correlation matrices are provided in Fig.

Discussion
In healthy elderly and in patients with AD or MCI, CSF and PET A␤ biomarkers demonstrated reciprocal predictive relationships,  consistent with an amyloid cascade model.
Although CSF and PET A␤ biomarkers track the same protein, they relay some unique information about the processes underlying AD pathogenesis
Previous observations suggest that CSF and PET A␤ biomarkers detect different forms of the protein (i.e., soluble A␤42 vs extracellular fibrillar A␤), and that CSF A␤42 changes stage earlier in AD progression
Reciprocally, the PET A␤ signal also predicted CSF A␤42 changes, although this direction of prediction was observed only in the HC group that included PET A␤ϩ people and in AD/MCI, suggesting that appreciable amyloid burden might be required before the PET A␤ signal predicts subsequent CSF A␤42 changes.
Some have attributed this to differences in biomarker sensitivity
The specific mechanisms underlying the drop in CSF A␤42 remain unclear.
It has been suggested that the drop in CSF A␤ might be caused by its deposition in fibrillar/insoluble form
In that case, the empirical model might be expected to show the PET signal to predict CSF changes more consistently.
Impaired efflux or trapping of A␤ in the interstitial fluid (e.g., in oligomeric form) could also prevent movement into the CSF.
If the radiotracer failed to detect oligomeric species in interstitial fluid, then a drop in CSF A␤42 concentrations might be expected to predict changes in the PET A␤ signal.
The initial change in CSF A␤42 concentrations has also been suggested to involve defects in A␤ processing and/or intraneuronal transport related to accumulation in autophagic vesicles (possibly because of cell stress and dysfunction of the endosomal-lysosomal system), which has been shown to occur early in AD pathogenesis and to precede extracellular deposition around dystrophic neurites
In healthy elderly some evidence of a reciprocally predictive relationship between A␤ and tau biomarker progression was seen; lower CSF A␤42 concentrations variably predicted subsequent increases in CSF p-tau, CSF p-tau variably predicted A␤ deposition, and A␤ deposition variably predicted subsequent increases in CSF p-tau.
The results are consistent with animal studies suggesting that tau and A␤ can have co-propagating activities.
In animals, A␤ increases tau hyperphosphorylation and NFT formation
Reciprocally, overexpression of human tau in APP transgenic mice can increase A␤ deposition
Those studies suggest that interactions between A␤ and tau might be cyclic in nature.
In the present models, CSF p-tau specifically predicted A␤ deposition, and reciprocally, there was some evidence that A␤ deposition could predict CSF p-tau progression.
In cross-sectional correlations, CSF p-tau concentrations were correlated with A␤ burden but not with CSF A␤42 concentrations, as previously reported
Because of uncertainties in the neurobiological underpinnings of the biomarkers and a lack of definitive causal inferences, the implications of the present model for preventative interventions are unclear.
In HC, lower CSF A␤42 variably predicted changes in cognitive status, so it might be speculated that identifying and targeting the mechanism(s) underlying this biomarker might prevent early changes in cognitive status due to AD in healthy elderly people.
The prediction of A␤ deposition by CSF p-tau seen in HC might also suggest that strategies targeting tau, either directly or indirectly via other processes that lead to tau accrual
In a recent study, healthy elderly people with both amyloid and tau PET accrual showed greater memory decline
Further prospective studies of asymptomatic/presymptomatic people will be needed to determine how the interplay between CSF and PET biomarkers predicts the development of clinical AD.
In AD/MCI, there was no evidence to support reciprocal predictions between A␤ and tau biomarkers.
The reason for this is unclear.
One possibility is that the biomarkers reached plateaus before these symptomatic stages.
It has been suggested that CSF A␤42 concentrations tend to bottom-out before the onset of symptoms
The empirical model suggests that this may not entirely account for the null findings because the amyloid biomarkers continued to exhibit dynamic interplay in AD/MCI, each predicting progression of the other.
Therefore, it is possible that amyloid and tau biomarkers progressed independently of one another in AD/MCI.
It has been suggested that extracellular p-tau can spread between neurons independently of amyloid, possibly driving neuronal hyperexcitability and disease progression in symptomatic stages
Consistent with those hypotheses, here CSF p-tau concentrations variably predicted cognitive decline in AD/MCI.
The lack of predictive relationships between tau and amyloid in AD/MCI might have therapeutic implications.
Recent studies using PET-derived tau measures suggest that tau deposition mediates the relationship between A␤ burden and cognitive status
If tau progresses independently of amyloid deposition once AD/MCI is established, then therapies targeting extracellular amyloid may be insufficient to halt cognitive progression.
In the present study, both A␤ burden and CSF p-tau predicted cognitive decline independently, and if true, targeting their distinct underlying molecular processes simultaneously may be necessary to halt disease progression.
This would be consistent with the failure of amyloid-targeted monotherapies in AD clinical trials to date
Moreover, examining CSF biomarkers together with the PET A␤ signal over time revealed that CSF A␤42 concentrations consistently predicted A␤ deposition in AD/MCI, suggesting that mechanisms underlying the drop CSF A␤42 were sustained throughout AD progression.
It might be speculated that targeting those mechanisms, which may include but may not be limited to A␤ deposition, might be of therapeutic benefit in symptomatic stages.
This study has several limitations.
As an empirical approach, the CLPM offers the advantage of making the cascade hypothesis explicitly testable; however, causality cannot be inferred explicitly, and the model is data-demanding leading to sample-size limitations; not all identified cross-lagged predictions reached significance consistently between the two lag periods, and there were insufficient data to construct the models in the subgroup of PET A␤ϩ HC, an important limitation to be addressed in future studies.
Because a similar independent dataset was unavailable, replication was not possible.
Additional waves would be required to model explicitly interindividual differences as trait-like features, although subgroup analyses accounted meaningfully for population heterogeneity
Too few longitudinal AV-1451 PET measures were available to model in ADNI cohorts, precluding exploration of tau deposition dynamics and regional specificity in brain; however, CSF p-tau appears to correlate with tau deposition
We propose further applications of the model to establish how the present findings link with biomarkers of neurodegeneration, and to identify pathophysiological processes that predict decreases in CSF A␤42 as potential targets for prevention and treatment.
In conclusion, to our knowledge, this is the first empirical model to test reciprocal predictive relationships between amyloid and tau biomarkers as they progressed over time in living people.
The empirical biomarker model is consistent with a hypothetical amyloid cascade involving reciprocal predictions between amyloid and tau progression in healthy elderly people, wherein tau specifically predicted amyloid deposition but not CSF A␤42 changes.
In healthy elderly people, lower CSF A␤42 concentrations predicted subsequent amyloid deposition and CSF p-tau changes, consistent with the proposed staging of these biomarkers
The empirical model further suggested that amyloid and tau biomarkers progressed independently in people with established AD/MCI.
In AD/MCI, CSF A␤42 concentrations predicted A␤ deposition, which predicted cognitive decline, and CSF p-tau concentrations predicted cognitive decline independently.
The results provide clarification regarding the dynamics of AD biomarker progression and its relationships with cognitive decline, consistent with priorities identified by The National Institute on Aging-Alzheimer's Association updated research framework



Figure 1 .
Figure 1.
Flow diagram of determination of included subjects in HC and AD/MCI study groups.
All AD/MCI were PET-confirmed A␤ϩ (above the amyloid positivity cutoff); HC were separated into A␤ϩ and A␤Ϫ subgroups for further analyses.
Groups and subgroups investigated in green.



Figure 2 .
Figure 2. Cross-lagged panel model results in (A) HC and (B) AD/MCI subjects.
PET-derived A␤ burden, CSF p-tau concentrations, and CSF A␤42 concentrations are modeled across three waves (baseline, 24 months, and 48 months) with covariates sex, baseline age, baseline MMSE score, APOE4, and baseline whole-brain atrophy.
Rectangles, Observed variables; large circles, grand mean centered variables; small circles, residual variances; thin gray arrows, nonsignificant longitudinal predictions or correlations between residuals; black arrows, significant covariate associations or correlations between residuals; green arrows, significant longitudinal predictions from A␤ deposition to a variable at a subsequent time point; orange arrows, significant longitudinal predictions from CSF p-tau concentrations to a variable at a subsequent time point; blue arrows, significant longitudinal predictions from CSF A␤ concentrations to a variable at a subsequent time point.
Standardized coefficients (␤) and p values are displayed for all significant predictions.
The complete covariance and correlation matrices are provided for HC in (Figure legend continues.)



4(
Figure legend continued.)
Figure 2-1 (available at https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI. 1056-19.2019.f2-1)
and Figure 2-2 (available at https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1056-19.2019.f2-2),
and for AD/MCI in Figure 2-3 (available at https://doi.org/10.1523/ JNEUROSCI.1056-19.2019.f2-3)
and Figure 2-4 (available at https://doi.org/10.1523/ JNEUROSCI.1056-19.2019.f2-4).



Figure 3 .
Figure 3. Cross-lagged panel model results in a subgroup of HC subjects who are A␤Ϫ.
PET-derived A␤ burden, CSF p-tau concentrations, and CSF A␤42 concentrations are modeled across three waves (baseline, 24 months, and 48 months) with covariates sex, baseline age, baseline MMSE score, APOE4, and baseline whole-brain atrophy.
The complete covariance and correlation matrices are provided in Figure 3-1 (available at https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1056-19.2019.f3-1)
and Figure 3-2 (available at https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1056-19.2019.f3-2).Figure legend as described in Figure 2.



Figure 4 .
Figure 4. Post hoc cross-lagged panel model results with longitudinal MMSE scores in (A) HC and (B) AD/MCI subjects.
PET-derived A␤ burden, CSF p-tau concentration, CSF A␤42 concentrations, and MMSE scores are modeled across three waves (baseline, 24 months, and 48 months) with covariates sex, baseline age, APOE4, and baseline whole-brain atrophy.
Legend as in Figure 2. Standardized coefficients (␤) and p values are displayed for all significant longitudinal predictions between MMSE scores and other cross-lagged variables, and for all significant associations between baseline covariates and MMSE scores.
The complete covariance and correlation matrices are provided for HC in Figure 4-1 (available at https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1056-19.2019.f4-1),
and in Figure 4-2 (available at https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1056-19.2019.f4-2),
and for AD/MCI in Figure 4-3 (available at https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1056-19.2019.f4-3)
and Figure 4-4 (available at https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1056-19.2019.f4-4).



Table 1 . Characteristics of HC and AD/MCI subjects



Table 2 . Summary of findings in healthy elderly and AD/MCI groups
Lower CSF A␤42 predicted increased A␤ deposition • Negative correlation between CSF A␤42 and A␤ burden • Greater A␤ burden variably predicted lower CSF A␤42 (not in the A␤Ϫ subgroup) • Positive correlation between CSF p-tau and A␤ burden • Lower CSF A␤42 predicted increased CSF p-tau • Positive correlation between CSF A␤42 and CSF p-tau (the A␤Ϫ subgroup only) • Higher CSF p-tau predicted increased A␤ deposition • Negative correlation between A␤ burden and MMSE scores at 48 months • Lower CSF A␤42 variably predicted lower MMSE scores AD/MCI • Lower CSF A␤42 predicted increased A␤ deposition • Negative correlation between CSF A␤42 and A␤ burden • Greater A␤ burden predicted lower CSF A␤42 • Positive correlation between CSF p-tau and A␤ burden • Greater A␤ burden predicted lower MMSE scores • Positive correlation between CSF A␤42 and MMSE scores • Higher CSF p-tau concentrations variably predicted lower MMSE scores • Negative correlation between CSF p-tau and MMSE scores • Negative correlation between A␤ burden and MMSE scores