Rasagiline effects on glucose metabolism, cognition, and tau in Alzheimer's dementia
Background: A Phase II proof of concept (POC) randomized clinical trial was conducted to evaluate the effects of rasagiline, a monoamine oxidase B (MAO-B) inhibitor approved for Parkinson disease, in mild to moderate Alzheimer's disease (AD).
The primary objective was to determine if 1 mg of rasagiline daily for 24 weeks is associated with improved regional brain metabolism (fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission tomography [FDG-PET]) compared to placebo.
Secondary objectives included measurement of effects on tau PET and evaluation of directional consistency of clinical end points.
Methods: This was a double-blind, parallel group, placebo-controlled, communitybased, three-site trial of 50 participants randomized 1:1 to receive oral rasagiline or placebo (NCT02359552).
FDG-PET was analyzed for the presence of an AD-like pattern as an inclusion criterion and as a longitudinal outcome using prespecified regions of interest and voxel-based analyses.
Tau PET was evaluated at baseline and longitudinally.
Clinical outcomes were analyzed using an intention-to-treat (ITT) model.
Results: Fifty patients were randomized and 43 completed treatment.
The study met its primary end point, demonstrating favorable change in FDG-PET differences in rasagiline versus placebo in middle frontal (P < 0.025), anterior cingulate (P < 0.041), and striatal (P < 0.023) regions.
Clinical measures showed benefit in quality of life (P < 0.04).
Digit Span, verbal fluency, and Neuropsychiatric Inventory (NPI) showed non-significant directional favoring of rasagiline; no effects were observed in Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale-Cognitive Subscale (ADAS-cog) or activities of daily living.
Rasagiline was generally well tolerated with low rates of adverse events and notably fewer neuropsychiatric symptoms in the active treatment group.
Discussion: These outcomes illustrate the potential benefits of rasagiline on clinical and neuroimaging measures in patients with mild to moderate AD.
Rasagiline appears to affect neuronal activity in frontostriatal pathways, with associated clinical benefit potential warranting a more fully powered trial.
This study illustrated the potential benefit of therapeutic repurposing and an experimental medicine proof-of-concept design with biomarkers to characterize patient and detect treatment response.

K E Y W O R D S
Alzheimer's disease, dopamine, FDG-PET, flortaucipir, glucose metabolism, MAO-B, QoL-AD, rasagiline, tau PET

INTRODUCTION
The need for effective therapeutics for patients with mild to moderate Alzheimer's disease (AD) is urgent, given limitations of currently approved medications and a high rate of negative clinical trial outcomes.
We conducted a Phase II "proof of concept" (POC) randomized clinical trial to evaluate the potential benefit of rasagiline in patients with mild to moderate AD.
Rasagiline is a selective monoamine oxidase B (MAO-B) inhibitor approved for treatment of Parkinson disease (PD) that has been shown to be safe and well-tolerated.
MAO-B inhibition increases the availability of dopamine, which mediates cognitive functions including executive abilities, working memory, attention, and reward as well as motor function.
In nonclinical AD models, rasagiline has demonstrated potential neuroprotection, with reductions in amyloid accumulation, tau hyperphosphorylation, and neurofibrillary tangle formation.
udies of rasagiline in patients with PD and schizophrenia suggest that the agent produces cognitive and other clinical benefits.
However, some clinical studies of MAO-B inhibitors have shown mixed or negative results.
For example, sembragiline did not meet cognitive or functional end points in AD patients over 52 weeks, but neuropsychiatric and functional benefit was noted in the more impaired subgroup.
Ladostigil showed potential atrophy-slowing effects but did not significantly alter clini-cal progression in mild cognitive impairment patients.
No trial has examined the effects of rasagiline on functional brain networks and relationship to clinical benefit.
The present study sought to understand the rasagiline as a potential treatment for patients with mild to moderate AD, supported by imaging of neuronal function and tau pathology.
The primary end point was change in cerebral glucose metabolism measured using fluoro-2-deoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography (PET), demonstrated to correspond to disease progression and functional treatment effects.
Based on prior studies,
FDG-PET was also used to evaluate the presence of an AD-like pattern of glucose metabolism as an enrollment prerequisite, increasing confidence in a diagnosis of AD.
A progressive pattern of temporoparietal hypometabolism has been reported to differentiate AD from other dementias, correlate with clinical status,
Clinical end points were evaluated as secondary outcomes to verify directional consistency with FDG.
This trial also included longitudinal measurement of tau with flortaucipir (Tauvid; Avid Radiopharmaceuticals) as a measure of AD pathology.
Tau aggregation is observed early in AD in medial temporal regions, spreading to lateral temporal, posterior, and frontal neocortex as AD progresses.
0]
This trial expanded on prior studies by measuring tau changes over a shorter period of 24 weeks and a broad range of AD severity, concurrent with FDG-PET.

HIGHLIGHTS
• Rasagiline is a monoamine oxidase B inhibitor approved in Parkinson disease.
• Rasagiline was evaluated in patients with mild to moderate Alzheimer's disease.
• A beneficial effect on frontostriatal glucose metabolism was observed versus placebo.
• Directional changes in quality of life and cognition supported clinical benefit.
• Relationships were observed between tau, other biomarkers, and treatment effect.

METHODS

Study design
This was a double-blinded, randomized, placebo-controlled study of the effects of 0.5 mg of rasagiline daily followed by

Randomization
The study was conducted by the Cleveland Clinic Lou Ruvo Center for Brain Health at three sites (Las Vegas NV, Cleveland OH, Lakewood OH).
Randomization was stratified by site, performed by the research pharmacist using a predetermined randomization schedule in which participants were assigned to rasagiline or placebo in a 1:1 ratio using randomly generated blocks of four or six participants.

Statistical power
Prior FDG-PET studies showed that metabolic changes associated with cognitive effects in AD can be detected in an unpaired design with less than 20 participants per arm.
Disease-related decline can be detected, although powered measurement of mitigation requires additional participants or time.
The study was not powered for clinical significance, but-as an experimental medicine approach-was designed to assess directionality for consistency with FDG findings and to determine the number of participants required to show a rasagilineplacebo difference in a powered trial.

Procedures

Medication
Rasagiline was initiated at 0.5 mg once daily for 4 weeks, increased to a 1 mg dose once daily at week 5, and maintained at this dose until the end of week 24.
Active and placebo tablets were provided by Teva, re-coated identically, and repackaged by randomization ID in a blinded manner.

Image acquisition and measurement
MRI was acquired at screening, and FDG and flortaucipir PET imaging were performed at baseline and at week 24.
Images were acquired using protocols based upon the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI, www.adni-info.org) and processed as described in the Supplemental Material.
Each participant's baseline FDG-PET scan was evaluated using two previously developed image classifiers that use a single time point.
The first was trained to differentiate scans of persons having status of amyloid negative and cognitively normal, amyloid positive with various stages of MCI and AD, frontotemporal dementia, and dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB).
The second quantifies the degree to which a scan expresses a pattern of hypometabolism and preservation relative to whole brain that reflects the progression of AD from amyloid negative, cognitively normal status through amyloid-positive AD dementia.
This pattern (Figure
Analysis (mathematical combinations of PCs), and intensive iterative split-half data resampling to determine the pattern(s) that best discrim-inated groups while minimizing data overfitting.
Pattern expression was quantified as a numeric score for each participant.
Tau SUVRs were measured in cortical tissue excluding cerebellum; a composite temporal region, the regions measured for FDG-PET; and using an adaptive approach that measured the change in subjectspecific set of voxels that were suprathreshold at baseline or 24 weeks to avoid directional bias, standardized to a common total volume.
White matter and cerebellar cortex reference regions were defined using a Gaussian decomposition approach (PERSI) (Supplement). 27

Clinical end points
The ADAS-cog, NPI, ADCS-ADL, DS, and COWAT were administered at baseline, and at weeks 4, 8, 24, and 28.
MMSE was administered at screening, baseline, and 24 weeks.
The CGIC was collected at 4, 8, 24, and 28 weeks.
QoL-AD was administered at baseline and 24 weeks.
Safety was monitored through weekly review of adverse events throughout the study.

Statistical analysis
Participants who completed both PET visits and passed image quality control were evaluated longitudinally.
Six-month changes in SUVR values and classifier scores were compared between treatment arms by ANOVA adjusted for age, baseline values, and interaction terms when applicable (JMP v14 (SAS); G:Power software).
Comparisons were also made within younger and older age strata given reports of greater tau and more rapid progression in younger AD participants

RESULTS

Participants
Between
Table
Age, sex, education, genotype, and baseline NPI, DSPAN, and COWAT scores did not differ between groups.
MMSE and ADAS-cog baseline scores were more impaired (by chance) in the placebo arm than the rasagiline arm (P < 0.06), whereas the rasagiline arm had worse baseline QoL-AD scores (P < 0.02).
Of the 43 participants who completed the study, one did not have a week-24 FDG PET scan and 3 were excluded from analysis due to pre-specified behavioral or motion confounds during image acquisition.
Among the 39 participants included in longitudinal image analysis, baseline MMSE and ADAS-cog scores did not differ between groups and QoL-AD scores were worse in the rasagiline-treated group (P < 0.05).

Baseline PET and ApoE characterization
Of the 59 participants whose screening FDG scans were analyzed using the Dementia Classifier, 57 exhibited a pattern of hypometabolism classified as AD-like and were included for potential enrollment.
Seventy-one percent of participants were apolipoprotein E gene (APOE) ε4 variant carriers, consistent with trials where positive amyloid imaging is used as an entry criterion.
Participants were diverse in FDG AD Progression Classifier scores (Figure
P < 0.001) and ADAS-cog scores (R = 0.42, P < 0.003).
AD Progression score and baseline MMSE did not differ significantly between study arms in the PET analysis population.
Tau burden varied widely across participants (Figures

Trial outcomes

Primary end point
The study met its primary end point of improvement in longitudinal glucose metabolism in rasagiline-treated participants versus placebo in one or more prespecified regions and in the pattern determined through voxel-based analysis (Figure
Rasagiline-treated participants decreased less than placebo-treated participants in middle frontal cortex (left P < 0.012, E.S. 0.82; bilateral P < 0.025, E.S. 0.75),
anterior cingulate cortex (P < 0.043, E.S. 0.68), striatum (P < 0.02, E.S. 0.83) (Table
Treatment effects remained significant when including age, baseline SUVR, and baseline MMSE as covariates.
Age was a significant covariate for middle frontal cortex and striatum.
Results using whole brain, subcortical white matter, and pons as alternate reference regions were in agreement regarding affected regions and directionality.
Placebo arm FDG AD Progression scores increased in severity (P < 0.01), and regional SUVRs likewise decreased in posterior cingulate-precuneus (P < 0.03, E.S. 0.74), inferior parietal (P < 0.01, E.S. 0.86), and middle frontal (P < 0.001, E.S. 1.74) regions, with decline greater in younger participants.

Secondary end points
Longitudinal clinical end points for the rasagiline and placebo arms over 24 weeks are presented in Figure
A favorable outcome for rasagiline compared to placebo was observed for QoL-AD (P < 0.04 all participants, adjusted for baseline QoL; P < 0.07 with a reduced set of matched baseline participants and adjusted for baseline QoL and MMSE; P < 0.07 Mantel-Haenszel chi-square).
In particular, uniform improvements were observed in rasagiline-treated participants compared to decline in placebo participants with similar baseline values (Figure
Directionally favorable outcomes were observed in Digit Span, CGIC, COWAT, and NPI.
No significant differences were observed in ADL and ADAS-cog (Figure
Mean values for each time point and results for pre-specified Increases in tau PET were observed in some participants over 24 weeks, particularly those with higher baseline values (Figure
Greater slopes and statistical power were observed when using the adaptive method that defined the region of interest according to combined pre-or post-suprathreshold voxels (Figure
No treatment differences in change in flortaucipir were observed in cortical regions having suprathreshold values at baseline.
Uniform longitudinal decreases were observed in the rasagiline but not placebo arm in subcortical regions, particularly accumbens (P < 0.0001) and putamen (P < 0.003) (Supplement).

Relationships between imaging and clinical end points
Higher tau burden, lower glucose metabolism, and lower cortical thickness in temporal regions at baseline correlated with greater decline in MMSE score in placebo participants (P < 0.008, P < 0.05, P < 0.004, respectively).
These relationships (Figure
Longitudinal differences between rasagiline and placebo arms were most pronounced in participants having greater tau, lower metabolism, and lower volumes in temporal regions at baseline.
Change in QoL-AD score, which differed between placebo and rasagiline arms, correlated with a pattern of increased metabolism in anterior cingulate, frontal, and striatal regions (Figure

Safety and tolerability
Rasagiline was generally well tolerated, with neuropsychiatric adverse events (AEs) in 5 (20%) placebo and 0 (0%) rasagiline patients, nonneuropsychiatric AEs in 10 (40%) placebo and 13 (52%) rasagiline patients, and no treatment-related deaths (Table
No rasagilinetreated participants experienced neuropsychiatric symptoms of agitation/irritability or psychosis compared to five placebo participants (t test not significant).

DISCUSSION

Rasagiline effects
This investigation of rasagiline as a treatment for AD met its pri- effects on frontostriatal neuronal function, with benefits on working memory and other cognitive function.
Because84% of participants in each arm of the present study were taking acetylcholinesterase inhibitors and/or medications such as memantine, rasagiline effects were incremental to the action of these medications.
The favorable effect in QoL observed for rasagiline was consistent with benefits on QoL reported with rasagiline in PD patients.
QoL has been associated in other studies with dopaminergic function.
anges in DS, CGIC, COWAT, and NPI were directionally consistent with FDG results.
The lack of ADAS-cog effect was similar to some studies of MAO-B inhibitors and rotigotine,
The lower number of rasagiline-treated participants who spontaneously reported neuropsychiatric events compared to the placebo group suggests an additional effect worthy of further study.
This observation supports the finding of a potential MAO-B inhibition effect on neuropsychiatric symptoms in AD patients reported in a phase 2 trial of sembragiline.
r findings indicate that differences associated with rasagiline treatment may be most detectable in participants exceeding baseline thresholds of temporal tau burden, hypometabolism, and atrophy (Fig-

ure S2
). Prospective biomarker stratification may help focus analyses on subgroups in which benefit is greatest.
The longitudinal progression in AD classifier pattern in placebo group and the 2% to 3% differences between study arms in frontostriatal regions were similar to the magnitude of change observed in other FDG-PET studies of AD and central nervous system drugs.
e placebo group decreases in striatum, which is relatively preserved in late-onset AD, was driven by decreases in left caudate in younger patients.
Caudate glucose metabolism has been identified as significantly reduced in early onset versus Late-onset AD.

Tau
This study illustrated the diverse distribution of tau in AD as well as its relationships to age, FDG-PET, and clinical status.
Results suggest that tau accumulation is observable over periods as short as 24 weeks, with higher accumulation rates associated with higher baseline tau burden.
Adaptive region definition increased change detection likely because it captured the diverse spatial distribution of tau across participants without diluting to entire cortex, and may minimize impact of head motion-induced tissue shifts by "ORing" pre-and post-suprathreshold boundaries.
Because rasagiline is a highly selective MAO-B inhibitor, this study

Study limitations
Limitations of the study include its small sample size and 24-week duration, intended for POC.
The lack of amyloid measurement was a diagnostic limitation.
However, flortaucipir, selective for AD variant tau, provided evidence of AD pathology and may serve as a surrogate indicator of amyloid given the observed relationship between neocortical tau and positive amyloid burden.
The high number of APOE ε4 carriers (71%) in the study is consistent with a trial population comprised primarily of AD patients.
The by-chance imbalance in baseline MMSE, ADAS-cog, and QoL scores between treatment arms posed a challenge also seen in other studies.
The multiple approaches applied to adjust for and/or balance these variables all supported the baseline-adjusted model results.
However, imbalances impact analysis complexity and interpretation, and prospective approaches to balancing arms could aid in other trials.

Conclusion
The findings of a favorable effect of rasagiline on longitudinal FDG over 24 weeks of treatment and directional benefit on clinical outcomes support a potential benefit of rasagiline for AD patients.
Given that this is an available, generic treatment with substantial safety data, it would be a cost-and time-effective addition to available treatments.
A



F I G U R E 1
Baseline FDG and Tau burden.
a-c, Tau burden for three participants age 61, 72, and 79 years shown with baseline clinical and FDG scores.
d, Pattern of hypometabolism and preservation relative to whole brain that is quantified by the AD Progression score.
e, Relationship between participant age and total tau SUVR.
f, Relationship between tau burden in a composite of temporal and parietal regions involved in the pattern of (d) versus FDG-AD Progression score


and potential comorbidities that may influence outcomes in older participants.
Statistical comparisons were based on absolute change values.
Mixed-model repeated-measures analyses were used to assess between-group clinical end point differences in modeled change over 24 weeks.
The dependent variable was the change from baseline score.Fixed effects were baseline outcome measure scores, treatment arm, visit, and treatment-by-visit interaction.
Study visit was treated as a continuous variable; an unstructured variance-covariance matrix was used.
The primary efficacy analysis was based on the modified intention-to-treat (mITT) population, including all randomly assigned participants with at least one post-baseline observation.
Testing for treatment differences was conducted by assessing the statistical significance of the treatment-by-visit regression coefficient.
Relationships between clinical and imaging end points were explored using correlation (Pearson R).
Because this was a preliminary POC study, no adjustments for multiple comparisons were made and a two-sided P-value of 0.05 was considered significant.In addition to including baseline values as model covariates, methods were implemented to further assess the impact of baseline differences on outcomes.
The software package "designmatch"
T-test and Analyses of Covariance (ANCO-VAs) were run on the reduced set.
A Cochran-Mantel-Haenszel test was performed on the full data set, splitting the sample at the median for the MMSE (score of 20).
Pre-defined exploratory analyses evaluated treatment effects for all clinical end points by baseline clinical severity measured by MMSE.


Twenty-four-week change in FDG SUVR in placebo-versus rasagiline-treated patients.
b, Longitudinal voxel-based classifier results showing regions where rasagiline-treated participants declined less in glucose metabolism than placebo-treated participants MMSE strata are shown in the Supplementary Material.
There were no side effects.


provided a stringent test of possible MAO-B binding of flortaucipir.
The uniform flortaucipir signal reductions observed in subcortical regions in rasagiline-treated but not placebo-treated participants may suggest binding to MAO-B.
However, effects were very weak compared to MAO-B-binding reductions caused by a rasagiline dose equal to that in the present study



F
I G U R E 3 a, Longitudinal change in clinical end points by study arm.
b, Individual participant longitudinal QoL-AD scores in the Younger subgroup.
c, Change in QoL by study arm, younger, and older subgroups (PL = placebo, RAS = rasagiline treated).
d, Change in QoL-AD from baseline in placebo and rasagiline group after matching for baseline clinical characteristics; decreases reflect worsening and increases represent improvement



F I G U R E 4
a, Example of increases in tau burden in a high tau imaging participant over 24 weeks.
b, Twenty-four-week changes in flortaucipir SUVRs for middle frontal, posterior cingulate-precuneus, and an adaptive region determined by baseline and week 24 suprathreshold voxels, by study arm powered clinical trial with assessment of QoL-AD, executive function, and neuropsychiatric aspects is warranted.
More broadly, this study demonstrated the utility of a POC/experimental medicine design incorporating imaging biomarkers for participant inclusion, evaluation, and stratification as a path to increase the probability of success of larger AD trials.


Baseline demographic and clinical characteristics of the study population


outcome of demonstrating improvements or less decline in glu-Region of interest results: difference (24 weeks minus baseline) mean, S.D. and difference between arms with 95% confidence interval