Cerebrospinal fluid biomarkers of Alzheimer's disease in a cohort of adults with Down syndrome
Introduction: Virtually all individuals with Down syndrome (DS) will develop Alzheimer's disease (AD) pathology by age 40.
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) biomarkers have characterized AD pathology in cohorts of late-onset AD (LOAD) and autosomaldominant AD (ADAD).
Few studies have evaluated such biomarkers in adults with DS.
Methods: CSF concentrations of amyloid beta (Aβ)40, Aβ42, tau, phospho-tau181 (ptau), neurofilament light chain (NfL), soluble triggering receptor expressed on myeloid cells 2 (sTREM2), chitinase-3-like protein 1 (YKL-40), alpha synuclein (αSyn), neurogranin (Ng), synaptosomal-associated protein 25 (SNAP-25), and visinin-like protein 1 (VILIP-1) were assessed in CSF from 44 adults with DS from the Alzheimer's Biomarker Consortium-Down Syndrome study.
Biomarker levels were evaluated by cognitive status, age, and apolipoprotein E gene (APOE) ε4 carrier status.

BACKGROUND
Due to the triplication of the amyloid precursor protein (APP) gene located on chromosome 21, virtually all individuals with Down syndrome (DS) will develop brain pathology indicative of Alzheimer's disease (AD) by the age of 40.
In late-onset AD (LOAD) and autosomal dominant AD (ADAD) cohorts, longitudinal analysis of various AD biomarkers has revealed significant potential for their use in determining pathological disease stage, as well as predicting symptom onset and cognitive decline in individuals with pre-clinical disease.
This pre-symptomatic stage has been estimated to begin two to three decades before the onset of clinical symptoms.
addition to the established AD cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) biomarkers amyloid beta 1-40 (Aβ40), amyloid beta 1-42 (Aβ42), total tau, and phospho-tau 181 (p-tau), recent studies have identified novel biomarkers in ADAD and LOAD cohorts that significantly correlate with pathologic and clinical markers of disease progression.
These emerging biomarkers include markers of neuronal and axonal injury (visinin-like protein 1 [VILIP-1] and neurofilament light chain [NfL]),
2]
In addition to these markers, α-synuclein (αSyn), which is typically associated with Lewy body pathology in Parkinson disease, has also been associated with AD pathology and cognitive decline.
w studies have characterized these emerging biomarkers in adults with DS.
The purpose of this study is to present the cross-sectional analysis of CSF biomarkers of established and novel AD biomarkers in this cohort and examine biomarker relationships with age, cognitive status, and apolipoprotein E (APOE) ε4 status (the strongest genetic risk factor for LOAD). 20

METHODS

Participants
Adults with DS between 25 and 66 years of age were enrolled in the ABC-DS study, a multi-site longitudinal study of AD biomarkers in adults with DS that includes the collection of neuropsychological, neuroimaging, genetic, and fluid biomarker measures.
Participants with baseline CSF collections (ages 30 to 61 years) as of January 2019 were included in this analysis.
Informed consent was obtained from all participants where possible; otherwise, assent was obtained from the participant and informed consent obtained from the participant's proxy or legally authorized representative.
All ABC-DS protocols and procedures were approved by the institutional review boards at the respective local clinical performance sites.

Cognitive assessment and genetic analysis

CSF collection and analysis
Participants underwent CSF collection via lumbar puncture (LP) between 9 am and 4 pm; typically, 10 to 20 mL of CSF was collected Open symbols represent cognitively stable individuals (CS), gray symbols represent individuals with MCI (DS-MCI), and black symbols represent individuals with AD dementia (DS-AD) defined by consensus criteria.
Horizontal lines represent mean ± SD.
Outliers more than 2 SD from the mean (triangles) were excluded from statistical analysis.
Group comparisons were conducted using Kruskal-Wallis and Dunn tests with Holm-Bonferroni correction for multiple comparisons.
P values <.05 were considered statistically significant Montgomery, TX).
Hemoglobin concentrations were not correlated with αSyn concentrations in the present study, therefore all αSyn data are reported.

Statistical analysis
Group comparisons based on cognitive status (CS, DS-MCI, or DS-AD) were performed using Kruskal-Wallis and Dunn tests with Holm-

RESULTS

Demographics
Demographic data are reported in Table individuals (both trisomy 21), so biomarker data for these participants were not included in analyses based on cognitive status, but they were included in analyses evaluating biomarker correlations and effects of APOE ε4 status.

Biomarker distributions by cognitive status
Individuals were grouped according to cognitive status (CS, DS-MCI, or DS-AD), and mean biomarker levels were compared (Table
Concentrations of Aβ42 and the Aβ42/Aβ40 ratio were significantly lower in individuals with dementia (P = .001
and P = .020,
respectively), and total tau, YKL-40, and SNAP-25 levels were significantly higher in the DS-AD group compared to the CS group (P = .009,
P =
.007, and P = .025,
respectively).
Of all the biomarkers, only NfL and the p-tau/Aβ42 ratio were significantly higher in both DS-MCI and DS-AD groups (P = .0002
and P = .0001,
respectively) compared to the CS group.
Levels of p-tau, αSyn, sTREM2, Ng, and VILIP-1 were not significantly different among the groups, although the lack of significance was likely due more to the high variability than the difference in the mean concentrations.

Biomarker distributions by age
In addition, the biomarker levels were also assessed with respect to age at time of LP (Table
Aβ42 (ρ = -0.47,
P < .01)
was negatively correlated with age, whereas levels of p-tau (ρ = 0.55, P < .0001),
NfL (ρ = 0.60, P < .0001),
YKL-40 (ρ = 0.64, P < .0001),
Ng (ρ = 0.30, P < .05),
SNAP-25 (ρ = 0.32, P < .05),
and VILIP-1 (ρ = 0.55, P < .01)
were all positively correlated with age.
Total tau (ρ = 0.29, P = .055)
and sTREM2
(ρ = 0.29, P = .060)
exhibited a trend toward significance with respect to age, but these analytes were highly variable in this cohort.
Aβ40 (ρ = -0.13,
P = .40)
and αSyn (ρ = 0.24, P = .12)
were not significantly correlated with age in this cohort.

APOE effects
We examined CSF biomarkers by APOE ε4 carrier status by designating individuals as APOE ε4-positive or -negative (Figure
Levels of sTREM2, SNAP-25, and the tau/Aβ42 ratio were significantly higher in those who were APOE ε4-positive versus ε4-negative (P = .024,
P = .035,
and P = .049,
respectively).
After controlling for age, Aβ42, total tau, SNAP-25 and the tau/Aβ42 ratio were significantly different between carriers and non-carriers (adjusted P = .008,
P = 0.027, P =
.028, and 0.015, respectively).
Significant APOE ε4-associated differences in other biomarkers were not observed (all P > .05).

Biomarker correlations
The correlation among CSF biomarkers in the cohort as a whole was also assessed (Table
Aβ40 was significantly positively correlated with Aβ42 (ρ = 0.63, P < .0001),
sTREM2 (ρ = 0.42, P < .01),
αSyn (ρ = 0.64, P < .0001),
Ng (ρ = 0.30, P < .05),
SNAP-25 (ρ = 0.32, P < .05),
and VILIP-1 (ρ = 0.43, P < .01).
Aβ42 was negatively correlated with tau (ρ = -0.32,
P < .05),
p-tau (ρ = -0.44,
P < .01),
and NfL (ρ = -0.49,
P < .001).
Total tau, p-tau, NfL, sTREM2, YKL-40, αSyn, Ng, SNAP-25, and VILIP-1 were all positively correlated with each other (P < .05,
P < .01,
P <
.001, or P < .0001
for all).
For illustrative purposes, select correlations are shown in Figure

DISCUSSION
This report describes results of the initial cross-sectional analysis of CSF biomarker data in the multi-site ABC-DS study.
Due to the limited number of studies of CSF biomarkers related to risk for AD in adults with DS, sample sizes were not formally constructed, and all participants with available CSF collections were included in the analysis.
Despite the small number of participants with available CSF (n = 44), the AD biomarker profiles in this cohort of adults with DS are remarkably similar to those observed in LOAD and ADAD cohorts.
general, low CSF Aβ42 and the Aβ42/Aβ40 ratio (indicative of amyloid deposition) were observed in individuals with AD dementia (compared to the MCI and CS groups), while biomarkers of tauopathy (ptau) and neurodegeneration (total tau, NfL) were higher.
This is consistent with findings in other cohorts of adults with DS,
CSF NfL and the p-tau/Aβ42 ratio were the only markers that significantly differentiated both the DS-AD and DS-MCI groups from the CS group, despite the relatively high variability (Figure
The presence of the APOE ε4 allele is a strong risk factor for the development of LOAD, as well as for an earlier onset of clinical symptoms of dementia.
The APOE genotype has also similarly been reported to influence age of symptom onset in ADAD mutation carriers.
8]
In this small study of adults with DS, we found that presence of an APOE ε4 allele was associated with significantly lower CSF Aβ42 and higher SNAP-25, tau and the tau/Aβ42 ratio, even after controlling for age.
A previous study of LOAD in cognitively normal older adults in the preclinical stage also reported similar APOE ε4 effects on CSF Aβ42; however, CSF tau was not affected by APOE ε4 status, likely due to the very early disease stage in that solely preclinical cohort.
Higher CSF levels of SNAP-25 were recently associated with APOE ε4 carrier status in LOAD.
To our knowledge, this is the first study to evaluate the cohort are ongoing and will provide a direct test of this hypothesis.
Although markers of neuroinflammation (sTREM2 and YKL-40) were more strongly correlated with markers of neuronal injury than markers of amyloid (Aβ42), the causality remains to be determined.
Of particular note is the very high positive correlation (ρ = 0.93) observed between CSF αSyn and Ng.
This finding is supported by a report that these proteins may be binding partners at the synapse.
It is likely that a similarly high correlation will also be observed in LOAD and/or ADAD, but this has yet to be reported.
If consistently observed in other cohorts, this would support the use of CSF levels of αSyn as a potential biomarker of synaptic dysfunction.
This study has several limitations.
Although large for cohorts of individuals with DS, the small sample size limits the statistical power required to identify differences of small magnitude and to allow proper control for potentially important covariates.
The small number also reduces our ability to draw conclusions that may be generalizable to the DS population as a whole.
Lack of an age-matched comparator control group without DS limits our ability to define general trisomy 21-related effects.
Heterogeneity in CSF sample collection procedures (eg, method and timing of LP) in ABC-DS may also influence analyte recovery, notably Aβ peptides known to exhibit diurnal variability.
wever, the use of the ratio of CSF Aβ42/Aβ40 as a marker of amyloid helps reduce this potential effect.
Our understanding of the timing of pathologic processes that



F I G U R E 1
under gravity flow or by aspiration while the participant was sitting, lying, or prone for fluoroscopy-assisted collection.
Samples were collected into a sterile polypropylene tube, flash frozen on dry ice, and shipped to the ABC-DS Biomarker Core at Washington University in St. Louis.
Samples were thawed on wet ice, aliquoted (0.5 mL) into polypropylene tubes, flash frozen, and stored at -80 • C until biomarker analysis.
Frozen aliquots were thawed on wet ice the day of analysis.
Concentrations of Aβ40, Aβ42, total tau, and p-tau were measured by chemiluminescent enzyme immunoassay using a fully automated platform (LUMIPULSE G1200, Fujirebio, Malvern, PA) according to manufacturer's specifications.
Ng, SNAP-25, and VILIP-1 were measured with microparticle-based immunoassays using Single Molecule Counting technology employing antibodies developed in the laboratory of Dr. Jack Ladenson at Washington University in St. Louis, as described previously.
Concentrations of sTREM2 were measured via an in-house enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) as described previously.
NfL (UmanDiagnostics, Umeå, Sweden), YKL-40 (Quidel, San Diego, CA), and αSyn (ADx Neurosciences, Ghent, Belgium) were measured via commercial ELISAs according to manufacturer recommendations.
Because αSyn levels in the blood are much higher than in the CSF, hemoglobin was measured as a control for blood contamination via ELISA (Bethyl Laboratories, Distribution of AD biomarkers in a cohort of adults with DS by cognitive status.
Levels of (A) Aβ42, (B) total tau, (C) p-tau, (D) Aβ42/Aβ40 ratio, (E) tau/Aβ42 ratio, (F) p-tau/Aβ42 ratio, (G) YKL-40, (H) SNAP-25, and (I) logNfL are plotted as a function of cognitive status.



E 2
Distribution of AD biomarkers in a cohort of adults with DS by age and cognitive status.
Levels of (A) Aβ42, (B) total tau, (C) p-tau, (D) Aβ42/Aβ40 ratio, (E) tau/Aβ42 ratio, (F) p-tau/Aβ42 ratio, (G) YKL-40, (H) SNAP-25, and (I) logNfL are plotted as a function of age at LP. Open symbols represent cognitively stable individuals (CS), gray symbols represent individuals with MCI (DS-MCI), and black symbols represent individuals with AD dementia (DS-AD) defined by consensus criteria.
Correlations coefficients represent Spearman rho (ρ).
P values <.05 were considered statistically significant and are shown.



APOEF I G U R E 4
genotype effects on these biomarkers in DS.
The mechanisms underlying these associations remain to be determined.
Future studies should include APOE genotype as an important variable to consider when evaluating the role of apoE across the cognitive aging spectrum in DS.The correlation profile of the various CSF biomarkers in this cohort of adults with DS was consistent with other reports in LOAD and ADAD,
However, there are some differences.
The relatively large positive correlation (ρ = 0.63) observed between Aβ40 and Aβ42 in DS likely reflects the overexpression and overproduction of APP and its resultant Aβ peptides due to triplication of chromosome 21.
Reductions in Aβ42, but not Aβ40, with advancing age likely reflect the AD-associated aggregation and deposition of Aβ42 as amyloid plaques.
Analyses of the association between CSF biomarkers and amyloid imaging in the ABC-DS Scatter plots of select biomarker correlations.
Plotted are the relationships between levels of (A) Aβ42 and Aβ40, (B) Aβ42 and total tau, (C) Aβ42 and p-tau, (D) total tau and p-tau, (E) total tau and log NfL, (F) p-tau and YKL-40, (G) Ng and αSyn, (H) Ng and VILIP-1, and (I) p-tau and SNAP-25.
Correlation coefficients represent Spearman rho (ρ).
P values <.05 were considered statistically significant.


develop over the entire natural course of AD (from CS through stages of cognitive and functional decline) has been made possible by biomarker evaluation.
Recent data from the largest international ADAD cohort (Dominantly Inherited Alzheimer Network, DIAN) demonstrated abnormalities in CSF markers of all pathologic processes (including amyloid, tau, neuronal injury, synaptic dysfunction, and neuroinflammation) in AD mutation carriers during the 20 to 30 year asymptomatic/preclinical period, with CSF concentrations of biomarkers increasing in abnormality as individuals approached their estimated age of symptom onset.
Despite challenges unique to the DS population (eg, heterogeneity in premorbid cognitive abilities, heterogeneity in the prevalence and age-of-onset of dementia, and existence of comorbidities due to the triplication of chromosome 21),


Correlation matrix of AD biomarkers in a cohort of adults with DS


Distribution of CSF biomarkers by age and APOE ε4 carrier status.Levels of (A) Aβ42, (B) total tau, (C) the tau/Aβ42 ratio, and (D) SNAP-25 are plotted as a function of age at LP. Open circles and dotted lines represent APOE ε4 non-carriers (ε4-).Black circles and solid lines represent APOE ε4 carriers (ε4+).Lines are linear regressions of biomarker data by age at LP.One individual did not have APOE genotype data and was excluded from this analysis.Group comparisons were performed by ANCOVA with age as a covariate.Adjusted P values <.05 were considered statistically significant in absolute values of both markers (Figure1).Fortea et al. reported