Novel Sustainable-by-Design HDAC Inhibitors for the Treatment of Alzheimer’s Disease
Alzheimer's disease (AD) represents a global problem, with an estimation of the majority of dementia patients in low-and middle-income countries by 2050.
Thus, the development of sustainable drugs has attracted much attention in recent years.
In light of this, taking inspiration from the HDAC inhibitor vorinostat (1), we develop the first HDAC inhibitors derived from cashew nut shell liquid (CNSL), an inexpensive agro-food waste material.
CNSL derivatives 8 and 9 display a HDAC inhibitory profile similar to 1, together with a more promising safety for 9 compared to 1.
Moreover, both compounds and particularly 9 were able to effectively modulate glial cell-induced inflammation and to revert the pro-inflammatory phenotype.
All these results demonstrate that the use of inexpensive food waste materials could be successfully applied for the development of accessible and sustainable drug candidates for the treatment of AD.
A lzheimer's disease (AD) is the most common form of dementia and a global health problem.
In fact, if AD was initially thought of as the epidemic of the developed world, with its aging population, nowadays it particularly impacts lowand middle-income countries.
here is no definitively established cause nor a cure for AD, with available treatments ultimately failing to modify disease progression.
In addition, if we want to guarantee universal coverage and equity of access to treatments to the global AD population, the medications must be affordable and accessible to avoid overwhelming developing countries' health systems.
his clearly adds lines of complexity to AD drug discovery, which is already one of the most formidable challenges for the pharmaceutical community.
However, it is something we must focus on, so as to ensure that we "leave no one behind" in the battle for a cure.
n AD most cases occur in patients with no known family history and are not linked to a genetic cause; thus, AD is mostly sporadic.
Mutations in specific genes can only explain 5-10% of the cases.
The genes implicated in early onset familial AD are those encoding for amyloid precursor protein (APP), presenilin 1, and presenilin 2. The gene implicated in the pathogenesis and the risk of developing sporadic AD is apolipoprotein E ε4 (APOE ε4).
The sporadic nature of the disease, the differential susceptibility and disease course in males and females, as well as the late age onset and the influence of lifestyles, highlight that genetic causes alone fail to explain AD etiology and reinforce the hypothesis that epigenetics might play a key role.
Evolving lines of research indicate that pharmacologically targeting epigenetic mechanisms, namely, DNA methylation, histone acetylation/ deacetylation, or noncoding RNA, may be of potential benefit in AD.
Particularly, restoring the perturbed acetylation homeostasis of the neurodegenerative state by histone modification has become one of the most significant research hot spots.
Indeed, if epigenetic treatments represent fewer than 2% of current drugs in Alzheimer's trials, Alzheimer's Drug Discovery Foundation (ADDF) considers this as an emerging area holding great promise.
One of the two epigenetic drugs currently in AD clinical trials is HDAC inhibitor (HDACi) vorinostat (1, Figure
Its therapeutic potential in AD is based on in vivo animal studies suggesting that its specific inhibition of class I histone deacetylases (HDACs) and HDAC6 (class IIb) could be most beneficial in treating dementia.
ith these concepts in mind and in conjunction with our studies aimed to explore the potential of cashew nut shell liquid (CNSL) for the production of AD drugs,
CNSL is a byproduct of the cashew kernel industry, extremely interesting in terms of waste valorization for the production of new chemicals.
lthough one of its main components, i.e., anacardic acid (2a, Figure

■ DESIGN
We pursue the idea that CNSL is a valuable starting point in the search for cost-effective and sustainable HDACis against AD.
Chemically, CNSL is a source of nonisoprenoid lipids, mainly anacardic acids (2), cardanols (3), cardols (4), and 2methylcardols (5) (Figure
All of them share a phenolic structure, bearing a C15-alkyl side chain (with different degrees of unsaturation) in meta-position with respect to the hydroxyl group (see Figure
were intrigued by the fact that the C8-acids 6 and 7 (Figure
To this end, docking simulations were carried out to confirm the proper fit of the designed 8 and 9 at class I nuclear HDAC1 and class IIb HDAC6 isoforms, in comparison with 1. Figure
In both complexes, the zinc binding group shows the expected bidentate chelation further stabilized by polar interactions with His140 and Tyr303 (in HDAC1) as well as with His610 and Tyr782 (in HDAC6).
The carbon linker is engaged in apolar contacts, which appear to be richer in HDAC6 (with His611, Phe620, His651, Phe680, and Leu749) than in HDAC1 (with Phe150, His178, and Leu271).
Finally, the cap moiety contacts the cavity rim where it can elicit π-π stacking reinforced by a H-bond with His499 in HDAC6 and with Tyr204 and Phe205 in HDAC1.
The more hindered cap moiety of 9 does not elicit relevant additional contacts, but it might even interfere with the rim residues, a feature more pronounced in HDAC1 where it clashes against Pro29, due to the already documented greater narrowness of the HDAC1 cavity rim compared to HDAC6.
Notably, both compounds compare well with the corresponding complexes stabilized by 1.
As exemplified by Figure
In contrast, the cap phenyl

ACS Medicinal Chemistry Letters
Letter groups show different arrangements reasonably due to the effect of the amide function, which induces a more folded arrangement in the linker of 1.
Based on these results, both compounds were synthesized and biologically characterized.

■ CHEMISTRY
Hydroxamates 8 and 9 were prepared by aminolysis exploiting the methyl esters 14 and 15 as starting reagents.
The required methyl 8-(3-methoxyphenyl)octanoate (
Next, treatment of 10 or 11 with ozone air in dichloromethane/methanol (1:1) at -70 °C, followed by reduction with sodium borohydride furnished the corresponding alcohols 12 (80%) or 13 (50%).
Treatment of 12 or 13 with PCC led to the aldehydes intermediates, which were oxidized by Jones Reagent to the acids 6 (96%) and 7 (70%).
In turn, 6 and 7 were converted to the respective methyl esters 14 (74%) and 15 (70%) by treating with iodomethane in acetone.
Despite its effectiveness, this synthetic sequence is clearly not compatible with sustainability criteria.
In response to these concerns, greener methods for producing 14 and 15 are being developed.
Finally, 14 and 15 were converted into target hydroxamates 8 and 9 following aminolysis with hydroxylamine generated in situ (Scheme 1).
HDAC Biochemical Assays.
Considering that the most promising HDACi for learning and memory indications exhibit the greatest selectivity for class I HDACs, targeted development of class I HDAC isoforms has been advocated for AD.
n addition, although not fully elucidated, HDAC6 has been suggested to play a role in AD-associated neurodegeneration.
ased on these considerations and on 1's class I HDAC/ HDAC6 inhibitory profile, we preliminary verified the computationally predicted capacity of 8 and 9 to properly bind HDAC1 and HDAC6 through a biochemical assay.
ompounds 1 and 6 were used as positive and negative controls, respectively (Table
As expected, 1 modulated the activity of HDAC1 and 6 with roughly equivalent submicromolar potency.
Both 8 and 9 exhibited a similar HDAC profile, with inhibitory potencies that were only slightly decreased (by 2.7-to 6.5-fold with respect to 1).
Thus, the obtained results support the starting idea that the insertion of the hydroxamate moiety on a CNSL backbone provides SAHA-like HDACis.
Indeed, acid 6, devoid of the hydroxamate moiety, showed only a modest inhibition (<15%) at 10 μM.
In spite of the prominent relevance of class I HDAC and HDAC6 isoforms, the role of individual HDAC enzymes as well as the action of specific HDACis in neurodegenerative diseases remains far from clear.
Trichostatin A (TSA) was used as reference compound.
From these data, we confirmed that the newly synthesized derivatives 8 and 9 display a class I HDAC/HDAC6 selectivity profile, very similar to 1. Once again, the close resemblance among 8, 9, and 1 accounts for a similar HDAC selectivity.
BBB Permeation Studies.
For AD-directed HDACis, the capability to cross the blood-brain barrier (BBB) is a fundamental prerequisite.
Nevertheless, recent studies have revealed that several HDACis, potentially useful to study/treat neurodegenerative diseases, show limited BBB permeation.
or the prediction of 8 and 9 to passively penetrate the BBB, a Parallel Artificial Membrane Permeability Assay (PAMPA) was used.
Data obtained for 8 and 9, together with precursors 2a and 3a, were correlated to standard drugs, where CNS bioavailability is known.
The results shown in Table
Moreover, the modifications performed improved the CNS drug-like properties of natural 3a, for which passive brain bioavailability is uncertain.
Notably, 2a's BBB penetration estimation was not determined due to its low solubility in the assay media.
Neurotoxicity Assays.
Compound 1 is an approved drug for the treatment of cutaneous T cell lymphoma, but intuitively, the use of HDACis for nononcology indications requires more stringent safety profiles.
Thus, neurotoxicity of 1, 8, and 9, in comparison with precursors 2a and 3a, was evaluated on primary cultures of cerebellar granule neurons (CGNs), as a useful in vitro model to study neuronal death.
GN viability was assessed after 24 h treatment at three Scheme 1. Synthesis of Hydroxamates 8 and 9

ACS Medicinal Chemistry Letters
Letter different concentrations (5, 25, and 50 μM) using the MTT (3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide) assay (Figure
It is evident that 1 displays signs of neurotoxicity at the higher tested concentrations (CGNs viability 70% at 25 μM and 52% at 50 μM).
Compound 8 affects neuronal viability even at 5 μM concentration (CGN viability ≤ 50%).
A more suitable profile is showed by 9 at all tested concentrations: CGN viability >80% even at 50 μM.
Regarding the corresponding precursors, 3a shows a more promising safety profile compared to 2a, with no evident signs of toxicity at the tested concentrations.
HDAC Cellular Assays.
To confirm the HDAC biochemical results at a neural cellular level, Western blotting experiments to detect histone H3 acetylation were performed with 1, 8, and 9.
As HDACis were reported to prevent the lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced decrease of acetylated histones H3 in microglia (but had no effect on the basal HDAC activity),
In accordance with the HDAC enzymatic profiles, 8 and 9 are able to induce H3 acetylation in a similar fashion to 1 (Figure
Immunomodulation Assays.
In neurology, HDACis have a long history of clinical use as mood stabilizers and antiepileptics.
More recently, 1 and other HDACis have attracted attention for AD primarily on the basis of their promising antineuroinflammatory profile.
Microglia, as the immune cells of the brain, are pivotal mediators of neuroinflammatory processes.
Microglial activation in the CNS is heterogeneous, categorized into two opposite phenotypes: M1 and M2.
M1 microglia, activated by LPS or IFN-γ, have proinflammatory, neurotoxic properties, inducing the proliferation of lymphocyte.
Alternatively activated M2 microglia are able to repair small damage, have an anti-inflammatory phenotype, contributing to trophic support of neurons and to degradation of toxic aggregates, and increase the neuroprotective functions thanks to anti-inflammatory interleukins and growth factors production.
M1 activation is associated with the expression of pro-inflammatory molecules, like inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS).
The M2 activation state is associated with the production of anti-inflammatory cytokines and specific markers of phagocytosis, such as mannose receptor type C 1 (MRC1).
On this basis, immunomodulation strategies aiming to attenuate M1 microglial activation or to trigger an M1/M2 microglial shift may contribute to counteract, at least partially, cognitive impairment in AD and other neurodegenerative diseases.
To this end, we tested whether our compounds could affect iNOS, triggering MRC1 profile expression upon inflammatory stimuli with LPS (100 ng/ mL) at 5 and 25 μM concentrations.
As reported in Figure
Importantly, at 5 μM, 8 and 9 were even more effective than reference compound 1, by almost completely abolishing iNOS expression.
These results highlight the potential of both 8 and 9 to effectively modulate glial cell-induced inflammation, and to be able, in principle, to revert the pro-inflammatory phenotype.
Then, we examined the capability of 1, 8, and 9, to promote M2 microglial phagocytosis, by evaluating MRC1 profile expression (Figure
Positively, 1 does not affect MRC1 expression levels at the two tested concentrations, whereas 9 shows a positive outcome only at 25 μM.
Conversely, 8 displays a dose-dependent negative effect.
These findings suggest that the M1/M2 immunomodulatory profile might not be directly linked to the HDAC inhibitory activity, as indicated by the strong induction of histone H3 acetylation in microglial cells (Figure
Indeed, the transcriptional machinery responsible for

ACS Medicinal Chemistry Letters
Letter regulating the gene networks accounting for the two activation states is complex and still not elucidated.
Neuroprotective Assays.
In spite of the well-recognized potential of HDAC inhibition against neurodegeneration, increasing recent evidence suggest that inhibition of single isoforms can result in both neuroprotective and neurodegenerative effects.
Although not yet elucidated, this might depend on context-specific and tissue/cell-specific effects.
Taking this into account, we tested whether 1, 8, and 9 can protect CGNs from low serum-and K + -induced neuronal death (Figure
Tacrine (1,2,3,4-tetrahydroacridin-9-amine), the first FDA-approved AD drug, was used as reference compound (Figure
Unfortunately, under these experimental conditions, all three HDACis were not able to restore neuronal viability, with 6 h pretreatment followed by 24 h cotreatment, although their effect is not so detrimental in terms of reduction of viability.
To note, 1 and 9 display a similar profile.

■ CONCLUSIONS
In conclusion, we were successful to discover 8 and 9 as the first HDACis derived from the inexpensive CNSL raw material.
Although clinical translation of HDACis in AD remains elusive, in our hands, they (particularly 9) displayed a therapeutic potential similar to that of AD investigational drug 1.
At the same time, they might have an improved potential in terms of sustainability and less toxicity in some cases.
As a starting material for the synthesis of new drugs, CNSL presents clear advantages from economical and ethical perspectives, compared to both synthetic and natural chemicals:
All these considerations point to the use of food waste-products as an enlightening perspective toward more accessible and sustainable drugs to the global AD community patients.

■ ASSOCIATED CONTENT

* S Supporting Information
The Supporting Information is available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acsmedchemlett.9b00071.

Figures S1 and S2, Table

■ AUTHOR INFORMATION
Corresponding Authors *E-mail: marialaura.bolognesi@unibo.it.
*E-mail: luizromeiro@unb.br.



Figure 1 .
Figure 1.
Chemical structures of HDACi 1 and CNSL derivatives 2-5.



Figure 2 .
Figure 2. Design of CNSL derivatives 8 and 9.



Figure 3 .
Figure 3. Main interactions stabilizing the putative complexes as computed for 8 within the binding pocket of HDAC1 (A) and HDAC6 (B).



Figure 4 .
Figure 4. Percentages of inhibition of HDACs 1-11 by derivatives 8 (blue) and 9 (orange) at 10 μM.



Figure 5 .
Figure 5. Neurotoxicity of 1, 2a, 3a, 8, and 9 on primary rat CGNs after 24 h treatment.
Results are expressed as percentage of controls and are the mean ± SE of at least three different experiments, each run in triplicate.
**p < 0.01 ***p < 0.001 compared to control conditions.



Figure 6 .
Figure 6.
Western blots of acetyl-H3, and total H3 after treatment of N9 cells with 1, 8, and 9. Results are expressed as percentage of controls and are the mean ± SE of three different experiments.
*p < 0.05 compared to control conditions.



Figure 7 .
Figure 7. Immunomodulatory effects of 1, 8, and 9 in microglial cells evaluated through Western blot analysis of iNOS and MRC1 expression.
GAPDH was used as loading control.
Densitometric results are expressed as percentage of LPS only and are the mean ± SE of three independent experiments.
*p < 0.05, **p < 0.01 compared to LPS condition.



Table 1 .
In Vitro Inhibition of HDAC1 and HDAC6