Donepezil-based hybrids as multifunctional anti-Alzheimer's disease chelating agents: Effect of positional isomerization
The intricate and multifactorial nature of Alzheimer´s disease (AD) requires the development of compounds able to hit different pathophysiological targets, such as cholinergic dysfunction, deposits of amyloid-β peptide (Aβ) and metal dyshomeostasis.
In order to continue the search for new anti-AD drugs, a design strategy was followed based on repositioning donepezil (DNP), by attaching a benzylpiperidine mimetic of DNP moiety at different (ortho, para) attachment points of a hydroxyphenyl-benzimidazole (BIM) chelating unit.
Herein, two compounds (1 and 2) are compared in terms of their potential multiple properties: both present good AChE inhibition (low micromolar range) and are moderate/good inhibitors of Aβ self-and Cu-mediated aggregation; although compound 1 has a higher chelating capacity towards Cu 2+ (pCu = 14.3, pZn = 6.4,
pH 7.4, CL/CM = 10, CM = 10 -6 M) than 2 (pCu = 10.7,
pZn = 6.3), attributed to its ability to establish a tridentate (N,O,O) coordination to the metal ion.
Both compounds are eligible as drug candidates for oral administration but compound 1 shows improved neuroprotective role by completely preventing Aβ-induced cell toxicity.

Introduction
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is one of the most common and devastating age-dependent neurodegenerative disorders and its prevalence is expected to enormously increase in the coming years because of the population growth and ageing
Hence, there has been a worldwide intensive research aimed to understand and find treatment for AD, but no cure has been found so far
Currently approved AD therapeutics are only able to attenuate the dementia symptoms by compensating the cholinergic deficit, as the acetylcholinesterase (AChE) inhibitors (tacrine, donepezil, rivastigmine, galantamine) or the glutamate N-methyl D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor antagonist (memantine)
The recognized multifactorial nature and consequent complexity of AD are believed to account for the absence of disease-modifying drugs.
In fact, the formation of misfolded protein aggregates, namely β-amyloid (Aβ) plaques (a prominent hallmark of AD), dyshomeostasis of metal ions and oxidative stress are among the many factors that are implicated in the trigger and progression of AD
Furthermore, although Aβ imbalance has been considered to be a causative agent in AD, high levels of metals (e.g.
Fe, Cu, Zn) have been found in the Aβ plaques of AD brains and, in particular, Cu and Zn bind to Aβ peptides, promoting their aggregation, while redox active metal ions (e.g.
Cu, Fe) promote overproduction of reactive oxygen species (ROS) that can damage biomolecules
Therefore, to address the multiple pathological factors and their potential interconnections in AD pathogenesis, in the last decade there has been a change of paradigm from singletarget drugs towards multi-target drugs as chemical entities (the so called multi-target ligands) able to address multiple biological targets involved in the disease, aimed to get possible therapeutic answers
In recent years, several research groups, including ours, have developed hybrid compounds, via a rational structure-based methodology which integrates a moiety with capacity for AChE inhibition with a framework able to interact with Aβ and also possess metal cheating capacity, so that to associate the symptom treatment with disease modifying roles, namely to inhibit the Aβ self-and metal-induced aggregation and to attenuate the metal-promoted ROS formation
This compound results from a structural modification of a recently reported positional isomer DNP hybrid (2)

Experimental

Chemistry

General methods and materials
Analytical grade reagents were purchased and used as supplied.
Solvents were dried according to standard methods
The chemical reactions were monitored by TLC using alumina plates coated with silica gel 60 F254 (Merck).
Column chromatography separations were performed on silica gel Merck 230-400 mesh (Geduran Si 60).
The melting points (m.p.) were measured with a Leica Galen III hot stage apparatus and are uncorrected.
The 1 H-and 13 C-NMR spectra were recorded on Bruker AVANCE III spectrometers at 300 and 400 MHz, respectively.
Chemical shifts (δ) are reported in ppm from the standard internal reference tetramethylsilane (TMS).
The following abbreviations are used: s = singlet, d = doublet, t = triplet, m = multiplet.
Mass spectra (ESI-MS) were performed on a 500 MS LC Ion Trap (Varian Inc., Palo Alto, CA, USA) mass spectrometer equipped with an ESI ion source, operated in the positive or negative ion mode.
For the target compounds, the elemental analyses were performed on a Fisons EA1108 CHNS/O instrument at LAIST and were within the limit of ± 0.4%.
The electronic spectra were recorded with a Perkin Elmer Lambda 35 spectrophotometer, using thermostated 1-cm path length cells and the fluorescence measurements were performed with a Spectramax Gemini EM (Molecular Devices) fluorimeter.

Synthesis of compound 1

2-((1-Benzylpiperidin-4-yl)methyl)isoindoline-1,3-dione (1a)
Phthalic acid anhydride (1 eq) and 4-(aminomethyl)piperidine (1 eq) were heated at 160 °C for 4 h.
The resulting dark brown solid was mixed with K2CO3 (6.6 eq), triethylamine
(1.4 eq) and benzyl chloride (2.3 eq) and refluxed in acetonitrile for 3 h.
Then, the mixture was cooled at rt, added to water, and extracted with ethyl acetate (three times).
The organic layers were collected, dried over sodium sulphate anhydrous, and concentrated under reduced pressure.
The crude was purified through chromatography column (eluent: ACN/H2O/NH4OH 92:8:0.1),
affording a white solid ( = 29%); M.P. = 130 °C. 1

(1-Benzylpiperidin-4-yl)methanamine (1b)
2-((1-Benzylpiperidin-4-yl)methyl)isoindoline-1,3-dione (1 eq) and hydrazine monohydrate (6 eq) were dissolved in absolute ethanol and warmed at 60 °C for 3 h.
The reaction mixture was then filtered and concentrated under reduced pressure.
The residue was dissolved in dichloromethane, washed with brine (three times), dried over anhydrous sodium sulphate, and concentrated under reduced pressure obtaining a pure yelloworange oil ( = 30.5%). 1

2-(2-Hydroxyphenyl)-1H-benzo[d]imidazole-4-carboxylic acid (1c)
To a solution of salicylaldehyde (1 eq) and Na2S2O5 (1.2 eq) in the green solvent (glycerol/choline chloride (2:1)) was added the 2,3-diaminobenzoic acid (1 eq).
The mixture was heated at 50 °C for 30 min.
Then, the mixture was cooled at rt, added to water and filtrated.
The afforded solid was washed with water and then dichloromethane and then purified by recristallisation in EtOAc and MeOH.
The title compound was obtained as a purple solid ( =25.2%), m.p. >300°C. 1

N-((1-benzylpiperidin-4-yl)methyl)-2-(2-hydroxyphenyl)-1Hbenzo[d]imidazole-4-carboxamide (1)
To a solution of the 2-(2-hydroxyphenyl)-1H-benzo[d]imidazole-4-carboxylic acid (1 eq, 1c) and (1-benzylpiperidin-4-yl)methanamine (1 eq, 2b), in dry DMF, was added Nhydroxysuccinimide (1 eq) and DCC (1 eq), and the reaction mixture was left stirring for

Molecular modeling for ligand-AChE docking
To perform the ligand-enzyme docking studies, the X-ray crystallographic structure of Torpedo californica-AChE (TcAChE) complexed with an inhibitor (donepezil, Dnp) was taken from RCSB Protein Data Bank (PDB entry 1 EVE)
This structure was chosen because of the similarity between the original inhibitor (DNP) and ligands 1 and 2, namely relatively to the benzylpiperidine moieties.
The original structure was treated using Maestro v. 9.3
The ligands were built using Maestro, and then, using Ghemical v. 2.0
The minimized ligands were docked into the AChE structure with GOLD software v. 5.1
The 'allow early termination' option was deactivated and the remaining default parameters of Gold were used.
The ligands were subjected to 100 genetic algorithm steps using ASP as fitness function.

Prediction of pharmacokinetic properties
To analyze the drug like behavior of the DNP-BIM hybrids, the prediction of their main pharmacokinetic properties was performed in silico.
This procedure determined parameters such as the lipo-hydrophilic character (clog P), blood-brain barrier partition coefficient (log BB), the ability to be absorbed through the intestinal tract (Caco-2 cell permeability) and CNS activity.
The ligands were built and minimized as previously mentioned for the docking studies.
The structures were submitted to the calculation of these relevant pharmacokinetic properties and descriptors using QikProp v. 2.5
These predictions are for orally delivered drugs and assume non-active transport.

Metal chelation studies

Potentiometric and UV-vis spectrophotometric titrations
Solutions.
The aqueous copper (CuCl2, 0.015 M) and zinc (ZnCl2, 0.0156 M) stock solutions for potentiometric and spectrophotometric equilibrium studies were prepared from 1000 ppm standards (Titrisol) and their metal content was evaluated by atomic absorption.
The titrant solution (0.1 M KOH) was obtained from a carbonate-free commercial concentrate (Titrisol) and standardized by potentiometric titration with potassium hydrogen phthalate.
The titrant solution was discarded whenever the percentage of carbonate (Gran's method)

Measurements

ESI-MS spectra
The pH of the Cu(II)/1 (CL = 2.25  10 -4 M) and Zn(II)/1 (CL = 2.25  10 -4 M) systems in 50% w/w DMSO/water medium was previously ascertained to 4.28 (CL/CCu = 1) and 6.42 (CL/CCu = 2), as well as to 7.01 and 8.39 (CL/CZn = 2), by using KOH solution, and the respective mass spectra were obtained from a LCQ Fleet mass spectrometer operated in the ESI positive and negative ion mode (Thermo Scientific).
The optimized parameters were as following: ion spray voltage, +4.5/-2.5 kV; capillary voltage, 16/-28 V; tube lens offset, -63 V; sheath gas (N2), 80 arbitrary units; auxiliary gas, 5 arbitrary units; capillary temperature, 250 ᵒC.
The spectra were recorded in the range 100 -1000 Da.
Spectra typically correspond to the average of 20-35 scans.

EPR spectra
CW-EPR spectra were recorded with a BRUKER EleXsys E500 spectrometer (microwave frequency 9.85 GHz, microwave power 10 mW, modulation amplitude 5 G, modulation frequency 100 kHz).
Two samples were prepared for each compound (1 and 2), one at ligand excess and another around equimolar concentration in 50% w/w DMSO/water solution.
The pH of the Cu(II)/1 (CL = 1.48  10 -3 M) system was ascertained to 6.75 (CL/CCu = 1) and 6.91 (CL/CCu = 1.5), while that of the Cu(II)/2 (CL = 2.23  10 -3 M) system was to 5.46 (CL/CCu = 1) and 5.72 (CL/CCu = 2), by using KOH solution.
Room temperature spectra were measured in capillary at 298 K. Anisotropic EPR spectra were recorded in quartz EPR tubes immersed in a Dewar containing liquid nitrogen (77 K); 0.025 mL MeOH was added to the 0.2 mL sample to avoid water crystallization upon freezing.
All recorded EPR spectra, and anisotropic EPR spectra at 77 K, were simulated by the EPR program
To describe the isotropic spectra the parameters g0, A0 Cu copper hyperfine (ICu= 3/2) and a0 N nitrogen (IN = 1) superhyperfine couplings have been taking into account.
The four copper(II) linewidths were treated with individual linewidth parameters.
The g-tensor (gx, gy, gz,), copper hyperfine tensor (Ax Cu , Ay Cu , Az Cu ) and nitrogen hyperfine tensor (ax N ,ay N ,az N , for wich x y and z denotes the directions of the g-tensor) parameters were fitted.
For the description of the linewidth the orientation dependent  and  parameters were used to set up each component spectra.
Since a natural copper(II)chloride was used for the measurements, both the isotropic and anisotropic spectra were calculated as the sum of the spectra of 63 Cu and 65 Cu weighted by their natural abundances.
The hyperfine and super-hyperfine coupling constants and the relaxation parameters were obtained in field units (Gauss = 10 -4 T).

Molecular modeling of the copper complexes
In the absence of X-ray structure, a molecular modelling study was performed aimed at providing some further insight into the 1:1 (M/L) copper complex structures of compounds 1 and 2, considering, respectively, one and two water molecules in the coordination shell.
These studies were carried out with full geometry optimization of the Cu(II) complexes by quantum mechanical calculations based on DFT methods included in the Gaussian 03 program software
Preliminary molecular simulation was obtained by using 3-21G basis set and afterwards 6-31G**.
No symmetry constrains were enforced during geometry optimization with the two basis sets.
The calculations were performed as well for one water molecule by using the B3PW91 functional, first with the 3-21G basis set and subsequently re-optimized via 6-31G** basis set.
Frequency calculations were performed to confirm the nature of the minima.
The electronic energies (Eb1) obtained at the PBE0/b1 level of theory were converted to free energy (Gb1) at 298.15 K and 1 atm by using zero point energy and thermal energy corrections based on structural and vibration frequency data calculated at the same level.

Biological studies

Acetylcholinesterase inhibition
The enzymatic activity of AChE was determined using an adaptation of Ellman's method, as already described
Firstly, a stock solution of AChE was prepared by dissolving enzyme 500 U in 10 mL of tris(hydroxymethyl)aminomethane (TRIS) buffer (50 mM, The obtained results were expressed in percentage of inhibition through the Eq. (
(1)
Where v1 is the initial reaction rate in the presence of the inhibitor and v0 is the initial rate of the control reaction.
The curves of inhibition were obtained using a plot of percentage of enzymatic inhibition versus inhibitor concentration, and a calibration curve was obtained from which the linear regression parameters were obtained.

Inhibition of self-and Cu 2+ -mediated Aβ aggregation
Amongst the methods used to measure the aggregation of Aβ1-42, the assay based on Thioflavin T (ThT) is the standard procedure
This test is performed with Aβ1-42 peptide previously prepared by dissolving it in 1,1,1,3,3,3-hexafluoro-2-propanol (HFIP), an organic solvent useful to solubilize and monomerize the β-sheet protein aggregates and reserve them in the fridge.
Films are re-dissolved in an Eppendorf tube with a fresh solution of a mixture of CH3CN/Na2CO3/NaOH, to have a stable stock solution, and, afterwards, added to an optimized fibrillation phosphate buffer.
The samples must be prepared using MeOH (1 mg/mL) as a solvent with the specific procedure, followed by incubation in a water bath for 24 h at 37°C with gentle shaking.
After incubation, the samples were added to a 96-well plate (BD Falcon) with 180 µL of 5 µM ThT in 50 mM glycine-NaOH (pH 8.5) buffer.
Blank samples were prepared for each concentration in a similar way, devoid of peptide.
After 5-min incubation with the dye, the ThT fluorescence was measured at 446 nm (excitation) and 485 nm (emission).

Cell viability and neuroprotection
SH-SY5Y human neuroblastoma cell line (ATCC-CRL-2266) is grown in Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium (DMEM), and were obtained from Gibco-Invitrogen (Life Technologies Ltd, UK) with 10% heat inactivated fetal calf serum, containing 50 U/mL penicillin and 50 μg/mL streptomycin, under a humidified atmosphere of 95% air-5% CO2 at 37 ºC.
Cells were plated at 0.12 × 10 6 cells/mL for cell viability assay.
The tested compounds were dissolved in DMSO at a concentration of 50 mM and aliquots were stored at -20 °C.
We performed a dose-response screening (from 10 μM to 40 μM) in order to choose the highest non-toxic concentration.
As a result we selected: 20 μM final incubation with Aβ1-42 or L-ascorbic acid/ferrous sulfate.
Aβ1-42 or L-ascorbic acid/ferrous sulfate where incubated alone or with the compound for an additional 24 h.
Aβ1-42 was prepared as 276.9 μM stock in sterile water and added to the medium at 2.5 μM final concentration.
Ferrous sulfate was freshly prepared as 0.36 M stock in water and added to the medium at 500 μM final concentration.
L-Ascorbic Acid was freshly prepared as 80 mM stock in water and added to the medium at 5 mM final concentration.
Aβ1-42 was purchased from Bachem (Torrance, CA, USA) and ferrous sulfate and L-ascorbic acid from Sigma Chemical Co (St. Louis, MO, USA).
Cell viability was determined by the MTT (3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5diphenyltetrazolium bromide) reduction test.
In viable cells, the enzyme succinate dehydrogenase metabolizes MTT into a formazan that absorbs light at 570 nm.
Following the cell treatment protocol, the medium was aspirated and 0.5 mL MTT (0.5 mg/mL) was added to each well.
The plate was then incubated at 37 °C for 1 h 30 min protected from light.
At the end of the incubation period, the formazan precipitates were solubilized with 0.5 ml of acidic isopropanol (0.04 M HCl/isopropanol).
The absorbance was measured at 570 nm
Cell reduction ability was expressed as a percentage of untreated control cells.
All data were expressed as mean ±S.E.M. of at least three independent experiments performed in duplicates.
Statistical analyses were performed using GraphPad Prism 5 (GraphPad Software, San Diego, CA, USA).
Differences between two datasets were evaluated by two-tailed unpaired Student's t test A P -value < 0.05 was considered statistically significant.

Results and Discussion

Synthesis of compound 1
The synthesis of compound 1 involved the synthetic strategy summarized in Scheme 1, while the synthesis of compound 2 was previously reported
Scheme 1. Reagents and conditions: i) phthalic anhydride, 160 °C, 4 h; ii)) benzyl bromide, K2CO3, triethylamine, acetonitrile, 50 °C, 3 h; (iii) N2H4 xH2O, absolute ethanol, reflux, 3 h, then RT, overnight; iv) dimethylacetamide, Na2S2O5, 100°C, 12 h; v) DCC, N-hydroxysuccinimide, dry DMF, RT, 24 h.
This involved the synthesis of two main frameworks, a benzyl-piperidine-methanamine (1b) and carboxylic derivative of benzimidazole (1c), as well as their attachment through an amidic linkage.
The preparation of 1b involved a 3-step reaction.
Firstly, the the primary amine group of the commercially available piperidinemethanamine was protected, as a phthalimide group, by reaction with phthalic anhydride, followed by the piperidine N-benzylation, by reaction with benzyl bromide in basic conditions, affording 1a.
This was subsequently released from phthalimide group by reaction with hydrazine hydrate in absolute ethanol, affording the free amine derivative (1b).
Parallely, The hydroxyphenylbenzimidazole carboxylic acid (1c) was prepared by Mannich reaction between 3,4-diamino benzoic acid and salicylaldehyde and cyclization in the presence of the reducing agent sodium metabissulfite
Finally the intermediates 1b and 1c were coupled to each other via amide bond formation, affording the novel hybrid 1.
This reaction was carried out in dry DMF with NHS and DCC as activators, under N2 atmosphere for two days.

Molecular design and modeling studies of ligand-AChE interactions
DNP is undoubtedly a contemporary choice as anti-AD drug and therefore it was herein used as an inspiration to design the new hybrid 1.
In this way, N-benzylpiperidine was enclosed in the structure of the hybrid and further connected to a hydroxyphenylbenzimidazole (BIM) unit.
The N-benzylpiperidine portion mimics the binding interaction of DNP within the catalytic anionic site (CAS) of AChE
It is well known that DNP establishes a strong interaction within the active site of human acetylcholine esterase, hAChE, and also of the electric ray homologue (Torpedo californica), TcAChE.
Notwithstanding some differences between the respective inhibitor-enzyme complexes, both enzymes are fairly conservative in terms of the main aminoacid residues that coat the active site gorge
The binding of DNP to TcAChE includes three types of interactions: in the bottom of the gorge, the benzyl group establishes a parallel π-π stacking with the indole group of Trp84; in the middle of the gorge, the charged nitrogen atom can establish a cation-π binding interaction with the phenyl group of Phe330; at the entrance of the gorge, the indanone ring interacts through π-π stacking with the peripheral anionic residue Trp279.
The docking simulations with compounds 1 and 2 show some differences in their accommodation inside the gorge of the enzyme, namely concerning the interaction of the benzylpiperidine moiety with the aminoacid residues of CAS: in the case of compound 2 there is an excellent superimposition with the original ligand (DNP), while compound 1, thought it can establish identical binding through the piperidine nitrogen atom, it slightly deviates from the position of the original ligand (see Fig.
On the other way, the BIM moieties of both compounds seem to be involved quite similarly in the interactions with PAS, allowing a π-π interaction with the indole group from Trp279, although probably with a less favorable orientation than DNP.
This fact is eventually due to the larger size of the BIM unit when compared with that of the indanone group of DNP.
Therefore, as a conclusion, the modeling studies seem to predict that the ortho compound 1 is a less good AChE inhibitor than its positional isomer (compound 2).

Acid-base properties
The chelating capacity of compound 1, with the BIM unit ortho-attached to the benzylpiperazinic moiety, was studied by pH-potentiometric (M = Cu 2+ , Zn 2+ ) as well as ultraviolet-visible (UV-vis in the case of Cu 2+ system) spectrophotometric titrations for the different M/L systems: 0:1, 1:1 and 1:2.
A 50% w/w DMSO/water medium was adopted to perform these studies, due to some solubility problems of the compound.
Nevertheless, in terms of cellular studies, the amount of ligand used is lower ( 7 M) and so the final concentration of DMSO employed in culture media would be even inferior ( 1%), therefore not expecting to involve modifications in biological tissues.
In order to establish the metal chelating model, first the protonation constants of 1 were determined by both above referred experimental techniques (see Fig.
Compound 1 was isolated in its neutral mono-protonated form (HL, a = 0 in Fig.
after the synthetic procedure, although the fully protonated species corresponds to H3L 2+ .
The three protonation constants contained in Table
The values obtained by both experimental techniques (potentiometry and UVvis spectrophotometry) are quite similar for log K1 values but present some discrepancies for log Ki (i =2,3), probably due to the fact that the UV-vis spectrophotometric titrations have higher experimental errors also since they are not performed in automated manner as the potentiometric ones.
Taking into consideration the outset in Fig.
Moreover, at pH 7.4 and considering CL = 10 -5 M, as an attempt to mimic the physiological conditions, the predominant species is: for compound 1, H2L + (70%) with a contribution of 29% of the neutral HL species; for compound 2, the neutral HL (50%) and 48% of H2L + .
Even though the lipo-hydrophilic character is not only determined by the molecular charge but also by the ability to establish solute-solvent interactions, the existence of the neutral HL species in significant concentrations (ca 29-50%) explains the need of using a 50% w/w DMSO/water medium in the solution studies.
In fact, in particular compound 2 showed to be insoluble for inferior % of DMSO content in the DMSO/water mixtures.

Metal chelation 3.4.1. Solution equilibrium studies
The existence of a BIM moiety in the structure of potential anti-neurodegenerative drugs was already proven to endow the compounds with capacity for hitting several AD targets, such as biometal chelation, eventual dual AChE interaction, as well as self-and Cumediated Aβ aggregation
Concerning metal chelation, the BIM unity is a bidentate moiety and its (N,O) coordination mode implicates a good potential coordination towards hard-soft metal ions.
The study of the metal chelating properties of compound 1, a positional isomer of the already studied compound 2, containing the BIM unit ortho-attached to the benzylpiperazinic moiety, will also show the possibility of formation of a (N,O,O) metal coordination type involving both the BIM moiety and the adjacent carbonyl oxygen atom.
The chelating ability of compound 1 was studied by using the same experimental techniques (potentiometry, UV-vis spectrophotometry) and experimental medium used for the titration of the ligand alone (50% w/w DMSO/water).
In the following calculations for the 1:1 and 1:2 M/L systems (M = Cu, Zn), the log Ki values previously obtained by each experimental method will be used in the complexation studies performed by the same methodology.
Fig.
The potentiometric curves seem to be in accordance with a (N,O) coordination mode, involving the BIM moiety of compound 1, as already found for other BIM derivatives
Table
In the obtained metal complex models, MHL and MH2L2 (not found from 1:2 Cu 2+ /1 spectral data) correspond to species with the ligand containing one protonated nitrogen atom at the piperidine moiety, while ML and ML2 correspond to complexes involving the completely deprotonated form of the ligand; MH-1L and MH-1L2 (not found from 1:2 Cu 2+ /1 spectral data) are mixed ligand-hydroxo metal complexes.
The models obtained for Cu 2+ /1 system from potentiometric and spectrophotometric data (see Table
The outset of Figure
As expected, to the CuH-1L species corresponds also a more intense spectrum with a blue shift of the bands relatively to CuHL/CuL (372 nm (1.5  10 4 )), corresponding to the formation of a complex that has an additional coordination site occupied by an apical water molecule.
Comparing, the spectral data of the Cu 2+ / 1 and Cu 2+ /2 systems
The inexistence, in this last case, of a band at 380 nm may point towards the formation of a MHL complex with a coordination core more strained in the case of compound 1 than for compound 2. Comparison of the metal chelating capacity of compound 1 with that of the already studied analogous compound 2 (see Table1) reveals that the pM values (at pH 7.4, CL/CM = 10, CM = 10 -6 M) are analogous for zinc but higher for copper, which may point towards the possibility of compound 1 having a different copper coordination core, eventually including the adjacent carbonyl oxygen atom, with correspondingly higher stability of the copper complex with 1.
In fact, previous studies on the copper chelation ability of 8hydroxyquinoline (HQ, pCu=13.2 in 60% w/w DMSO/water)
To further examine the proposed complexation models, ESI-MS data was also obtained from solutions of M/1 (M = Cu, Zn), in 50% w/w DMSO/H2O and 1:1 and 1:2 M/L stoichiometric conditions, at specific pH values.
The obtained spectra confirmed the existence of 1:1 and 1:2 metal complexes (see Table
The ESI-MS analysis of a solution of the 1:1 Cu 2+ /1 system, at pH 4. Finally, to analyze the copper coordination core of the complexes with compounds 1 and 2, EPR spectra of these copper systems were obtained, at room temperature and in frozen solution together with the calculated EPR spectra of the component species (see Figure
The solution EPR spectra for the studied systems could be mainly described by free copper, CuLH and CuL2H2, as well as the ratio of the species agreed well with the distribution curves at the selected pH working values.
For the systems with compound 1 (1:1) in RT solution and 2 in frozen solution, only the CuLH complex or the free copper and CuLH could be detected, respectively.
In those cases, the 1:2 Cu/L complex was not formed.
Nevertheless, for compound 1, the frozen solution sample recorded at 1:1 ratio showed a dimer species (Cu2L2H2), besides CuLH, which frequently forms for aromatic flat ligands by the off-centered parallel stacking interaction of two mono-complexes arranged above each other.
The frozen solution spectra of the CuLH and CuL2H2 complexes show well resolved nitrogen splitting, and could be simulated with one nitrogen for CuLH and two nitrogens for CuL2H2, in accordance with the involvement of one or to BIM chelating cores.
The obtained EPR data are collected in Table
The comparison of the EPR data for the CuLH complexes of compounds 1 and 2 allows concluding that the isotropic and anisotropic g values reflect higher ligand field for compound 1 than for compound 2, since the g values are lower for compound 1.
This result supports the already suggested (N,O,O) tridentate coordination mode for compound 1, with the involvement of the adjacent carbonyl oxygen atom.
For the 1:2 copper complex of compound 1 it is probable that the second ligand coordinates equatorially with its imidazole nitrogen and axially with the phenolate oxygen atom.
This coordination change agrees with the facts that gz value decreases only 0.01, comparing with the same value of the 1:1 complex, and the Az value also declines evidencing an axial coordination with small rhombic distortion.



Fig 1 .
Fig 1. DNP and DNP-BIM hybrids (1 and 2), chelators with different attachment points between the benzylpiperidine and the BIM moieties.


H NMR (300 MHz, MeOD-d4), δ (ppm): 1.37 (m, 2H, Pip), 1.67 (d, 2H, J = 12.0 Hz, Pip), 1.80 (m, 1H, Pip), 2.02 (td, 2H, J = 12.0 Hz, Pip), 2.91 (d, 2H, J = 12.0 Hz, Pip), 3.51 (s, 2H, NCH2Ph), 3.58 (d, 2H, J = 12.0 Hz, NCH2CH), 7.34-7.29 (m, 5H, Ph), 7.89-7.79
(m, 4H, Phth); m/z (ESI-MS): 335.00 (M+H) + .


H NMR (300 MHz, MeOD-d4), δ (ppm): 1.01-1.21
(m, 2H, Pip), 1.64 (d, 2H, J = 12.0 Hz, Pip), 1.86 (t, 1H, J = 12.0 Hz, Pip), 2.40 (d, 2H, J = 12.0 Hz, Pip), 2.78 (d, 2H, J = 12.0 Hz, NCH2CH) 2.91 (d, 2H, J = 12.0 Hz, Pip), 3.51 (s, 2H, NCH2Ph), 7.34-7.19
(m, 5H, Ph)


H NMR (300 MHz, MeOD-d4), δ (ppm): 7.08 (d, 2H, J = 8.0 Hz, BIM); 7.42 (m, 2H, J = 8.0 Hz, BIM), 7.96 (t, 2H, J = 8.0 Hz, BIM), 8.25 (d, 1H, BIM); m/z (ESI-MS): 253 (M-1)+, 255.00 (M+1)+.
2.1.2.3.



. Compound 1
was titrated in 50% (w/w) DMSO/H2O medium, at T = 25.0  0.1 °C and ionic strength (I) 0.1 M KCl, by using 0.1 M KOH as titrant.
Both glass and Ag/AgCl reference electrodes were previously conditioned in DMSO/H2O mixtures with increasing amount of DMSO and the response of the glass electrode was controlled by strong acid -strong base (HCl/KOH) calibrations with the determination of the Nernst parameters by Gran's method
The measurements were performed in a final volume of 30.00 mL, with the ligand concentrations (CL) 6.7  10 -4 M (potentiometry) and 4.0  10 -5 M (spectrophotometry), under different CM/CL ratios: 0:1 (L), 1:1 and 1:2 (M = Cu, Zn).
The spectrophotometric measurements were carried out at pH ca 2.5-11.5, in the 300-420 nm wavelength range.
All titrations were performed in duplicate and under the stated experimental conditions the pKw value (13.6) was determined and subsequently used in the computations.
The stepwise protonation constant of the ligand, Ki = HiL/Him H h L l , were calculated by fitting the potentiometric and spectrophotometric data with, respectively, Hyperquad 2008 [9] and PSEQUAD programs
The metal hydrolysis constants were determined under the defined experimental conditions (I = 0.1 M KCl, 50% w/w DMSO/H2O, T = 25.0  0.1 °C) and the following values of stability constants were included in the fitting of experimental data towards the equilibrium models related to the Cu 2+ /L and Zn 2+ /L systems: 99; log ZnH-2= -14.79, log ZnH-3 = -23.48.
Species distribution curves were plotted with the Hyss program [9].



pH 8 )
. Then, 4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazineethanesulfonic acid (HEPES) buffer was used for further dilution of the enzyme solution therefore obtaining the final working solution of AChE.
The assay solution consisted of 374 μL of HEPES buffer (50 mM and pH 8.0), a variable volume (10-50 μL) of the compound's stock solution (1 mg/mL of MeOH), 476 μL of 3 mM bis(3-carboxy-4-nitrophenyl) disulfide (DTNB), 25 μL of AChE stock solution and the necessary amount of methanol to attain the same volume of sample mixture in a 1 mL cuvette.
After mixing, samples were left to incubate for 15 min and then 75 μL of 16 mM acetylthiocholine iodide (AChI) solution was added and immediately the reaction was monitored at 405 nm for 5 min.
Firstly, enzyme activity was determined by measuring the rate of enzymatic reaction in solution by recording absorbance (with or without enzyme) at 405 nm.
To calculate the percent inhibition of AChE, the enzyme activity in the presence of increasing concentrations of the test compound, as well as for a blank reaction (methanol without compounds), were measured at 405 nm.



concentrations for compounds 18 , 19 ,
20 and 23; 20 μM final concentrations for compound 19; 35 μM final concentration for compounds 21 and 24.
The final concentration of DMSO in culture media did not exceed 0.05% (v/v) and no alterations on cells were observed.
The compounds were added to the cell media 1 h before the % I = 100-(v1/ v0 x 100)



Fig. 2 .
Fig. 2. Superposition of compound 1 (above) and 2 [17] (below) and the original ligand (DNP), from PDB code 1EVE, inside the TcAChE active site: DNP (green), compound 1 (yellow) and compound 2 (brown).



Figure 1 -
Figure 1 -a) Potenciometric titration curves of compound 1 (C L = 6.7  10 -4 M) in 50% w/w DMSO/water; b) Absorption spectra of 1 (2.56  pH  11.53, C L = 4  10 -5 M) in 50% w/w DMSO/water and outset containing the individual calculated spectra by PSEQUAD [10].



Table 1 -=
Stepwise protonation constants of compound 1 and compound 2 for comparison purpose, as well as global formation constants a for their Cu(II) and Zn(II)) complexes (T = 25.0  0.1 º C, I = 0.1 M KCl, 50% w/w DMSO/water) and pM b values.
MmHhLl/M m H h L l ; b pM = -log[M] at pH 7.4 (CL/CM = 10, CM = 10 -6 M), c pH-potentiometric data; d UV-vis spectrophotometric data; e ref. [18].



Figure 2 - 5 M
Figure 2 -Spectrophotometric absorption spectra of the 1:2 Cu 2+ / 1 system (2.58 < pH < 11.51, C L = 4.0  10 -5 M) in 50% w/w DMSO/water and outset and outset containing the individual calculated spectra by PSEQUAD [10].



Figure 3 Figure 3 -
Figure3shows the species distribution curves for the 1:2 Cu(II)/1 and Zn(II)/1 systems by using the potentiometric determined model at the used experimental conditions.



Figure 4 - 4 M 10 - 4 M
Figure 4 -a) Expanded ESI(+) mass spectrum for the Cu(II)/1 system (C L /C Cu = 2, C L = 2.25  10 -4 M, pH=6.42) and species distribution curves.
The insert shows the theoretical isotopic pattern for [(C 54 H 55 N 8 O 4 )Cu] + ; b) Expanded ESI(-) mass spectrum for the Zn(II)/1 system (C L /C Zn = 2, C L = 2.25  10 -4 M, pH=7.01) and species distribution curves.
The insert shows the theoretical isotopic pattern for [(C 27 H 27 N 4 O 2 )ZnCl 2 ] -.