Altered Frequency-Dependent Brain Activation and White Matter Integrity Associated With Cognition in Characterizing Preclinical Alzheimer’s Disease Stages
Background: Subjective cognitive decline (SCD), non-amnestic mild cognitive impairment (naMCI), and amnestic mild cognitive impairment (aMCI) are regarded to be at high risk of converting to Alzheimer's disease (AD).
Amplitude of low-frequency fluctuations (ALFF) can reflect functional deterioration while diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) is capable of detecting white matter integrity.
Our study aimed to investigate the structural and functional alterations to further reveal convergence and divergence among SCD, naMCI, and aMCI and how these contribute to cognitive deterioration.
We analyzed ALFF under slow-4 (0.027-0.073
Hz) and slow-5 (0.01-0.027
Hz) bands and white matter fiber integrity among normal controls (CN), SCD, naMCI, and aMCI groups.
Correlation analyses were further utilized among paired DTI alteration, ALFF deterioration, and cognitive decline.
Results: For ALFF calculation, ascended ALFF values were detected in the lingual gyrus (LING) and superior frontal gyrus (SFG) within SCD and naMCI patients, respectively.
Descended ALFF values were presented mainly in the LING, SFG, middle frontal gyrus, and precuneus in aMCI patients compared to CN, SCD, and naMCI groups.
For DTI analyses, white matter alterations were detected within the uncinate fasciculus (UF) in aMCI patients and within the superior longitudinal fasciculus (SLF) in naMCI patients.
SCD patients presented alterations in both fasciculi.
Correlation analyses revealed that the majority of these structural and functional alterations were associated with complicated cognitive decline.
Besides, UF alterations were correlated with ALFF deterioration in the SFG within aMCI patients.

INTRODUCTION
Subjective cognitive decline (SCD), amnestic mild cognitive impairment (aMCI), and non-amnestic mild cognitive impairment (naMCI) are regarded to be at high risk of converting to Alzheimer's disease (AD)
SCD and aMCI are characterized as preclinical AD stages
While multiple research papers regard naMCI as part of the disease continuum due to diverse aspects
Accordingly, the utilization of combined structural and functional neuroimaging analyses is required to further reveal convergence and divergence among normal controls (CN), SCD, naMCI, and aMCI and assist in characterizing the preclinical AD progression.
Resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging (rs-fMRI) is applied for AD pathophysiologic measurement through blood-oxygen-level dependent (BOLD) signal alterations
Amplitude of low-frequency fluctuations (ALFF), defined by BOLD signal fluctuations under low frequency bands, is widely utilized in preclinical AD detection to reflect intrinsic neuronal activities
To note, the selection of specific frequency bands is critical for the precise reflection of neuronal activity
Previous studies have consistently indicated that the slow-5 band (0.01-0.027
Hz) and slow-4 band (0.027-0.073
Hz) are more sensitive in reflecting the compensation and deterioration of AD
Thus, we infer that ALFF under slow-4 and slow-5 bands may be a splendid choice for revealing preclinical AD spontaneous neuronal activities.
Furthermore, diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) detects water molecule diffusion and is sensitive in white matter atrophy detection
DTI-based measures, e.g., fractional anisotropy (FA), mean diffusivity (MD), and relative anisotropy (RA), have been widely proven to be correlated with MCI and AD symptoms
Therefore, utilization of DTI analyses may assist in uncovering alterative characteristics of preclinical AD stages from a structural perspective.
Numerous research papers have utilized ALFF calculation and DTI analyses separately in revealing typical characteristics of prodromal AD stages.
For ALFF detection, abnormal ALFF values were widely detected in the frontal, occipital, and temporal lobes in aMCI patients and were proven to act as a sensitive biomarker for AD pathology
Also, gradual disturbances among CN, SCD, aMCI, and AD were revealed through correlation analyses between ALFF alterations and neuropsychological assessments
DTI tractography may assist in distinguishing significantly deteriorated white matter integrity and serve as biomarkers for MCI
SCD suffered from more subtle alterations than MCI, indicating a potential disease progression sequence
Furthermore, white matter alterations were also revealed to be correlated with progressed cognitive decline
Through MRI modalities, which included combined ALFF and DTI analyses, Gupta et al. created a classification tool to distinguish converting MCI (which progresses to AD) from non-converting MCI
However, the mentioned research lacked consideration of the entire AD preclinical stages (i.e., SCD, naMCI, and aMCI) and analyses of the relationship with cognition.
For the ALFF calculation part, separate sub-divided frequency bands were regarded to better present impairment
Besides, comprehensive cognitive domains may reflect real cognitive conditions more accurately
A combination of structural and functional neuronal analyses may reveal alterations from a comprehensive perspective and help better understand disease pathology and progression.
This study analyzed DTI indices and ALFF to measure structural and functional alterations in preclinical AD stages.
Next, correlation analyses were utilized in matched groups among cognition, white matter integrity, and ALFF values to further reveal internal associations.
We speculated that convergence and divergence existed among SCD, naMCI, and aMCI.
Moreover, relations between structural and functional alterations may further be revealed under AD progression.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Subjects
Our study gained approval from the responsible Human Participants Ethics Committee of the Affiliated Nanjing Brain Hospital (Nos.
2018-KY010-01 and 2020-KY010-02) (Nanjing, China).
Every participant provided written informed consent.
Data applied in this study were obtained from our in-house database: Nanjing Brain Hospital-Alzheimer's Disease Spectrum Neuroimaging Project (NBH-ADsnp) (Nanjing, China), which is constantly being updated.
The details of the NBH-ADsnp-related information are provided in Supplementary Material.
A total of 79 elderly patients were recruited initially from hospitals and communities through advertisement and broadcasting.
Twelve of the participants were excluded due to no MRI data (n = 10) and excessive head motion (cumulative translation or rotation >3.0 mm or 3.0 • , n = 2).
A total of 67 patients were eventually included after exclusion with accordance to previous studies
Detailed inclusive and exclusive criteria are summarized in Supplementary Material.

Neuropsychological Assessments
Evaluation of the four cognitive domains (i.e., visuospatial function, executive function, information processing speed, and episodic memory) was conducted based on neuropsychological assessments according to previous studies
Division and evaluation details are listed in Supplementary Material.

MRI Data Collection
Detailed MRI data acquisitive parameters of the NBH-ADsnp database are provided in Supplementary Material.

ALFF Data Analyses
For ALFF analyses, data preprocessing was performed by MATLAB2013b 1 and DPABI
Briefly, the preprocessing steps included slice-timing and head motion correction, nuisance covariate regression, spatial normalization, spatial smoothing with a Gaussian kernel of 6 mm × 6 mm × 6 mm (full width at half maximum, FWHM)
Participants with excessive head motion (cumulative translation or rotation >3.0 mm or 3.0 • ) were excluded.
The details regarding preprocessing steps are provided in the Supplementary Material.
We used DPABI to calculate the multi-band ALFF values after the image preprocessing procedure.
In brief, we used a Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) to convert the time series into the frequency domain, and obtained the power spectrum, the square root of which was calculated and averaged across frequency intervals that were pre-defined.
The averaged square root obtained by the procedure was then taken as ALFF.
ALFF was z-normalized as Fisher's z transformation ALFF (zALFF) after the calculation
According to previous studies

Statistical Analysis
Statistical analyses were conducted by the Statistical Package for the Social Sciences (SPSS) software version 22.0 (IBM, Armonk, New York, United States).
Comparison of demographic and neuropsychological data within CN, SCD, naMCI, and aMCI was done by analysis of covariance (ANCOVA) and the chisquare test (for gender).
We performed two-sample T-tests for post hoc comparisons between any two groups (Bonferronicorrected, p < 0.05).
The DPABI software was used to compare differences in ALFF indices among the four groups.
Differences under slow-4 and slow-5 bands were revealed by conducting ANCOVA after controlling for age, gender, education level, and GM volume.
A non-parametric permutation test (1,000 permutations) was applied to get control of the false positive rate in the clusterlevel inference
We corrected multiple comparisons of statistical maps to a significant level of p < 0.05, with a cluster size of over 1,350 mm
We used two-sample T-tests to investigate the differences between every two groups under the significant regions detected in the ANCOVA test after controlling for age, gender, education level, and GM volume.
A strict TFCE-FWE was applied to correct the results to a significant level of p < 0.05, with a cluster size of over 270 mm 3 .
In the DTI analyses, for each metric (i.e., FA, MD, and RA), we performed multiple comparisons between any two matched groups.
False discovery rate (FDR) correction was utilized at a threshold of p < 0.05.
To note, various neurocognitive assessments were divided into four cognitive domains as mentioned above (see Supplementary Material for details).
We obtained the composite Z scores of each domain by transforming raw scores into normalized Z scores.
After extracting the ROI Series using the REST software
Furthermore, all data in this study have been subjected to tests for normality.
This study used the Shapiro-Wilk test to assess data normal distribution.
To note, all data (age, education level, neuropsychological characteristics, altered ALFF values, and altered white matter integrity) in this study exhibited a normal/Gaussian distribution, except gender.

RESULTS

Demographic and Neuropsychological Characteristics
Demographic and neuropsychological characteristics of the four groups can be found in Table
To begin, SCD scored the highest among the four groups in the SCD-Q test.
In comparison with CN, aMCI presented significantly lower scores in MDRS-2, MMSE, and MoCA tests (all p < 0.05).
The aMCI group exhibited significant deficits in visuospatial function, executive function, episodic memory, and information processing speed (all p < 0.05).
The aMCI group also showed significantly lower scores in executive function and episodic memory in comparison with the SCD group (all p < 0.05).
Compared to CN, naMCI displayed lower scores in executive function and information processing speed, while naMCI showed lower scores in executive function, information processing speed, and education level in comparison with SCD (all p < 0.05).
aMCI displayed lower scores in episodic memory in comparison with naMCI (all p < 0.05) (see Table

Altered ALFF Values Among CN, SCD, naMCI, and aMCI
Under the slow-4 band, the ANCOVA analysis exhibited significant differences in six brain regions among CN, SCD, naMCI, and aMCI, including the right superior parietal lobule, bilateral lingual gyrus (LING), bilateral superior frontal gyrus (SFG), and right middle frontal gyrus (cluster size >1,350 mm 3 , p < 0.05).
Compared to CN, SCD, and naMCI displayed an increase in ALFF in the right LING and left SFG, respectively.
In comparison with CN, aMCI showed reduced ALFF values in the right middle frontal gyrus and left SFG.
Compared to aMCI, naMCI exhibited increased ALFF values in the right LING (cluster size >270 mm 3 , p < 0.05, TFCE-FWE corrected) (see Table
Under the slow-5 band, the ANCOVA analysis exhibited significant differences in three brain regions among CN, SCD, naMCI, and aMCI, including the right SFG, right middle frontal gyrus, and right superior parietal lobule/left precuneus (cluster size >1,350 mm 3 , p < 0.05).
Compared to CN, SCD, and naMCI, aMCI exhibited descended ALFF values in the right SFG, right middle frontal gyrus, and right superior parietal lobule/left precuneus, respectively (cluster size >270 mm 3 , p < 0.05, TFCE-FWE corrected) (see Table

Deteriorated White Matter Integrity Among CN, SCD, naMCI, and aMCI
Significant results were mainly present in the superior longitudinal fasciculus (SLF) and uncinate fasciculus (UF) among paired groups.
Compared to CN, SCD, and naMCI presented significantly descended FA in the SLF.R. Besides, in comparison with CN, SCD and aMCI exhibited significantly descended MD in the UF.L. Compared to CN, SCD and aMCI also presented significantly descended RA in the UF.L (all p < 0.05, FDR corrected) (see Figure

Associations Between Aaltered ALFF Values, White Matter Integrity, and Cognition
Significant associations between altered ALFF values and cognition were detected with age, gender, and education level as covariates (p < 0.05, Bonferroni corrected).
Under the slow-4 band, the ALFF values of the right superior parietal lobule were positively correlated with executive function in the groups of CN and aMCI (r = 0.6557, p = 0.0002) (see Figure
Under the slow-5 band, the ALFF values of the right superior parietal lobule/left precuneus were positively correlated with episodic memory within the groups of naMCI and aMCI (r = 0.4734, p = 0.0035).
The ALFF values of the right superior parietal lobule in combination with SCD and aMCI were positively correlated with episodic memory (r = 0.4866, p = 0.0034) (see Figure
Significant associations between altered DTI scores and cognitions were detected with age, gender, and education level as covariates (p < 0.05).
MD values of the UF.L were positively correlated with executive function in SCD patients (r = 0.7934, p = 0.0188).
RA values of the UF.L were positively correlated with executive function in SCD patients (r = 0.7571, p = 0.0296).
MD values of the UF.L were positively correlated with visuospatial function in SCD patients (r = 0.7839, p = 0.0213).
RA values of the UF.L were positively correlated with visuospatial function in SCD patients (r = 0.7394, p = 0.0360) (see Figure
Significant associations between altered DTI scores and abnormal ALFF values were detected with age, gender, and education level as covariates (p < 0.05).
Under the slow-4 band, MD values of the UF.L were positively correlated with ALFF values of the left SFG in aMCI patients (r = 0.4295, p = 0.0285).
Besides, RA values of the UF.L were positively correlated with ALFF values of the left SFG in aMCI patients (r = 0.4049, p = 0.0402) (see Figure

DISCUSSION
To the best of our knowledge, our study was the first to combine ALFF detection with DTI analyses and cognition to reveal the inner relationship of CN, SCD, naMCI, and aMCI.
Our results discovered ascended ALFF values mainly in SCD and naMCI patients while descended ALFF values in aMCI patients in comparison with the other three groups.
aMCI and naMCI patients reflected white matter alterations in the UF and SLF, respectively, while SCD patients exhibited alterations in both fasciculi.
To note, the majority of damage was associated with decline in specific cognitive domains.
On balance, these results indicate that SCD may act as the preclinical stage of naMCI or aMCI.
Besides, aMCI has a divergent deteriorative pattern and degree compared to naMCI.
Overall, this study indicates the complicated relationship between structural and functional deterioration and further implies that structural and functional integration may characterize the preclinical AD disease progression.

Convergent Structural and Functional Alterations in SCD and aMCI Patients
As was presented, white matter integrity alterations in the UF within SCD patients were associated with deteriorated executive function and visuospatial function performance.
Besides, UF white matter alterations were correlated with descended ALFF values in the SFG within aMCI patients.
Descended ALFF values were also detected in the MFG within aMCI patients, which was in close association with deteriorated executive function performance.
According to previous studies, the UF serves as a major white matter tract connecting the lateral orbitofrontal cortex and anterior temporal lobes bidirectionally.
Due to its bidirectionality, UF alterations may result in both temporal and frontal dysfunction.
Studies have discovered decisionmaking dysfunction and deterioration of specific learning and mnemonic acquisition associated with altered UF values
Furthermore, the MFG and SFG all belong to prefrontal brain regions which are closely connected to the UF.
Lower ALFF values represent weakened spontaneous neural activity.
Anatomically, white matter degeneration is associated with gray matter atrophy which is correlated with neuronal dysfunction.
Our study results further imply the consistency of ALFF value deterioration and DTI alterations.
Besides, the rostral area of the MFG has been revealed to be closely related with working memory and executive cognitive function
MCI patients have presented executive dysfunction associated with the MFG in previous studies
Combined together, it indicates that dysfunctional neuronal activities and altered white matter integrity jointly lead to executive dysfunction.
The SFG is usually considered to be strongly connected with working memory
The SFG is also in association with the UF.
It is reported that strong connections exist between episodic memory and UF alterations
We speculate that interaction between the UF and SFG may be potential reasons for the presented results of dysfunction in episodic memory in the SFG.
Notably, compared to SCD and aMCI exhibited a significant decrease in ALFF values in the SFG, which further demonstrates the continuous episodic memory decline from SCD to aMCI in patients.
Altogether, in accordance with these results, we may indicate that SCD and aMCI share convergence in the mechanism of UF alterations.
Previous studies have revealed decreased FA values and increased MD values in AD patients
Our study, however, discovered decreased MD values.
We imply that this may reflect the potential compensatory mechanism.
Decreased RA values were also detected in the UF.
Few analyses focused on RA alterations in preclinical AD stages.
In accordance with multiple sclerosis,
We speculate this mechanism also exists in preclinical AD stages.
Through these UF white matter integrity alterations, which are associated with gray matter damage, prefrontal regions reflect dysfunctional conditions which further lead to comprehensive cognitive decline.
Besides, in detail, both SCD and aMCI present similarly deteriorated cognition in episodic memory, indicating that SCD may act as a prodromal stage of aMCI

Convergent Structural and Functional Alterations in SCD and naMCI Patients
Significantly decreased FA values were detected in both SCD and naMCI patients in the SLF.
The SLF is a major white matter tract between the temporoparietal junction and parietal lobe with the frontal lobe.
According to previous studies, the SLF engages in working memory regulation and somatosensory information transference
Our study may prove the convergent deteriorative mechanism between SCD and naMCI in fasciculi.
However, no descended ALFF value was detected in SCD and naMCI patients.
Several previous animal studies have indicated that white matter damage appears prior to cortical plaques
However, a reversed conclusion has been raised with regard to vascular insufficiency.
Still, the tight correlation between white matter atrophy and neuronal dysfunction has been confirmed
Araque
In accordance with our results, we speculate that in the SLF, structural abnormality may be detected earlier in these two disease stages.
Besides, the LING and SFG presented increased ALFF values in SCD and naMCI patients, respectively.
Increased ALFF values indicate enhanced neuronal connectivity within related brain regions
Furthermore, the LING belongs to the visual network that is associated with visual processing
The SFG belongs to the prefrontal cortex (PFC) which is in possession of prefrontal working memory activity
Compensation and deterioration of these two regions have been widely detected in previous studies
On balance, this phenomenon implies the neuronal plasticity of brain regions, indicating that ALFF may serve as an important role in early functional compensation detection.

Divergent Structural and Functional Alterations in naMCI and aMCI Patients
Non-amnestic mild cognitive impairment patients mainly presented decreased white matter integrity in the SLF.
Furthermore, ALFF analyses discovered that naMCI patients exhibited ascended ALFF values in the SFG.
These indicate the consistency of brain region requisition in both deterioration and compensation aspects from structural and functional levels, respectively.
This may indicate the potential damaging progression of naMCI in the SLF and connected frontal regions according to our results.
Amnestic mild cognitive impairment patients detected deteriorated ALFF values in diverse brain regions (i.e., the MFG, SFG, PCUN, and LING).
For DTI analyses, white matter alterations were mostly located in the UF.
We detected associations between altered white matter integrity in the UF and ALFF deterioration in the SFG.
As is mentioned, we speculate that UF alterations interact with dysfunction in the SFG and MFG.
Combined together, structural and functional damage leads to a sharp decline in comprehensive cognition.
Descended ALFF values in the MFG are connected with executive dysfunction.
Partial MFG belongs to prefrontal regions and is in involved in executive function
With the UF participating in execution, we may speculate that functional intercommunication exists between white matter and gray matter.
To note, in comparison with naMCI and aMCI presented significantly descended ALFF values in the PCUN and LING.
The LING participates in the visual network.
Episodic memory integrates as much sensation as auditory and visual information
Researchers have discovered that episodic memory performance is related to the LING
The PCUN is the putative pivotal region of default mode network (DMN), which is considered to be associated with self-related cognitive processing
This brain region is also regarded to have central roles in episodic memory that declines in early disease progression
Descended ALFF values have been detected in the PCUN in SCD, MCI, and AD
Our results reflect the association between episodic memory decline and functional deterioration in the LING and PCUN, indicating the potential neuronal network deficiency of aMCI.
Furthermore, this further demonstrates that typical cognitive deterioration in aMCI tends to be episodic memory decline in comparison with naMCI.
The LING and PCUN may be highly involved in the episodic memory deteriorative mechanism and serve as biomarkers for distinction between naMCI and aMCI.
Furthermore, no related atrophy in white matter with ALFF alterations was found in the PCUN and LING.
We speculate that there is still a neuronal compensation mechanism in late aMCI, which can be reflected in the inapparent damage in DTI analyses.
However, specific neuronal atrophy has formed.
The severity of the disease leads to insufficient compensation, resulting in irreversible dysfunction.
Based on this, we imply that early damage to the PCUN has not been well compensated, resulting in the clinical manifestations of decreased episodic memory in aMCI patients.
Overall, aMCI presents decreased white matter integrity in the UF and more severe ALFF alterations compared to naMCI.
Therefore, this may indicate that aMCI and naMCI may not only share parallel relationships with distinctly declined cognition.
aMCI may act as a more severe disease condition, which is a preclinical AD stage with enhanced research value.

LIMITATIONS
Three limitations became apparent in the study and should be mentioned.
First, the sample size was small, which may cause the results to be less reliable.
To improve statistical power, a non-parametric permutation test (1,000 permutations) was applied to control the false positive rate in the cluster-level inference.
Furthermore, our NBH-ADsnp database continuously recruits volunteers and gets updated.
Once enough volunteers are gathered, we will further verify the accuracy of the conclusion.
Second, individual differences existed in age as well as education levels among CN, SCD, naMCI, and aMCI.
Although all these were used as covariates to maintain the accuracy and reliability of the study, follow-ups have been performed to further reduce this effect and confirm the conclusions reached today in the following studies.
Finally, this study only used ALFF to reveal the underlying pathological mechanism of AD disease progression.
Yang and colleagues have indicated that fractional fALFF (fALFF) can reduce the impact of respiration, cardiac action, or motion while other studies have suggested that ALFF has higher reliability than fALFF
Indeed, both indicators have their strengths and weaknesses
Furthermore, Han and colleagues have emphasized that both ALFF and fALFF are useful and sensitive indexes for the detection of the pathological mechanism of AD-related neurodegeneration
Therefore, in the future, we will expand the sample to further verify the validity of our conclusions and analyze both ALFF and fALFF for an in-depth and comprehensive understanding of the underlying pathological mechanism of AD disease progression.

CONCLUSION
Subjective cognitive decline presents the joint deteriorative characteristics of aMCI and naMCI and tends to convert to either aMCI and naMCI.
Besides, aMCI has a divergent deteriorative pattern and degree compared to naMCI.
Overall, this study further indicates that abnormalities in specific white matter fibers may be the structural basis of brain activation in preclinical AD stages, which may contribute to cognitive decline.
Structural and functional integration can together characterize the preclinical AD disease progression.



FIGURE 1 |
FIGURE 1 | Significant differences in ALFF under the slow-4 band among CN, SCD, naMCI, and aMCI.
(A) Results of ANCOVA analysis among CN, SCD, naMCI, and aMCI (cluster size >1,350 mm 3 , p < 0.05).
(B-E) Results of voxel-wised analyzed two-sample T-tests (cluster size >270 mm 3 , p < 0.05, TFCE-FWE corrected).
To note, these analyses set age, gender, educational level, and GM volume as covariates.
CN, normal control; SCD, subjective cognitive decline; naMCI, non-amnestic mild cognitive impairment; aMCI, amnestic mild cognitive impairment; ANCOVA, analysis of covariance; SPL, superior parietal lobe; SFG, superior frontal gyrus; LING, lingual gyrus; MFG, middle frontal gyrus.
R, right hemisphere; L, left hemisphere.



FIGURE 2 |
FIGURE 2 | Significant differences in ALFF under the slow-five band among CN, SCD, naMCI, and aMCI.
(A) Results of ANCOVA analysis among CN, SCD, naMCI, and aMCI (cluster size >1,350 mm 3 , p < 0.05).
(B-D) Results of voxel-wised analyzed two-sample T-tests (cluster size >270 mm 3 , p < 0.05, TFCE-FWE corrected).
To note, these analyses set age, gender, educational level, and GM volume as covariates.
CN, normal control; SCD, subjective cognitive decline; naMCI, non-amnestic mild cognitive impairment; aMCI, amnestic mild cognitive impairment; ANCOVA, analysis of covariance; SPL, superior parietal lobe; SFG, superior frontal gyrus; PCUN, precuneus; MFG, middle frontal gyrus.
R, right hemisphere; L, left hemisphere.



FIGURE 3 |
FIGURE 3 | White matter integrity alterations among CN, SCD, naMCI, and aMCI.
(A,B) FA scores in the SLF.R among CN, SCD, naMCI, and aMCI.
(A,C) MD scores in the UF.L among CN, SCD, naMCI, and aMCI.
(A,D) RA scores in the UF.L among CN, SCD, naMCI, and aMCI.
*/** meant that significance existed between paired groups.
All these significant results were corrected applying FDR correction with a threshold of p < 0.05 after controlling for age, gender, educational level, and GM volume.
CN, normal control; SCD, subjective cognitive decline; naMCI, non-amnestic mild cognitive impairment; aMCI, amnestic mild cognitive impairment.
FA, fractional anisotropy; MD, mean diffusivity; RA, relative anisotropy; SLF, superior longitudinal fasciculus; UL, uncinate fasciculus.
R, right; L, left.



FIGURE 4 |
FIGURE 4 | Altered ALFF values associated with cognition.
(A,B) Significant correlations between ALFF values and cognition among matched groups under the slow-4 band.
(C,D) Significant correlations between ALFF values and cognition among matched groups under the slow-5 band.
These analyses set age, gender, educational level, and GM volume as covariates.
All presented results were corrected by utilizing Bonferroni correction with a threshold of p < 0.05.
EM, episodic memory; EF, executive function.
SCD, subjective cognitive decline; naMCI, non-amnestic mild cognitive impairment; aMCI, amnestic mild cognitive impairment.
MFG, middle frontal gyrus; LING, lingual gyrus; SFG, superior frontal gyrus; SPL, superior parietal lobe; PCUN, precuneus; R, right; L, left.



FIGURE 5 |
FIGURE 5 | Altered DTI scores associated with abnormal cognition and ALFF values.
(A-D) Significant correlations between altered DTI scores and cognition.
(E,F) Significant correlations between altered ALFF values and abnormal DTI scores.
This study set age, gender, educational level, and GM volume as covariates.EF, executive function; VF, visuospatial function.
SFG, superior frontal gyrus; SCD, subjective cognitive decline; aMCI, amnestic mild cognitive impairment.
MD, mean diffusivity; RA, relative anisotropy; UL, uncinate fasciculus.
L, left.


).



TABLE 1 |
Demographic data of CN, SCD, naMCI, and aMCI.Data are exhibited as mean ± standard deviation (SD).
p < 0.05 meant significant differences existed among CN, SCD, naMCI, and aMCI.
All p-values were achieved through ANOVA analyses except gender (chi square test).
Between-group comparisons were further utilized to reveal specific alterations among matched groups (



TABLE 2 |
Differences in ALFF under slow-4 and slow-5 bands among CN, SCD, naMCI, and aMCI.