Age-at-Onset and <i>APOE</i> -Related Heterogeneity in Pathologically Confirmed Sporadic Alzheimer Disease
To characterize age-related clinical heterogeneity in Alzheimer disease (AD) and determine whether it is modified by APOE genotype or concomitant non-AD pathology, we analyzed data from 1,750 patients with sporadic, pathologically confirmed severe AD.
In this retrospective cohort study, regression and mixed effects models assessed effects of estimated age at onset, APOE genotype, and their interaction on standardized clinical, cognitive, and pathologic outcome measures from the National Alzheimer's Coordinating Center database.
A bimodal distribution of age at onset frequency in APOE e4cases showed best separation at age 63.
Using this age cutoff, cases were grouped as e4early-onset AD (EOAD) (n = 169), e4+ EOAD (n = 273), e4late-onset AD (LOAD) (n = 511), and e4+ LOAD (n = 797).
Patients with EOAD were more likely than patients with LOAD to present with noncognitive behavioral or motor symptoms or nonmemory cognitive complaints, and had more executive dysfunction, but less language impairment on objective cognitive testing.
Age at onset and e4genotype were independently associated with lower baseline Mini-Mental State Examination scores and greater functional impairment and patients with EOAD had faster cognitive and functional decline than patients with LOAD regardless of APOE genotype.
Patients with EOAD were more likely than patients with LOAD to receive a non-AD clinical diagnosis even though they were more likely to have pure AD without concomitant vascular or other non-AD neurodegenerative pathology.
Early-onset sporadic AD is associated with a greater likelihood of an atypical, non-memorydominant clinical presentation, especially in the absence of the APOE e4 allele, which may lead to misattribution to non-AD underlying pathology.
Despite a shared basic pathology across the age range,
Studies suggest that individuals with early-onset AD (EOAD) (typically defined as age <65) have faster cognitive decline than those with late-onset AD (LOAD),
Because many studies did not include autopsy verification, it is impossible to know whether age-related clinical and cognitive heterogeneity occurred in the context of typical AD pathology or depended upon differences in the extent and severity of AD pathology, non-AD pathology superimposed on AD, or non-AD pathology alone.
Therefore, we examined the relationship between age at onset and the clinical presentation of dementia in individuals with autopsy-confirmed severe AD in the large, multicenter National Alzheimer's Coordinating Center (NACC) database.
The contribution of concomitant non-AD neuropathology to potential age-related differences was also examined.
We hypothesized that those with EOAD, especially without the APOE e4 risk allele, are more likely than those with LOAD to have atypical clinical and cognitive presentations, resulting in greater misattribution of the underlying pathology to non-AD causes.

Methods

Case Selection
Data were drawn from the September 2019 data freeze of the NACC database,
Due to major changes in data collected under version 3 of the NACC Uniform Data Set (UDS), this study was restricted to those with clinical data collected under UDS versions 1 and 2 spanning 2005-2015.
Within these parameters, we identified 2,830 patients with a pathologic diagnosis of severe AD, defined as Braak stage V-VI with moderate/severe density of neuritic plaques (i.e., "high likelihood" by National Institute on Aging-Reagan criteria
As our focus was sporadic AD, cases were excluded if they had a known dominantly inherited mutation for AD (e.g., APP; n = 42), a family history of such a mutation (n = 8), Down syndrome (n = 4), or a reported age at onset younger than 50 (n = 115), which may indicate an unknown/de novo autosomal-dominant mutation.
Cases were also excluded if essential data were missing, such as reported age at onset (n = 209) or APOE genotype (n = 315), or if the last valid Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) score was more than 5 years before death (n = 494).
Ultimately, 1,750 cases of pathologically confirmed severe AD at death were included in this study.

Neuropathologic Analysis
Data reported to NACC by each ADC neuropathologist included a diagnosis and specific pathologic findings defined in a NACC Coding Guidebook (alz.washington.edu).
In addition to Braak staging and staging of neuritic plaque density (Consortium to Establish a Registry for Alzheimer's Disease score), we utilized information on the presence/absence of arteriosclerosis, microinfarcts, macroinfarcts/lacunae, and hemorrhages/microbleeds. Atherosclerosis of the Circle of Willis and amyloid angiopathy were each rated on a 4-point scale (none, mild, moderate, severe), and are dichotomized as moderate/severe vs none/mild in our analyses.
Lewy body disease (LBD) pathology included brainstem-predominant, limbic (i.e., transitional), and neocortical (i.e., diffuse) subtypes.
Data on the amygdala predominant and olfactory bulb subtypes was available in a subset of 809 (46%) participants.
Hippocampal sclerosis was not identified separately in the earlier NACC UDS 1 and 2, but instead included under a diagnosis of medial temporal lobe (MTL) sclerosis.
Due to extensive changes in reporting practices in NACC over the years,
Data on TDP-43 immunostaining in the amygdala, hippocampus, and neocortex were available in a subset of 368 (21%) participants for staging of limbicpredominant age-related TDP-43 encephalopathy (LATE).

Clinical Assessment and Diagnosis
At baseline and subsequent visits that occurred at approximately 1-year intervals, participants received a standardized dementia evaluation
Psychiatric symptoms were assessed with the Geriatric Depression Scale (GDS) and the Neuropsychiatric Inventory (NPI).
Cognition was assessed with a neuropsychological test battery
The predominant symptom first recognized in "cognition," "behavior," or "motor" domains (when present) was recorded.
Estimated age at onset of cognitive decline was determined by the clinician through an interview with a knowledgeable informant/study partner.
At each visit, a clinical diagnosis was assigned based on a review of all available clinical data.
The clinical diagnostic procedure included determining whether mild cognitive impairment (MCI), dementia, or cognitive impairment-not MCI was present.
Next, presence was noted of conditions such as probable or possible AD, probable or possible vascular dementia, frontotemporal dementia (FTD) (including behavioral-variant FTD, PPA, PSP, and CBD), LBD (dementia with Lewy bodies or Parkinson disease), or various other conditions that result in cognitive impairment.
Of those conditions present, one was chosen as the "primary" contributor to the cognitive impairment, while others could be listed as "contributing" or "present but not contributing" to cognitive impairment.
Baseline visit was defined as the first visit at which the participant received a non-normal diagnosis.
Baseline was the first ADC visit for a vast majority of the cases; however, some patients (n = 140; 8%) entered the study as cognitively normal and were only classified as impaired at a later ADC visit.
Last visit was defined as the last visit prior to death during which UDS version 1 or 2 data were collected.
The baseline visit was also the last visit for 18.2% of the cases.

Statistical Analysis
Density distributions of the estimated age at onset by the number of APOE e4 alleles were plotted for the 1,750 cases.
The bimodal distribution in the e4-negative (e4-) population was fit well by a 2-component gaussian mixture model (p < 0.001) using an expectation maximization algorithm with the mixtools package for R.
Although the cut point was derived from the e4population only, it was also applied to the e4+ cases to allow us to more easily probe separate effects of APOE and age at onset and their interaction.
APOE genotype was collapsed into e4-(e3e3; e2e3; e2e2) and e4+ (e2e4; e3e4; e4e4) categories in analyses.
In order to illustrate the results of the various analyses, cases were divided into 4 groups and group means and SDs are presented in tables and figures: EOAD e4-(n = 169), EOAD e4+ (n = 273), LOAD e4-(n = 511), and LOAD e4+ (n = 797).
Effects of age at onset, APOE genotype, and the age at onset × APOE genotype interaction were examined by linear regression for continuous variables and logistic regression for dichotomous clinical and neuropathologic variables.
If the interaction term was not significant it was dropped from the model and only main effects were reported to allow for simple interpretation.
Sex distributions differed by age at onset (table
We report the β coefficients and 99% confidence intervals (CIs) for linear regression and the odds ratio (OR) and 99% CI for logistic regression.
Cognitive domain scores were created to examine cognitive profiles at baseline.
Patients' raw scores on each cognitive test were converted to z scores relative to robust normal control participants (individuals who remained cognitively normal throughout all of their evaluations in NACC).
Matching performed with the MatchIt R package
A small percentage of cognitive data (<5% per test) were imputed using the missMDA R package.
Principal component analysis with Varimax rotation identified 4 components that were conceptually labeled as "executive," "memory," "language," and "attention" based on the primary loadings.
The 4 component scores (i.e., cognitive domain scores) were generated for each participant (centered and scaled relative to matched robust normal controls) and separately examined in regression models with linear adjustments for sex and education.
To examine progression, longitudinal change on the MMSE and CDR sum of boxes (CDR-SOB) for up to 5.5 years from baseline was examined using linear mixed effects models with terms for age at onset, APOE genotype, age at onset × APOE genotype, and their interactions with time.
Models were adjusted for sex, education, baseline score, and their interactions with time.
MMSE scores of 0 after the first 0, and CDR-SOB scores of 18 after the first 18, were dropped before model fitting to minimize floor effects.

Standard Protocol Approvals, Registrations, and Patient Consents
The research protocol was approved at each ADC's institutional review board and written informed consent was obtained from participants at each ADC.

Data Availability

Results

Participant Demographic Characteristics
The participants with severe AD pathology selected for this study (n = 1750) had a mean ± SD age of 75.6 ± 9.4 years at their baseline ADC clinical assessment, 15.4 ± 3.1 years of education, and 43% were female.
The average baseline MMSE score was 19.5 ± 7.9.
The APOE genotype distribution was 61% e4+ and 39% e4-.
The average estimated age at onset was 70.5 ± 9.7 years, age at death was 80.3 ± 9.5 years, and overall duration of illness was 9.7 ± 3.9 years.
The average age at the last ADC evaluation was 78.5 ± 9.6 years, the last MMSE score was 13.9 ± 8.2, and the interval between the last evaluation and death was 1.8 ± 1.3 years.

Distribution of Age at Onset by APOE Genotype
Density distributions of the estimated ages at onset by the number of APOE e4 alleles (figure
A 2-component gaussian mixture model fit only to the e4individuals (p < 0.001) identified 2 underlying distributions (figure
The point of intersection between these 2 distributions (the age at onset, which is equally likely to belong to both) was age 63.0 years.

Participant Demographic Characteristics as a Function of Age at Onset and APOE Genotype
Patients with EOAD had longer duration of illness than patients with LOAD by 0.80 years (99% CI, 0.25-1.34)
and a longer interval from last evaluation to death by 0.22 years (99% CI, 0.03-0.41)
(table
Presence of an e4 allele was associated with a longer duration of illness by 0.89 years (99% CI, 0.40-1.37).
Patients with EOAD were less likely to be female (OR, 0.57; 99% CI, 0.42-0.77)
than were patients with LOAD.
When e4+, patients with EOAD were more likely than patients with LOAD to have 2 rather than 1 e4 allele (OR, 1.55; 1.05-2.25).
APOE e4+ patients were more likely than APOE e4patients to have had a first-degree relative with dementia (OR, 2.02; 99% CI, 1.53-2.67).
There were no significant interactions of APOE genotype with age at onset.

Clinical Assessment and Diagnosis
Presenting Symptoms
Most patients reported that cognitive symptoms occurred first; however, patients with EOAD were more likely than patients with LOAD to report noncognitive (i.e., behavioral or motor) symptoms first (OR, 2.70; 99% CI, 1.17-6.13),
and this was particularly true for e4patients with EOAD, as shown by a significant age at onset × APOE genotype interaction effect (p < 0.01) (figure
When cognitive symptoms occurred first, the first symptom was usually memory impairment (figure
Executive domain scores were profoundly more impaired in patients with EOAD than patients with LOAD, and this was particularly true for those with an e4genotype (p < 0.01 for the age at onset × APOE genotype interaction).
Language domain scores were worse in patients with LOAD than patients with EOAD (β = 0.30; 99% CI, 0.07-0.53).
Attention domain scores were unimpaired overall, but slightly worse in patients with EOAD than patients with LOAD (β = -0.44;
99% CI, -0.72 to -0.16).

Clinical Diagnosis
The proportion of patients diagnosed with dementia at baseline ranged from 73% to 91% across groups (table
Patients with EOAD were more likely than patients with LOAD to receive a clinical diagnosis of dementia rather than MCI (OR, 3.02, 99% CI, 1.94-4.90).
This same pattern of results was observed at the final evaluation before death, although the proportion of cases diagnosed with dementia increased in all groups and ranged from 92% to 100% (table

Presumed Etiology
The presumed etiology of the cognitive impairment was assigned based on the results of the baseline evaluation.
The proportion of cases with an etiology thought to be primary or contributing to the cognitive impairment are shown as a function of age at onset and APOE genotype in figure
Approximately 80%-90% of all cases were presumed to have AD pathology as primary or contributing to the cognitive impairment.
In approximately 10%-20% of cases, cognitive impairment was incorrectly attributed to an etiology other than AD.
Patients with EOAD were more likely than patients with LOAD (OR, 0.64; 99% CI, 0.43-0.97) to have their cognitive impairment incorrectly attributed to non-AD pathology.
FTLD pathology was the second most common presumed etiology after AD and was more likely to be assigned as primary or contributing to the cognitive impairment in patients with EOAD than patients with LOAD (OR, 4.25; 99% CI, 2.74-6.65).
Vascular pathology, in contrast, was less likely to be assigned to patients with EOAD than patients with LOAD (OR, 0.18; 99% CI, 0.06-0.46),
although it was rarely assigned as a cause of cognitive impairment.
There was little change in the presumed etiology of cognitive impairment between the baseline and final evaluations (figure
Patients with EOAD continued to be less likely than patients with LOAD to have their cognitive impairment attributed to AD, although this was now only true for e4patients with EOAD (p < 0.01 for the APOE genotype × age at onset interaction).
FTLD remained the second most common presumed etiology after AD, and was more likely to be assigned as primary or contributing to cognitive impairment in patients with EOAD than patients with LOAD, particularly in those without an APOE e4 allele (p < 0.01 for the APOE genotype × age at onset interaction).
Vascular pathology, though rarely assigned, remained more likely to be assigned to patients with LOAD than patients with EOAD (OR, 0.25; 99% CI, 0.10-0.53).
The proportion of individuals with pure severe AD with no identified concomitant pathologies was higher among patients with EOAD than patients with LOAD (OR, 1.41; 99% CI, 1.06-1.87)
(figure
There was no significant effect of age at onset, APOE genotype, or their interaction on the prevalence of concomitant LBD, FTLD, or other pathology.
Medial temporal lobe sclerosis (including hippocampal sclerosis) was less common in patients with EOAD than in patients with LOAD (OR, 0.46; 99% CI, 0.27-0.74),
but there was no significant effect of APOE genotype or age at onset × APOE genotype interaction.
In exploratory subanalyses of individuals with full staging for LBD (n = 809; 46%; figure
although none of the individual stages differed by APOE genotype.
Presence of any TDP-43 pathology was less likely in EOAD than LOAD (OR, 0.37; 99% CI, 0.18-0.72),
driven by lower likelihood specifically of hippocampal TDP-43 (OR, 0.24; 99% CI, 0.08-0.57).
The remaining effects and interactions were not significant.

Discussion
We identified several examples of age-related heterogeneity in patients with sporadic, pathologically confirmed severe AD.
Consistent with previous studies of clinically diagnosed patients,
They were also more likely to have selfreported history of TBI, but less likely to have a history of stroke or TIA.
Patients with EOAD were more impaired than patients with LOAD on mental status and functional activity measures at their initial ADC evaluation.
Objective cognitive testing showed that patients with EOAD had far worse executive function impairment, but less language impairment, than patients with LOAD.
As in previous studies with clinically diagnosed AD,
Ultimately, patients with EOAD were more likely than patients with LOAD to receive a non-AD clinical diagnosis (e.g., FTD, DLB) at their initial ADC evaluation; however, this was only true for APOE e4-EOAD by the last ADC evaluation.
Our results confirm in a relatively large cohort of patients with autopsy-proven severe AD greater likelihood of an initial atypical, nonmemory focal cortical presentation in EOAD than in LOAD.
Despite this, patients with EOAD were more likely than patients with LOAD to have pure AD pathology without concomitant non-AD pathology.
Patients with LOAD were more likely than patients with EOAD to have cerebrovascular pathology, MTL/hippocampal sclerosis, and in a subanalysis, hippocampal TDP-43, consistent with a more common history of vascular disease in LOAD than EOAD, and the known age-related increase in vascular,
Thus, even though patients with EOAD were more likely than patients with LOAD to have an atypical clinical presentation, concomitant non-AD pathologies were less common in EOAD than LOAD.
This finding suggests that copathologies are not responsible for the atypical clinical presentation or faster cognitive decline in EOAD.
We also identified heterogeneity related to APOE genotype.
Regardless of age at onset, e4+ patients performed worse than e4patients on mental status and memory tests, functional activity scales, and psychiatric measures.
APOE genotype was not associated with clinical diagnosis at the initial ADC evaluation, but e4+ patients were significantly more likely than e4patients to be correctly assigned an AD diagnosis at their final evaluation.
This increased accuracy may be because e4+ patients exhibited a more AD-like profile with more prominent memory impairment.
It is possible, however, that patients known to be e4+ were more likely to be called AD since some ADCs may use genetic information when assigning diagnoses.
There was no difference in the likelihood of concomitant pathologies in e4+ and e4patients, except for a higher likelihood of amyloid angiopathy in e4+ patients as previously reported.
It is unclear if amyloid angiopathy significantly contributes to cognitive decline.
In addition, in a subanalysis, LBD pathology (not specific to any particular LBD stage) was more likely in e4+ than e4patients, consistent with findings that the APOE e4 allele is associated with LBD pathology independent of AD.
Estimated age at onset appeared to be normally distributed for those with 1 or 2 e4 alleles, with an expected shift toward younger onset in those with 2 e4 alleles.
In contrast, the frequency distribution of age at onset for those who were e4appeared to have 2 separate peaks at 57 and 76 years of age.
This finding is consistent with the possibility that e4patients with EOAD represent a subgroup that has increased likelihood of atypical clinical features.
This possibility is supported by several age at onset by APOE genotype interaction effects we observed.
For example, the EOAD e4group was more likely than other groups to have noncognitive or nonmemory cognitive presenting symptoms, greater executive function deficits on objective testing, and were most likely to be clinically assigned an etiology other than AD (particularly FTD).
By the last evaluation before death, only 76% of e4patients with EOAD, but over 90% of e4+ patients with EOAD and e4+ and e4patients with LOAD, were assigned an etiology of AD.
There are several possible explanations for why patients with EOAD, and especially those who are APOE e4-, have an increased likelihood of an atypical clinical profile even in the absence of concomitant pathology.
First, there may be genetic contributions to the clinical manifestation of EOAD beyond APOE in the form of polygenic risk or unknown mutations.
A genetic explanation is unlikely, however, since the EOAD e4group had the lowest percentage (at 51%) of individuals reporting a first-degree family member with dementia.
Second, the EOAD e4group was more likely (at 50% prevalence) than other groups to report a history of depression within the past 2 years.
Although active depression was not evident on the GDS, past depression may have influenced the nature of the initial presentation of symptoms, leading to increased reports of initial behavioral or nonmemory cognitive changes and more prominent executive function deficits in e4patients with EOAD.
It is not clear whether depression in the past 2 years is a component of the dementia syndrome in EOAD or a reaction to awareness of cognitive impairment at a young age.
However, if it is a reaction, it might be expected to equally affect e4+ and e4patients with EOAD.
Third, there could be age-related differences in concomitant pathologies not fully examined or reported in the ADC neuropathologic evaluations.
Indeed, our exploratory subanalysis showed associations of TDP-43 pathology with older age at onset, consistent with the criteria for LATE
nally, distribution of AD pathology may differ by age at onset and APOE genotype.
Previous research shows that there can be an atypical distribution of tangle pathology with neocortical predominance and hippocampal sparing even in those with severe AD pathology (i.e., Braak stage V-VI).
While these studies did not specifically address age at onset, they found that this atypical distribution was most likely to occur in younger patients (< 65 on average) who were e4-.
Similarly, structural imaging and tau PET both support the idea of greater frontal and parietal atrophy and pathologic burden in EOAD.
5]
Several limitations of the study should be noted.
The multicenter nature of the study may enhance generalizability, but it introduces variability, because the 33 contributing ADCs may differ slightly in inclusion/exclusion criteria, assessment measures used to reach a diagnosis, and neuropathologic methodology.
ADC cohorts are not representative of the general population, with overrepresentation of rare dementias (e.g., FTD) and possible underrepresentation of vascular dementia.
The original NACC neuropathologic evaluation did not include updated methods (e.g., α-synuclein antibodies) and diagnostic classifications (e.g., LATE), so only exploratory analysis could be carried out in some instances.
Finally, our cohort was intentionally limited to those with severe AD pathology, which may have precluded our ability to observe subtle contributions of concomitant pathology to atypical disease presentations.
However, applying strict pathologic criteria for AD allowed us to avoid the pitfalls of including non-AD mimics (e.g., hippocampal sclerosis


NACC has developed and maintains a large relational database of standardized clinical and neuropathologic research data collected from the National Institute on Aging-funded ADCs across the United States.
NACC data are freely available to all researchers at alz.washington.edu/.
e2274 Neurology | Volume 96, Number 18 | May 4, 2021 Neurology.org/N



Figure 1
Figure 1 Distribution of Ages at Onset by APOE Genotype



Figure 2
Figure 2 Clinical Presentation and Diagnosis



Figure 3
Figure 3 Objective Cognitive Assessment and Progression



Figure 4
Figure 4 Concomitant Pathology



Table 1 Demographics



Table 2
Clinical Assessment and History at Baseline



Table 3
Clinical Assessment at Last Visit 99% CI for β does not include 0; 99% CI for odds ratio does not include 1 (i.e., p < 0.01).