Microbiota-gut-brain axis and toll-like receptors in Alzheimer’s disease
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a multifactorial disease which involves both the periphery and central nervous system (CNS).
It has been recently recognized that gut microbiota interacts with the gut and brain (microbiota-gut-brain axis), contributing to the pathogenesis of neurodegenerative diseases, such as AD.
Dysbiosis of gut microbiota can induce increased intestinal permeability and systemic inflammation, which may lead to the development of AD pathologies and cognitive impairment via the neural, immune, endocrine, and metabolic pathways.
Toll-like receptors (TLRs) play an important role in the innate immune system via recognizing microbes-derived pathogens and initiating the inflammatory process.
TLRs have also been found in the brain, especially in the microglia, and have been indicated in the development of AD.
In this review, we summarized the relationship between microbiota-gut-brain axis and AD, as well as the complex role of TLRs in AD.
Intervention of the gut microbiota or modulation of TLRs properly might emerge as promising preventive and therapeutic strategies for AD.

Introduction
Modern medicine has achieved great victory in life span expanding.
As the incidence of numerous geriatric diseases increases with age, the new challenges include alleviating symptoms, reducing the complications of diseases, and delaying the onset with the intervention of risk factors.
Dementia is one of these diseases, which exerts heavy burden on both the family and society.
The prevalence of dementia increases exponentially with age.
The global prevalence of dementia is about 0.7-1.8% in population aged 60-64 years, while in people aged over 90 years the figure is between 28.7% and 63.9%
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the most common type of dementia accounting for 50-60% of all cases.
Extracellular senile plaques and intracellular neurofibrillary tangles are the main pathological hallmarks of the disease.
The biomarker framework has been established for clinical diagnosis, including amyloid b-42 (Ab42) level, total tau and phosphorylated tau (p-Tau) level in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), positron emission tomography (PET) amyloid imaging, Fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) uptake on PET and structural magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
Although great efforts have been made targeting the two pathological hallmarks, there still remains no disease modifying treatment for AD.
To date, therapeutic strategies targeting against Ab, including active vaccines, passive immunization, as well as band c-secretases inhibitors, were fraught with failure and confusing results
Clinical trials focused on tau protein immunotherapy are still pending
Several hypotheses other than amyloid cascade hypothesis have been raised
It is considered that the imbalance between Ab production and clearance leads to Ab accumulation and subsequently neuronal dysfunction.
Accumulating studies have implicated that neuroinflammation might participate in the clearance of Ab and even promote the pathological process of AD
Epidemiological and observational studies indicate that non-steroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) users had a lower risk of developing dementia
Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) revealed that some genes involved in immune response were associated with AD risk
Acute systemic inflammation events including various infections, surgical interventions, myocardial infarction and so on, could boost neuroinflammation and exaggerate cognitive decline
In animal experiments, it has also been shown that systemic inflammation could accelerate AD-like pathological changes
All these evidences indicate a close relationship between AD and inflammation.
It is assumed that infection event could exaggerate neuroinflammation, promote Ab production, and then resulting in exacerbation of cognitive impairment.
In recent years, a large number of studies revealed that dysbiosis or the localized intestinal infection may trigger systemic immune response, resulting in exacerbated inflammatory response in AD brain
Dysbiosis refers to microbial imbalance on or inside the body.
Intestinal microbiota can bidirectionally interplay with the central nervous system (CNS) through neural, immune, endocrine, and metabolic signals, which is regarded as the microbiota-gut-brain axis
There were over 150,000 microbial genomes reconstructed from global, body-wide metagenomes
The human gastrointestinal (GI) tract is the largest reservoir and harbors approximately 10 14 microorganisms.
Gut microbiota not only has metabolic and trophic functions, but also promotes host defense and immune homeostasis
As numerous lymphoid tissues locate in the intestinal mucosa, GI tract incessantly monitors the pathogens and the dynamic microenvironment of the gut.
The alteration of gut microbiota may lead to intestinal infection or inflammatory bowel disease, and prime the immune response
Toll-like receptors (TLRs), the crucial sentinels, are the first line of defenders, participating in recognizing molecules broadly shared by pathogens and the activated immune system.
TLRs are involved in commensal colonization, maintenance of the homeostasis, and integrity of the intestinal barrier
Apart from an assortment of gut bacteria and their excreta, Ab is also a ligand of TLRs, which, under certain conditions, can initiate the inflammatory process in the gut and the brain, leading to the development of neurodegenerative diseases, including AD.
Here, we review the current knowledge concerning the relationship between TLRs and microbiota-gut-brain axis in AD, and discuss the potential mechanisms underlying the role of TLRs in AD (Fig.

Toll-like receptors signaling
TLRs are a family of transmembrane pattern recognition receptors.
TLRs initiate the downstream signaling transduction upon recognition of damage-and pathogen-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs and PAMPs).
To date, 11 human and 13 mouse TLRs have been identified.
The TLRs can roughly be classified into two groups referring to their space distribution.
TLR1, TLR2, TLR4, TLR5, TLR6, and TLR11 are expressed on the plasma membrane, which recognize microbial products such as lipids, lipoproteins, and proteins, whereas TLR3, TLR7, TLR8, and TLR9 are localized in cytoplasmic compartments, which can be activated by nucleic acid species
TLRs are composed of three major domains, a leucine-rich repeat (LRR) ligand-binding domain, a single membrane spanning helix, and a signaling Toll-interleukin-1 receptor (TIR) domain.
Upon recognizing PAMPs or DAMPs, TLRs undergo conformational changes following dimerization to recruit the downstream signaling adaptors, which triggers the activation of specific transcription factors and the subsequent innate immune responses.
A total of four adaptor proteins have been identified, including myeloid differentiation primary response protein 88 (MyD88), TIR domaincontaining adaptor molecule (TIRAP, also known as MyD88adaptor-like protein, MAL), TRIF-related adaptor molecule (TRAM, also known as TIR-domain-containing molecule 2, TICAM2), TIR domain-containing adaptor protein inducing interferon-b (TRIF, also known as TIR-domain-containing molecule 1, TICAM1)
MyD88 is a universal adaptor protein for all TLR-mediated signaling pathways except for TLR3
MyD88-dependent pathway can induce the activation of nuclear factor kappa B (NF-jB) and activator protein 1 (AP-1), leading to the expression of proinflammatory cytokines, such as tumor necrosis factor-a (TNF-a), interleukin (IL)-1, and IL-6.
Both TLR3 and TLR4 are capable of recruiting TRIF, resulting in the production of type-I interferon (IFN).
TRAM is specifically necessary for TRIF-dependent signaling pathway through TLR4, but not TLR3
Besides, TLR7, TLR8, and TLR9 can also induce the production of type-I IFN through the MyD88-dependent pathway
The activation of TLRs can be regulated by sialic acid-binding immunoglobulin superfamily lectin receptors (Siglecs), which are known to inhibit the immune response.
Extensive Siglec-TLR interactions negatively regulate the activation of TLRs
Disruption of their interactions can result in the activation of TLRs and the immune responses
Siglec-3 (CD33) has been shown to regulate the presentation of LPS to TLR4, leading to down-regulation of TLR4-mediated signaling
Besides, triggering receptors expressed on myeloid cells-1 (TREM-1) also acts synergistically with receptors for PAMPs, including TLRs.
TREM-1 amplifies the TLR-mediated immune response to microbial products, resulting in a dramatic upregulation of pro-inflammatory cytokines secretion

TLRs in Alzheimer's disease
Broad expression of TLRs have been found in human CNS.
TLR1-9 encoding mRNA were detected in primary cultures of microglia from postmortem human brain.
Astrocytes and oligodendrocytes were also found to express TLR2 and TLR3, and to some extent, TLR1 and TLR4
Besides, certain TLRs were also found in neurons
Microglia are the resident macrophages and primary immune cells in the CNS, responsible for the elimination of invading pathogens and injured neurons.
As early as in the 1990s, microglia had been revealed can be activated by Ab
TLRs are also the endogenous binding sites for Ab.
It has been revealed that CD14, TLR2, and TLR4 are required for the activation of microglia by Ab
Overexpression of TLR2, TLR4, and CD14 (the lipopolysaccharide (LPS) receptor) have been found in the brains of both AD patients and AD mouse models
AD mouse models, mostly generated by over-expression of mutated human PS1, APP and/or tau, are valuable tools to investigate the mechanisms of AD.
These transgenic mouse models generally develop amyloid plaques and/ or neurofibrillary tangles in the brain, resembling the hallmarks of AD.
Triple-transgenic AD (3xTg-AD) mouse, APP/presenilin 1 (APP/ PS1) mouse, and tau transgenetic mouse are the commonly used AD mouse models to investigate the role of TLRs in AD
The role of TLR2 in AD is controversial.
TLR2 can recognize Ab42, triggering the release of pro-inflammatory cytokines, including TNF-a, interleukin-6 (IL-6), and interleukin 1-b (IL-1b), which are detrimental to the CNS, promoting the pathogenesis of AD
Inhibiting TLR2 by anti-TLR2 antibody could attenuate Ab-induced pro-inflammatory cytokines release and amyloid accumulation, leading to improved performance in spatial learning in AD mouse models
Additionally, TLR2 deficiency enhanced phagocytosis and clearance of Ab in cultured microglia
All these evidences indicate that inhibition of TLR2, which participates in Ab deposition and Ab-induced neuroinflammation, might be beneficial for AD.
However, Richard et al. reported that TLR2 knockout APP/PS1 mice had lower amyloid burden, but higher toxic Ab1-42 species and more heavily cognitive damage
This was supported by another study, which demonstrated a markedly increased uptake of Ab42 by microglia via the activation of TLR2
These discrepancies might be due to different animal models used, as well as their representing disease stages.
Thus, the role of TLR2 in AD still needs further investigation.
Similar to TLR2, TLR4 seems to play a dual role in the pathogenesis and progression of AD as well.
On one side, microglial TLR4 mediates Ab-induced neurotoxicity
Cytokines, including IL-1b, IL-10, IL-17, and TNF-a, were upregulated in a TLR4dependent way in AD mice
On the other side, TLR4-mutant AD mice had less microglial activation, and as a result, more Ab accumulation and severer cognitive deficits than TLR4 wild type AD mice, suggesting that activation of microglia via TLR4 signaling could enhance the clearance of Ab and preserve cognitive function from Ab-induced neurotoxicity
Another study found that neuroinflammation could promote neuronal autophagy, and that chronic mild stimulation of TLR4 was associated with a reduction in cerebral p-Tau levels and improved cognitive function of tautransgenic AD mice
However, activation of microglia by LPS, a TLR4 ligand, was markedly blunted in 12-month-old APP/PS1 mice compared to their 2-month-old counterparts, indicating Fig.
Potential implications of TLRs and gut-brain-axis for AD.
In healthy subjects, the gut epithelium is guaranteed by tight junctions between the cells.
TLRs are expressed on macrophages, dendritic cells (DCs), and intestinal epithelial cells, serving as sentinels to monitor the pathogens in gut.
Vagus nerve appears to modulate communication between the gut and the brain.
The whole microenvironment maintains in homeostasis.
During aging, the tight junction of intestinal and BBB become permeable.
In AD patients, the diversity of gut microbiota decreased, while the population of pro-inflammation bacteria increased.
Bacteria and their excretions could cross the leaky gut and then activate the TLRs in epithelium, IECs and macrophages, leading to production of pro-inflammation cytokines.
These cytokines make their way through circulation or vague nerves to the brain, enlarge the neuroinflammatory responses, and promote neurodegeneration in CNS.
TLR4 signaling dysfunction due to chronic exposure of microglia to Ab deposits
Collectively, these studies suggest that TLR4 signaling is essential for the clearance of Ab by microglia.
However, persistent chronic activation of microglia by Ab exposure would dampen the TLR4 signaling, leading to further Ab accumulation and neurodegeneration.
Thus, modulating the activation of TLR4 towards facilitating Ab clearance without activating neuroinflammation should be a promising treatment target for AD.
In addition to TLR2 and TLR4, TLR9 can also be detected in both microglia and neurons.
TLR9 polymorphism has been reported to be associated with a decreased risk of AD
Activation of TLR9 signaling could protect neurons from stress
TLR9 knockout mice showed impaired synaptic function
Targeting CpG motifs, which function as TLR9 agonists, can reduce both Ab and tau pathologies in various AD transgenic mouse models, and rescue their cognitive deficits
These studies provide valuable evidence in support of immunomodulation via TLR9 as a potential therapeutic approach for AD.

Gut microbiota and aging
Human aging is an intrinsic physiological process with a gradually function decline in the organs, including intestine, brain, and gut microbiota.
The normal intestinal barrier is comprised of tight junctions between epithelial cells, mucus, bicarbonate, and antimicrobial peptides secreted from Paneth cells
An integrated and healthy gut wall is essential to protect the host from the attack of pathogenic bacteria.
Disorders of the GI tract are prevalent amongst the elderly population.
For example, chronic constipation is common in the elderly and reaches an incidence rate of 30-40% among those over 65 years of age
The underlying mechanism is poorly understood, but impaired intestine mobility, intrinsic aging of the cells in the gut, and some extrinsic factors like gut microbiota, may influence the physiological function of the GI tract
Age related loss of enteric neurons by about 38% was found in old man
Animal studies also demonstrated neuronal loss and degenerative changes with age in the enteric nervous system (ENS), which might be associated with a age-related phenotypic shift of macrophages and altered neural response to inflammatory signals, resulting in increased apoptosis and loss of enteric neurons and neural stem cells
Besides, intestinal epithelial stem cells (IESC), which are responsible for the renewal of the intestinal epithelium, have also been shown to experience age-related dysfunction in mice, such as hyper-proliferation and expansion, and increased expression of genes associated with cellular stress, DNA damage and apoptosis
Gut microbiota transmission occurs during the peri-partum period from mothers to their infants, which could be affected by several perturbations, including birth by Cesarean section and the use of antibiotics during pregnancy
The composition and diversity of the infant microbiota is highly dynamic during the first year of life, and gets to resemble those of adult microbiota by around 3 years old
Thereafter, the gut microbiota generally maintains stable.
However, the increasing disappearances of microbiota and its diversity due to decreased vertical transmission from mother to child, decreased horizontal acquisition of commensal microbiota from other humans, and disrupted maintenance of key microbiota taxa in the early life by multiple insults like antibiotics exposure have exerted cumulative effects over generations, particularly the development of immunity in the gut
Gut microbiota has been suggested to be associated with the development and organization of ENS, and the formation of gut immune system, although little is known about how the balance between immune response and host health is maintained
In terms of aging, age-dependent, microbiome-modulated immunosenescence have been identified.
The diversity and configuration of microbiota in the elderly can be affected by factors including residence location, diet, and health status, leading to the incidence of a wide variety of aging-related diseases

The blood brain barrier during aging
The blood brain barrier (BBB) is a highly selective barrier that acts to separate the circulating blood from the brain in the CNS.
It is composed of the continuous capillary endothelium connected by the tight junctions, astrocytic end feet, and basal membrane.
The physical function of BBB is selectively impermeable to the microscopic objects (e.g., bacteria), large or hydrophilic elements diffusing into the CSF
However, BBB dysfunction and leakage, associated with tight junction impairment and pericytes loss, are common during aging
BBB needs much more mitochondrial volumes than tissues from non-BBB area to maintain its unique structure and the corresponding function
However, this high mitochondrial content makes it vulnerable to accumulated oxidative stress and damage during aging, such as reactive oxygen species (ROS).
The compromised BBB allows pathogens to get into the brain, leading to neuronal damages.
Cross-talks exist between the gut and brain, though the exact mechanisms have not been fully elucidated.
The impact of gut microbiota on gut-brain axis is proposed to involve neural, immune, neuroendocrine, and metabolic systems
The vagus nerve is the longest cranial nerve in the body and has afferent (sensory) and motor (efferent) nerves.
Neurochemical and behavioral changes induced by bacteria exposure to the gut were not found in vagotomized mice, suggesting the vagus as a modulatory communication pathway between the gut and brain
The spread of certain pathologies between the gut and brain have also been identified in animal studies via the vagus nerve
Certain live bacteria may be beneficial to the establishment of BBB defense
Germ-free mice showed significantly increased permeability of BBB, as well as lowered levels of endothelial tight junction proteins
On the other hand, overresponse of the immune system due to gut dysbiosis can result in increased intestinal permeability, gut-vascular barrier (GVB) disruption, and systemic inflammation, which may further lead to the impairment of BBB integrity and neuroinflammation
The existence of GVB was firstly identified by Spadoni et al, who demonstrated the disruption of GVB by pathogenic bacteria, leading to a systemic immune response
Additionally, metabolic products produced by microbiota, such as short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs), can be sensed by vagus nerve.
They can modulate the function of cholinergic neurons of the gut and neuronal activity in the brain after crossing the BBB, resulting in behavioral and cognitive changes.
Environmental and dietary influences, including chronic bacterial or viral infections can progressively alter BBB permeability and thereby facilitate cerebral colonization by opportunistic pathogens as we age.
Given the existence of the gut wall, gut microbiota, immune system, and BBB dysfunction during aging, the microbiota-gut-brain axis may play an important role in age related neurodegenerative diseases such as AD.

The gut microbiota in Alzheimer's disease
Early in 1989, Ab protein deposits were detected in the intestine
Amyloid-b protein precursor (AbPP) from which Ab is derived, and total tau, are also expressed in the enteric neurons, making it plausible that AD pathophysiology could involve the ENS
However, this concept still needs further verification due to contro-versial reports which showed similar amount of Ab and tau pathologies between AD patients and elderly controls
Animal studies have shown a direct effect of gut microbiota on AD pathologies.
Intestinal inflammation induced by gut microbiota perturbation has been identified contributing to the pathogenesis and progression of AD.
The local gut inflammation induced by infection significantly enhanced microglia activation and neuroinflammatory response in 3xTg-AD mice
A lower level of proinflammatory cytokine IL-17 was found in gut-associated lymphoid tissue (GALT) cells of aged AD mice compared to their controls, suggesting that the surveillance to gut microbiota and immune barrier were impaired in AD
Altered gut microbiota composition in the fecal samples from AD patients and AD mouse models have been reported
The altered microbial composition could influence the levels of Ab42, amyloid deposition, and pro-inflammatory cytokines in the brain
A recent report revealed different genera abundance of fecal microbiota between AD patients and cognitively normal controls (increased in AD: Dorea, Lactobacillus, Streptococcus, Bifidobacterium, Blautia, and Escherichia; decreased in AD: Alistipes, Bacteroides, Parabacteroides, Sutterella, and Paraprevotella)
A significantly negative relationship between amyloid burden and relative abundance of Lactobacillus in AD feces was observed
In another study, cognitively impaired patients with brain amyloidosis showed lower abundance of the anti-inflammatory E. rectale and higher abundance of pro-inflammatory Escherichia/Shigella in their fecal samples compared to healthy controls or amyloid negative controls.
Besides, amyloidosis-positive patients had increased serum levels of the pro-inflammatory cytokines, including IL-6, CXCL2, NLRP3 and IL-1b, and lower serum levels of anti-inflammatory cytokine IL-10
These findings support that there is an association between gut-microbiota-related inflammation and brain amyloidosis in AD.
Although great efforts have been made focusing on the role of gut-brain-axis in AD, the relationship between antibiotic treatment and the development of AD in humans has not been identified.
Animal studies have demonstrated that antibiotic-induced perturbations in gut microbiota could influence neuroinflammation and amyloidosis in the brain.
Antibiotic treatment over 6 months induced distinct alterations in microbial diversity in APP/PS1 mice, alongside alterations in peripheral inflammatory cytokines and chemokines, which coincided with attenuated Ab plaque deposition and neuroinflammatory responses
The same group also found that 1 week postnatal antibiotic treatment of APP/PS1 mice resulted in altered gut microbial diversity and reduced Ab deposition at 6.5 months of age
The underlying mechanism has not been elucidated.
However, these findings indicate the close relationship between altered host innate immunity and amyloidosis in AD.

Microbiota-gut-brain axis and TLRs: potential implications for AD
It is well known that TLRs are expressed on numerous cell types in gut, including macrophages, dendritic cells (DCs), T lymphocytes, and intestinal epithelial cells (IECs).
Intestinal epithelial cells are located on the front line of a microbial-rich environment, therefore, TLRs act as the essential mediators between microbiota and the host.
A broad spectrum of compounds are excreted by GI microbiota, including bacterial amyloids and LPS.
The alterations of gut microbiota composition might induce perturbation of bacterial amyloids and LPS.
Both of them can directly activate TLRs.
Bacterial amyloids have been detected in both gram-negative and gram-positive bacteria, like Proteobacteria, Bacteriodetes, Chloroflexi, Actinobacteria, and Firmicutes
There are a variety of bacterial amyloids which contribute to numerously different functions
It has been known that bacterial amyloids are involved in biofilms formation and host defense
However, bacterial amyloids also function as toxins, triggering apoptosis in some human cell lines
The existence of vast quantities of amyloids imply that human physiology may be potentially exposed to a tremendous systemic amyloid burden.
It is remarkable that amyloids produced by human microorganisms are biologically similar to CNS amyloids, such as CsgA, Ab42
When bacteria invade the intestinal mucosa, following interaction with a receptor complex of TLR1/ TLR2, bacterial amyloids can initiate a robust release of inflammation cytokines, including IL-17 and IL-22
Higher bacterial LPS level was found in AD brains than that of the controls
The mean LPS levels varied from 2 to 26 folds increases in brain samples from AD over age-matched controls, depending on the brain area and the severity of the disease
Infusion of bacterial LPS into the fourth ventricle of rat brains reproduced AD-like pathological alterations and cognitive impairment, which did not recover with time
Administration of LPS peripherally led to prolonged elevation of Ab and cognitive deficits
Besides, AD mice exhibited enhanced expression of microglial LPS receptor, CD14, the blockade of which reduced excessive microglial activation and toxicity
Additionally, an in vitro study demonstrated that LPS could potentiate Ab fibrillogenesis
These results suggest that bacterial infection events are potential catalyst to promote the progression of AD.
On the other hand, Ab has also been reported to be an innate immune protein, which protects the brain from invading pathogens by entrapping and neuralizing them within the b-amyloid
Ab has been shown to exert antimicrobial activity in vitro
The antimicrobial activity was significantly higher in brain homogenates from AD than in samples from age matched controls, which can be ablated with the treatment of anti-Ab antibodies
However, chronic sustained activation of this protective antimicrobial pathway leads to excessive Ab deposition and tangle formation, and subsequently neurodegeneration and dementia
Under physiological conditions, despite constant exposure to microbial-derived TLR ligands, IEC is in a state of hyporesponsiveness with low expression of TLRs.
If the intestine is infected by pathogenic bacteria or when inflammatory bowel disease occurs, TLRs are upregulated in an inflammation-dependent way in IECs and macrophages
As a result, tremendous pro-inflammation cytokines and chemokines are released into the blood.
Altered gut microbiota profile has been found associated with elevated levels of plasma LPS, inflammatory cytokines (IL-6, IL-8, IL-12, and TNF), and activated T-cells
Gut infection could also enhance systemic pro-inflammatory response, characterized by the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines such as TNF-a, IL-6, CCL5, and CXCL-1, which was associated with increased activation of microglia in 3xTg-AD mouse brain
Once the pro-inflammatory cytokines are released by TLRs, they make their way to the brain by crossing the BBB via both diffusion and cytokine transporters, especially during aging when the GI epithelial barrier and BBB become significantly more restructured and permeable.
In the brain, these cytokines act on receptors expressed by neurons and glial cells, particularly microglia, altering their activation status and physiology
A recently published work by Wang et al. observed accumulation of Ab in the brains of 5xFAD mice, which is accompanied by shifts in gut microbial population
Besides, as activated M1 microglia increased in the brain, so did the number and pattern of peripheral pro-inflammatory T helper 1 (Th1) cells, indicating that gut dysbiosis alters peripheral inflammation, promoting the activation of microglia and amyloidosis, and eventually cognitive impairment.
A drug named GV-971, remodeled the gut microbiota, could reduce Th1 cell proliferation in the blood and harness neuroinflammation and cognitive impairment, which has also been demonstrated effective in a phase 3 clinical trial

The potential therapeutic targets
To date, there is no disease modifying therapy available for AD.
Therefore, novel insights into AD pathologies are imperative to discover new therapeutic strategies.
The existing interactions between TLRs and the gut-microbiota-brain axis in AD might provide opportunity for intervention.
Emerging studies are focusing on regulating inflammatory response in the gut and brain to delay the progression of AD.
Administration of probiotics appears to be a novel and safe method to preserve a healthy intestinal microbiota and intestinal barrier, reducing the initiation of pro-inflammatory responses and propagation of neuroinflammation in neurodegeneration diseases
Cell surface macromolecules in probiotics, such as peptidoglycan, cell wall teichoic, and lipoteichoic acid (LTA), exopolysaccharides, surface layer associated proteins (SLAPS), and fibronectin binding proteins are able to interact directly with the intestinal epithelium, mucus, and TLRs of the GI mucosa
It has been found that LPS-induced neuroinflammation and memory impairment could be attenuated by consumption of probiotics
In animal experiments, treatment of probiotics, including Bifidobacterium and Lactobacillus, could ameliorate cognitive impairment, decrease the size and number of amyloid plaques, and reduce the immune response and neuroinflammation
Clinical trials also demonstrated that probiotics administration could significantly increase the mini-mental state examination score of the AD patients
Antibiotic treatment and fecal microbiota transplantation are potential options, but still need further investigation.
As mentioned above, TLRs might be the possible therapeutic targets for AD.
Although the role of TLR2 in AD brain is still controversial, studies have demonstrated the association of TLR2 signaling with the activation of microglia and the clearance of Ab.
Further investigations are needed to better characterize the TLR2 signaling, which would shed light on how to target TLR2 as a therapy for AD.
Activation of TLR4 signaling have been found to promote microglia-mediated Ab clearance.
Besides, TLR4 activation could also be probably beneficial due to its autophagy effect.
However, LPS-induced TLR4 signaling activation was dampened in AD mice during aging, suggesting TLR4 signaling might become tolerant to persist Ab exposure in the brain
Chronic and systemic administration of Monophosphoryl lipid A (MPL, a non-pyrogenic TLR4 agonist), through enhancing phagocytic capacity without inducing immune tolerance of innate immune cells, can attenuate the cerebral Ab load
What's more, TLR9 could be another possible therapeutic target.
Intraperitoneal injection of TLR9 agonist significantly reduced Ab and tau pathologies, as well as levels of toxic oligomers in AD mouse models
TLR9 stimulation also effectively ameliorated the cognitive deficits of these mice.
These beneficial effects might result from increased phagocytic activity and upregulation of anti-inflammatory cytokines
Given the complexity of the roles of TLRs in AD, a more profound understanding of the TLR signaling pathway and their association with AD pathologies are essential for the development of effective treatments.

Summary and outlook
In conclusion, we summarized the role of microbiota-gut-brain axis and TLRs in the pathogenesis of AD.
It can be assumed that when gut dysbiosis occurs, microbial amyloids, LPS and other small compounds segregated can disrupt the gut wall and increase its permeability, which further undermine the BBB via blood or ENS pathway.
TLRs can be activated by microbial amyloids or LPS in the gut, leading to the release of pro-inflammatory and/or antiinflammatory cytokines, which results in the imbalance of the immune system, contributing to the progression of AD pathologies and cognitive decline.
Attempts to restore the gut microbiota to a composition that found in healthy adults may slow down the progression of AD.
However, interventions directly targeting TLRs still have a long way to go before more extensive studies carried out to elucidate the TLR signaling pathway and its impact on the immune system.

Declaration of Competing Interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.