Pyroptosis in Alzheimer's disease: cell type-specific activation in microglia, astrocytes and neurons Authors
The major neuropathological hallmarks of Alzheimer's disease (AD) are amyloid β (Aβ) plaques and neurofibrillary tangles (NFT), accompanied by neuroinflammation and neuronal loss.
Increasing evidence is emerging for the activation of the canonical NOD-, LRR-and pyrin domain-containing 3 (NLRP3) inflammasome in AD.
However, the mechanisms leading to neuronal loss in AD and the involvement of glial cells in these processes are still not clear.
The aim of this study was to investigate the contribution of pyroptosis, a pro-inflammatory mechanism of cell death downstream of the inflammasome, to neurodegeneration in AD.
Immunohistochemistry and biochemical analysis of protein levels were performed on human post-mortem brain tissue.
We investigated the presence of cleaved gasdermin D (GSDMD), the pyroptosis effector protein, as well as the NLRP3 inflammasomeforming proteins, in the medial temporal lobe of 23 symptomatic AD, 25 pathologically defined preclinical AD (p-preAD) and 21 non-demented control cases.
Cleaved GSDMD was detected in microglia, but also in astrocytes and in few pyramidal neurons in the first sector of the cornu ammonis (CA1) of the hippocampus and the temporal cortex of Brodmann area 36.
Only microglia expressed all NLRP3 inflammasome-forming proteins (i.e., ASC, NLRP3, caspase-1).
Cleaved GSDMD-positive astrocytes and neurons exhibited caspase-8 and non-canonical inflammasome protein caspase-4, respectively, potentially indicating alternative pathways for GSDMD cleavage.
Brains of AD patients exhibited increased numbers of cleaved GSDMD-positive cells.
Cleaved GSDMD-positive microglia and astrocytes were found in close proximity to Aβ plaques, while cleaved GSDMD-positive neurons were devoid of NFTs.
In CA1, NLRP3-positive microglia and cleaved GSDMD-positive neurons were associated with local neuronal loss, indicating a possible contribution of NLRP3 inflammasome and pyroptosis activation to AD-related neurodegeneration.
Taken together, our results suggest cell typespecific activation of pyroptosis in AD and extend the current knowledge about the contribution of neuroinflammation to the neurodegenerative process in AD via a direct link to neuron death by pyroptosis.

INTRODUCTION
More than 50 million people worldwide suffer from dementia, of which 60-70% have Alzheimer's disease (AD)
AD is characterized by cerebral atrophy with underlying neuronal loss, leading to progressive deterioration of memory and cognitive function
Symptoms are generally preceded by a preclinical stage of 10 to 30 years during which pathological changes already occur
The deposition of extracellular plaques mainly consisting of insoluble amyloid β protein (Aβ) and the formation of intraneuronal neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs) comprising hyperphosphorylated tau protein (pTau) are considered the major neuropathological hallmarks of AD
These lesions are associated with chronic neuroinflammation, mediated by reactive microglia and astrocytes, which is accompanied by the release of inflammatory cytokines
These reactive glial cells are known to accumulate around Aβ plaques, and correlate with NFT burden
One of the pathways leading to the release of inflammatory cytokines is activation of the NOD-, LRR-and pyrin domain-containing 3 (NLRP3) inflammasome, a key innate immune sensor
During NLRP3 inflammasome activation, the receptor protein NLRP3 forms a multi-protein complex with apoptosis-associated speck-like protein (ASC) and caspase-1
Subsequently, caspase-1 is cleaved and activated, in turn cleaving the pro-inflammatory cytokines pro-IL-1β and pro-IL-18, yielding their biologically active forms
Additionally, caspase-1 cleaves gasdermin D (GSDMD), releasing its N-terminal fragment (GSDMD-NT)
These cleaved GSDMD peptides oligomerize and form pores in the plasma membrane, eventually leading to pyroptotic cell death and the release of mature IL-1β and IL-18
This intrinsically pro-inflammatory type of cell death is marked by DNA fragmentation as well as nucleus and chromatin condensation, and is accompanied by the release of cellular content
Besides NLRP3 inflammasome-dependent pyroptosis activation, this cell death mechanism can also be activated directly via caspase-4 during non-canonical inflammasome activation
Increasing evidence is emerging for the activation of the NLRP3 inflammasome in AD, including elevated levels of activated caspase-1 in the frontal cortex and hippocampus of AD patients
On the other hand, Aβ and pTau pathology were shown to drive the activation of the NLRP3 inflammasome
It has been reported that microglia, astrocytes and neurons express components of the NLRP3 inflammasome
Interestingly, NLRP3 inflammasome activation was recently linked to microglial pyroptotic cell death and reduced Aβ clearance in vitro
However, the presence of the pyroptotic effector, i.e., cleaved GSDMD, has not yet been investigated in AD.
Although evidence for NLRP3 inflammasome activation in AD is strong
Additionally, it is unclear how the NLRP3 inflammasome and pyroptosis pathway relate to the previous reported association between necroptotic cell death and neuronal loss in AD
Here, we analyzed the activation of pyroptosis, as well as the canonical NLRP3 and noncanonical inflammasome, in different cell types in the medial temporal lobe (MTL) (i.e., the first sector of the cornu ammonis (CA1) of the hippocampus and in the temporal cortex of Brodmann area 36) of human AD patients.
We investigated the presence of pyroptosis-related proteins (i.e., cleaved GSDMD and IL-18), the components of the NLRP3 inflammasome (i.e., ASC, NLRP3 and caspase-1), as well as caspase-4 and caspase-8, in microglia, astrocytes and neurons, and their association with AD pathology.
Our findings indicate differential activation of pyroptosis in a cell type-specific manner in AD cases.
Proteins involved in NLRP3 inflammasome and pyroptosis activation correlated with neuronal loss in AD, potentially indicating a contribution of inflammasome-and pyroptosis-activation to neuronal death.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Human autopsy cases
Brain tissue samples from 69 patients were included in this study (Suppl.
Table

, online resource).
Selection criteria were the absence of encephalitis or meningitis and (a) meeting the criteria for symptomatic AD, i.e., clinical signs of dementia and intermediate-high degrees of AD neuropathological changes, (b) exhibiting AD neuropathological changes without clinical signs of dementia, indicative for pathologically-defined preclinical AD (p-preAD)
Autopsies were performed in University or municipal hospitals in Belgium (Leuven) and Germany (Bonn, Ulm and Offenbach) in accordance with the applicable laws.
Informed consent was obtained following local legislation.
The recruitment protocols for the collection of human brains were approved by the ethical committees of UZ Leuven (Belgium) and the University of Ulm (Germany).
Tissue samples were taken during autopsy.
The right hemisphere of the cerebrum and cerebellum as well as right half of the brainstem were dissected for gross neuropathological assessment and stored at -80 °C.
The left cerebral and cerebellar hemispheres together with the left half of the brainstem were fixed in 4 % aqueous or phosphate-buffered formaldehyde for 2-4 weeks, followed by dissection and gross neuropathological assessment.
Tissue samples were collected from hippocampus with temporal cortex.
The clinical Dementia Rating (CDR) score

Neuropathology
Samples from all regions of the left hemisphere were embedded in paraffin and microtomed at 5 μm.
Tissue was mounted on Flex IHC adhesive microscope slides (Dako, Glostrup, Denmark) and dried at 55 °C.
Sections were stained with hematoxylin and eosin for diagnostic purposes.
Post-mortem neuropathological assessment of AD pathology was performed based on standardized clinicopathological criteria, including Aβ plaque deposition in the medial temporal lobe (AβMTL phase) determined by Aβ immunohistochemistry
The National Institute of Aging-Alzheimer Association (NIA-AA) score was determined based on the AβMTL phase, Braak-NFT stage and CERAD score, reflecting the degree of AD pathology
The granulovacuolar degeneration (GVD) stage based on the presence of the necroptotic cell death effector phosphorylated mixed lineage kinase domainlike protein (pMLKL) within the vacuoles of GVD was determined according to previously described criteria
Cases were classified into three groups based on the clinical and post-mortem neuropathological diagnosis: (1) AD = intermediate-high NIA-AA score, signs of cognitive decline (CDR ≥ 0.5); (2) p-preAD = low-high NIA-AA score, no signs of cognitive decline (CDR = 0); and (3) non-AD = no signs of AD pathology (NIA-AA score = 0), no signs of cognitive decline (CDR = 0).
Primary age-related tauopathy (PART)
Relevant clinicopathological characteristics of the cases included in this study are summarized in Suppl.
Table

Immunohistochemistry
The presence of NLRP3, ASC, caspase-1, cleaved GSDMD and IL-18 was examined in tissue sections of the MTL covering the hippocampus and temporal cortex (Brodmann area (BA) 36).
An overview of the primary antibodies and their respective dilutions used for the immunohistochemical analysis can be found in Suppl.
Table
Paraffin-embedded tissue sections were processed and stained using a Leica BOND-MAX Automated IHC/ISH Stainer (Leica Biosystems, Wetzlar, Germany) with the Bond Polymer Refine Detection kit (DS9800, Leica Biosystems) according to the manufacturer's protocol.
Briefly, tissue sections were deparaffinized and chemically treated for epitope retrieval (pH 6.1).
Hydrogen peroxide was used to quench activity of endogenous peroxidase.
Tissue sections were then incubated with primary antibodies for 30 min, followed by Horseradish Peroxidase (HRP)-labelled secondary antibodies.
The substrate chromogen 3,3'-Diaminobenzidine tetrahydrochloride hydrate (DAB) was used to visualize the complex, followed by counterstaining with hematoxylin.
After dehydration using an autostainer (Leica Biosystems), sections were mounted using an automated cover-slipper (Leica Biosystems) and Leica CV mount (Leica Biosystems).
Images were taken with a Leica DFC7000 T camera (Leica Microsystems, Wetzlar, Germany) on a Leica DM2000 LED light microscope (Leica Microsystems).
Image processing was performed with ImageJ software (National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, USA) and Inkscape (

Quantification of immunoreactive cells
Immunoreactive microglial cells, astrocytes and neurons in the hippocampal sector CA1 and in the temporal cortex of Brodmann area 36 were quantified on DAB-stained tissue sections (/mm²).
In the temporal cortex, neuronal presence of cleaved GSDMD and the neuronal density was assessed in layer III, since this layer contains the cell bodies of neurons vulnerable to AD pathology
The presence of NLRP3 inflammasome and pyroptosis-related proteins was assessed in all layers of the temporal cortex, since dendrites and/or axonal processes of layer III neurons extend in other cortical layers
Only regions lacking infarcts, microinfarcts or bleedings were considered for quantification.
Morphological criteria for positive cells were determined prior to quantification.
Cell types were distinguished based on cell type-specific cytological features as described by García-Cabezas et al
Fig.
For quantifications of immunoreactive microglial cells and astrocytes, three and five consecutive images were taken at 40x magnification (0.23 x 0.31 mm) of CA1 and cross-sections of the temporal cortex (layer I-VI), respectively, using a Leica DM2000 LED microscope (Leica Microsystems).
For neuronal counts, three consecutive images were taken at 20x magnification (0.46 x 0.62 mm) of CA1 and layer III of the temporal cortex, as described by Koper et al
All cell counts were performed manually using ImageJ software.

Immunofluorescence
Co-localization of inflammasome and pyroptosis-related proteins, cell-type specific proteins and AD pathology was investigated using multiple labelling immunofluorescence.
The microglial cell marker ionized calcium binding adaptor molecule 1 (IBA1) and the astrocyte marker glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) were used as cell-type specific markers.
Anti-Aβ17-24 (clone 4G8) and anti-pTau (S202/T205; clone AT8) were used to detect Aβ and pTau pathology, respectively.
Anti-pMLKL was used to detect the necroptotic cell death effector pMLKL.
Paraffin-embedded tissue sections comprising the hippocampal formation and temporal cortex (Brodmann area 36) were deparaffinized using an autostainer (Leica Biosystems).
Pretreatment was performed using a PT Link module (pH 6.1, Dako).
Incubation with primary antibodies derived from different host species was done overnight in a humid chamber at room temperature (RT), followed by 90 min incubation with carbocyanine 2 (Cy2)/Alexa 488, Cy3 or Cy5 labeled secondary antibodies (Jackson ImmunoResearch Ltd, West Grove, USA).
To combine two primary antibodies derived from the same host species, a modified staining protocol was used to avoid cross-reactivity of secondary antibodies, as previously described
Briefly, incubation of the first primary antibody was performed as described above.
The second primary antibody was incubated with donkey anti-rabbit Fab fragments (2 µg Fab fragment per 1 µg primary antibody, Jackson ImmunoResearch) conjugated to a Cy2 or Cy3 dye for 20 min.
Normal rabbit serum (Jackson ImmunoResearch) was added for another 10 min to capture unbound Fab fragments (10 µl of serum per 1 µg Fab fragment).
After incubation with normal donkey serum (Jackson ImmunoResearch) for 10 min, the mixture was added to the slides and left to incubate overnight in a humid chamber at room temperature (RT).
All antibodies with their respective dilutions can be found in Suppl.
Table
After incubation with TrueBlack Lipofuscin Autofluorescence Quencher (Biotium, Fremont, USA) for 30 s, tissue sections were mounted manually with ProLong Gold Antifade Mountant with DAPI (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, USA) for nuclear counterstaining.
Images of immunofluorescence stainings were captured using a Nikon A1R laser scanning confocal system coupled to a Nikon Eclipse Ti inverted microscope (Nikon Instruments Inc., Melville, USA) using NIS-Elements (Nikon Instruments Europe B.V., Amstelveen, The Netherlands).
Image analysis was performed using ImageJ software.

Protein extraction for SDS-PAGE western blot
Frozen tissue of the temporal cortex from a subset of cases, AD (n =10), p-preAD (n = 6) and non-AD (n = 12) cases, was used for protein extraction.
Samples were homogenized with a micropestle (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany) in extraction buffer (2% SDS in 50 mM Tris, 150 mM NaCl, pH 7.6; TBS) containing nucleases (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and a protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Thermo Fisher Scientific).
Sonication was performed using an ultra-sonic homogenizer (Biologics Inc., Cary, USA), followed by centrifugation with a 5415R centrifuge (Eppendorf) at 13,000 x g for 30 min at RT.
The supernatant (fraction containing soluble and dispersed proteins) was collected and protein concentrations were determined using the Pierce BCA Protein Assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific).
NuPAGE LDS Sample Buffer (Invitrogen, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and NuPAGE Sample Reducing Agent (Invitrogen, Thermo Fisher Scientific) were added to the supernatants, followed by 10 min heating at 75 °C.
Samples were loaded onto precast NuPAGE 4 -12 % Bis-Tris Protein Gels (Life Technologies, Carlsbad, USA) in equal amounts of protein (20 μg).
Electrophoresis was performed with MOPS-SDS or MES-SDS running buffer (Alfa Aesar, Ward Hill, USA) at 140 V for 70 min, followed by semi-wet transfer onto Amersham Protran 0.2 µm nitrocellulose membranes (GE Healthcare, Chicago, USA).
Membranes were blocked with 5 % non-fat dried milk (AppliChem, Darmstadt, Germany) in PBS with 0.1 % Tween-20 (PBS-T) for 1 h at RT and incubated with primary antibody (Suppl.
Table
Horseradish-peroxidase (HRP)-conjugated species-specific secondary antibodies (Dako) were used to bind primary antibodies.
Protein bands were detected using SuperSignal West Pico or Dura chemiluminescent substrate (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and imaged using an Amersham Imager 600 (GE Healthcare).
Restore Western Blot Stripping Buffer (Life Technologies) was used to strip bound antibody, followed by incubation with anti-glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) primary antibody to confirm equal protein load.
ImageJ software (National Institutes of Health) was used to quantify protein band intensity, normalized to the intensity of GAPDH.

Protein extraction for Native-PAGE western blot
Frozen tissue of the temporal cortex from a subset of cases, AD (n =5), p-preAD (n = 5) and non-AD (n = 4) cases, was used for protein extraction.
During the protein extraction protocol, samples were kept on ice.
Samples were homogenized with a micropestle (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany) in extraction buffer without detergent (50 mM Tris, 150 mM NaCl, pH 7.6; TBS) containing nucleases (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and a protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Thermo Fisher Scientific).
Sonication was performed using an ultra-sonic homogenizer (Biologics Inc., Cary, USA), followed by centrifugation with a 5415R centrifuge (Eppendorf) at 3,000 x g for 30 min at 4 ⁰C.
The supernatant (fraction containing soluble and insoluble dispersed proteins) was collected, and protein concentrations were determined using the Pierce BCA Protein Assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific).
NativePAGE Sample Buffer (Life Technologies, Carlsbad, USA) was added to the supernatants.
Samples were loaded onto precast NativePAGE 3 -12 % Bis-Tris Protein Gels (Life Technologies) in equal amounts of protein (20 μg).
Electrophoresis was performed with dark blue cathode buffer (5 % NativePAGE running buffer, 5 % NativePAGE cathode additive, Life Technologies) followed by light blue cathode buffer (5 % NativePAGE running buffer, 0.5 % NativePAGE cathode additive, Life Technologies) at 150 V for 120 min, followed by semi-wet transfer onto Amersham Hybond 0.45 µm PVDF membranes (GE Healthcare, Chicago, USA).
Blocking, incubation with antibodies and detection was performed in a similar manner as for SDS-PAGE western blotting.
ImageJ software (National Institutes of Health) was used to quantify the area of positive signal.

Statistical analyses
GraphPad Prism (GraphPad, San Diego, USA) was used for normality tests and analysis of variance.
One-way ANOVA or the non-parametric equivalent Kruskal-Wallis test was performed followed by Tukey's or Dunn's multiple comparisons test, respectively, to assess significance of inter-group differences.
Within-subject factors consisted of brain region and cell type immunoreactive to the distinct investigated proteins.
Between-subject factors consisted of disease group (i.e., non-AD, p-preAD and AD).
Statistical significance was considered at p < 0.05.
Data are presented as median with interquartile range or mean with standard deviation for non-parametric or one-way ANOVA, respectively.
Partial correlation, linear regression, and mediation analyses were performed using IBM SPSS Statistics software (IBM, Armonk, USA).
Correlation matrices, controlled for age and sex, were separately calculated for neuronal density in CA1 and in layer III of the temporal cortex, together with cleaved GSDMD-positive microglial cells, astrocytes and neurons, NLRP3-and caspase-1-positive microglial cells, AβMTL phase, Braak NFT stage, CERAD, NIA-AA, CDR score, pMLKL-GVD stage, and the number of pMLKL-positive neurons in the CA1 region.
Post-mortem interval (PMI) was included in the correlation analysis to control the effect of post-mortem delay on the investigated variables.
Correlation coefficient values between 0.3 and 0.7 were considered as moderate
Variables that showed significant correlation with neuronal density in CA1 and/or layer III of the temporal cortex were further used for hierarchical regression analysis using R statistical software
Repeated k-fold cross-validated models were computed using the R package caret (
For this, the data was randomly split into k-subsets, with k set to 10 with three repeats.
Starting from a base model including age and sex, variables were added one by one according to decreasing correlation value.
Models were compared pairwise to obtain the regression model that resulted in the lowest test sample Root Mean Squared Error (RMSE) and highest R-squared, indicators of model fit.
Mediation analysis was performed using the PROCESS macro for SPSS
The Sobel test was used to calculate the p-value of the indirect effect.

RESULTS
To investigate pyroptosis activation in AD, we performed immunohistochemical analyses on postmortem brain tissue derived from the MTL of 23 symptomatic AD patients, 25 p-preAD, and 21 nondemented control cases (non-AD).
The CA1 region within the hippocampus was selected as a representative region for AD related cell loss
This gives the opportunity to analyze regions that are involved at different time points in the progression of the AD hallmark pathologies, Aβ plaques and NFTs
We detected cleaved GSDMD in 19 out of 23 AD (83%), 17 out of 25 p-preAD (68%) and 12 out of 21 non-AD (57%) cases.
The presence of cleaved GSDMD varied in different cell types, and in the distinct regions of the brain.

Pyroptosis-related proteins and the canonical NLRP3 inflammasome are expressed in microglia of the AD brain
Microglia exhibited all proteins forming the NLRP3 inflammasome (i.e., ASC, NLRP3, caspase-1), as well as the pyroptosis effector proteins (i.e., cleaved GSDMD and IL-18) in CA1 (Fig.
To confirm presence of the NLRP3 inflammasome and pyroptosis-related proteins specifically within microglia, we performed multiple labelling immunofluorescence using the microglial cell marker IBA1.
ASC, NLRP3, caspase-1, cleaved GSDMD and IL-18 were detected in IBA1-positive cells, confirming their presence in microglia (Fig.
Cleaved GSDMD-positive microglia primarily showed an enlarged cytoplasm and few processes and branches or few processes and no branches identified as amoeboid microglia, indicative of a reactive state
The number of cleaved GSDMD-positive microglial cells was quantified in CA1 and the temporal cortex.
Microglia in CA1 were immunoreactive to cleaved GSDMD in 15 AD (65%), 11 p-preAD (44%) and 5 non-AD (24%) cases.
In the temporal cortex, cleaved GSDMD-positive microglia were observed in 16 AD (70%), 13 p-preAD (52%) and 6 non-AD (29%) cases.
Morphologically, the immunostaining pattern of microglial cleaved GSDMD showed a cytoplasmic, often granular staining (Suppl.
Fig.
In CA1, a significant increase in cleaved GSDMD-positive microglial cells was observed in the AD group compared to the non-AD group (p = 0.0026) (Fig

Cleaved GSDMD and caspase-8 are expressed in astrocytes of the AD brain
In contrast to the expression of all NLRP3 inflammasome-forming proteins in microglia, astrocytes in CA1 and temporal cortex exhibited NLRP3 and cleaved GSDMD, but not ASC, caspase-1 or IL-18 (Fig.
Immunofluorescence stainings of CA1 showed NLRP3 and cleaved GSDMD in GFAPpositive cells, confirming its presence in astrocytes (Fig.
Cleaved GSDMD-positive astrocytes showed a hypertrophic morphology with an enlarged cytoplasm, few processes and branches, representing a reactive state
Quantifications of cleaved GSDMD-positive astrocytes in CA1 and the temporal cortex were performed in a similar manner as for microglia.
In CA1, astrocytes were immunoreactive to cleaved GSDMD in 11 AD (48%), 6 p-preAD (24%) and 2 non-AD (10%) cases.
In the temporal cortex, cleaved GSDMD-positive astrocytes were observed in 12 AD (52%), 11 p-preAD (44%) and 6 non-AD (29%) cases.
Similar to cleaved GSDMD detected in microglia, the immunostaining pattern in astrocytes was cytoplasmic, often with a granular appearance, but more uniformly distributed across the cytoplasm (Suppl.
Fig.
In CA1, a significant increase in cleaved GSDMD-positive astrocytes was observed in the AD group compared to the non-AD group (p = 0.0050) (Fig.
A similar trend was observed for cleaved GSDMD-positive astrocytes in AD temporal cortex compared to that of non-AD cases (p = 0.0684) (Fig.
Since ASC and caspase-1, key players in canonical inflammasome activation, were not seen in astrocytes, we analyzed the histological presence of caspase-8, a known inducer of the cleavage of GSDMD
Interestingly, a subset of astrocytes exhibited strong caspase-8 immunoreactivity, predominantly in AD cases (Fig.
We detected the presence of both, cleaved GSDMD and caspase-8 in GFAP-positive astrocytes (Fig.
Finally, to exclude the involvement of caspase-8 in the extrinsic apoptosis pathway, we performed immunohistochemical stainings using an antibody for cleaved caspase-3, the apoptotic effector protein.
Only physiological levels of cleaved caspase-3 were observed in all groups (Suppl.
Fig.

Cleaved GSDMD and the non-canonical inflammasome protein caspase-4 are expressed in neurons of the AD brain
Besides microglia and astrocytes, also neurons in CA1 and temporal cortex were immunoreactive to cleaved GSDMD (Fig.
Predominantly in cases affected by AD pathology, cleaved GSDMD was observed in the cytoplasm of pyramidal neurons.
Sparse neurons in CA1 and layer III of the temporal cortex were strongly positive for cleaved GSDMD (Fig.
Low levels of NLRP3 and IL-18 were found in the cytoplasm of neurons across all groups, whereas ASC and caspase-1 were not observed (Suppl.

Fig. 4, online resource).
Neurons with strong cytoplasmic immunoreactivity to cleaved GSDMD and shrunken nuclei, presumably undergoing pyroptosis (Suppl.
Fig.
In the temporal cortex, these neurons were observed in 9 AD (39%), 5 p-preAD (20%) and 1 non-AD (5%) cases.
Overall, the number of cleaved GSDMD-positive neurons showing shrunken nuclei was low, and the differences between AD compared to p-preAD (p = 0.0218) and non-AD cases (p = 0.0004) were minimal but significant (Fig.
Also in layer III of the temporal cortex, the number of cleaved GSDMD-positive neurons was increased in the AD group compared to the non-AD group (p = 0.0124) (Fig.
Cleaved GSDMD was not observed in microglial cells or astrocytes that interacted with or were in close proximity to cleaved GSDMD-positive neurons.
Overall, pyramidal CA1 neurons showed physiological levels of caspase-8 in the cytoplasm (Fig.
However, some neurons in AD cases showed a more intense, granular immunostaining pattern for caspase-8 (Fig.
Since the canonical inflammasome components ASC and caspase-1 were not detected in neurons, and caspase-8 was not detected in cleaved GSDMD-positive neurons (Fig.
We detected caspase-4 in cleaved GSDMD-positive neurons (Fig.
Interestingly, neurons strongly immunoreactive to cleaved GSDMD were devoid of pTau-positive material (Fig.
In line with this, pTau-filled neurons did not exhibit cleaved GSDMD (Fig.

Cleaved GSDMD is expressed in Aβ plaque-associated microglial cells and astrocytes
After delineating the cell type-specific presence of the NLRP3 inflammasome and pyroptosisrelated proteins, we investigated the pyroptotic effector cleaved GSDMD in Aβ plaque-associated microglial cells and astrocytes.
IBA1-positive microglial cells and GFAP-positive astrocytes exhibiting cleaved GSDMD were observed near 4G8-positive Aβ plaques in CA1 and the temporal cortex (Fig.
In addition, plaque-associated microglial cells also exhibited all NLRP3 inflammasome-forming proteins (i.e., ASC, NLRP3, caspase 1) and IL-18 (Suppl.

NLRP3-positive microglia and cleaved GSDMD-positive neurons are associated with neuronal loss in CA1 of the hippocampus
To investigate the association between the presence of pyroptotic effector cleaved GSDMD and neuronal loss in AD, neuronal count per surface area (mm²) was used as a surrogate parameter for local neuronal loss.
In line with a previous study performed by our group

4, online resource).
A combination of the latter two parameters could thus best predict the neuronal density in CA1 compared to regression models using other predictor variables.
Simple linear regression confirmed the negative effect of increased NLRP3-and cleaved GSDMD-positive microglial cells on the neuronal density in CA1 (Suppl.
Fig.
A similar analysis was performed in layer III of the temporal cortex.
A weak negative correlation was found between the neuronal density in layer III of the temporal cortex and the number of caspase-1-positive microglial cells (r = -0.303,
p = 0.013) (Suppl.
Table
Starting from a linear regression model including the parameters age and sex (RMSE = 13.17,
R 2 = 0.13), the addition of the predictor variable caspase-1positive microglial cells (β = -1.282,
p = 0.013) could best predict the neuronal density in layer III of the temporal cortex (RMSE = 12.82, R 2 = 0.20) compared to other predictor variables (Suppl.
Table
The negative effect of increased caspase-1-positive microglial cells on the neuronal density in temporal cortex layer III was again confirmed using simple linear regression (Suppl.
Fig.

Pyroptosis/inflammasome activation in microglia and necroptosis activation in neurons have independent effects on neuronal loss in CA1
To test whether hippocampal neuronal loss is associated with the presence of the pyroptosis effector protein cleaved GSDMD and/or the necroptosis effector pMLKL in pyramidal CA1 neurons, we investigated a subset of the cases (n = 63) that was previously included in a study by
Partial correlation analysis controlled for age and sex indicated correlations between the number of pMLKLpositive neurons in CA1 and the number of cleaved GSDMD-positive microglial cells (r = 0.321, p = 0.012), astrocytes (r = 0.310; p = 0.015) and neurons (r = 0.261, p = 0.042) (Suppl.
Table
Similar to our findings for cleaved GSDMD-positive neurons and NLRP3-positive microglial cells, neuronal density in CA1 correlated inversely with the number of pMLKL-positive neurons in CA1 (r = -0,316; p = 0.013).
Based on the results from partial correlation, we constructed a linear regression model predicting neuronal density using the number of NLRP3-positive microglial cells, cleaved GSDMD-positive neurons and pMLKL-positive neurons as independent variables to clarify the contribution of both pyroptosis/inflammasome activation and necroptosis on neuron death in AD.
Independently, the number of NLRP3-positive microglial cells (β = -1,673, p < 0.001), cleaved GSDMDpositive neurons (β = -12,733, p = 0,003) and pMLKL-positive neurons (β = -0,535, p = 0,013) were inversely associated with the neuronal density in CA1 (Suppl.
Table
Included in one linear regression model, the number of NLRP3-positive microglial cells (β = -1,544, p < 0.001) and cleaved GSDMD-positive neurons (β = -8,543, p = 0.031) had independent effects on the neuronal density, while the effect of the number of pMLKL-positive neurons (β = -0,366, p = 0.052) did not reach statistical significance but showed a clear trend toward an independent contribution to neuron death.
Linear regression predicting neuronal density in CA1 using the number of NLRP3-positive microglia and pMLKL-positive neurons in CA1 indicated significant inverse association (β = -0,431, p < 0.001 and β = -0,263, p = 0.013, respectively).
Finally, to investigate co-expression of the pyroptotic cell death effector cleaved GSDMD and necroptotic cell death effector pMLKL in neurons, we used multiple labelling immunofluorescence.
pMLKL was not observed in cleaved GSDMD-positive neurons (Suppl.
Fig.
Vice versa, pMLKL-positive neurons did not express cleaved GSDMD (Suppl.
Fig.

Detection of the complete NLRP3 inflammasome and cleaved GSDMD in single microglia, and potential pyroptosis executor GSDMD-NT oligomers
To investigate possible NLRP3 inflammasome-mediated cleavage of GSDMD and, thus pyroptosis activation in microglia, we used multiple labeling immunofluorescence.
We observed coexpression of the NLRP3 inflammasome and the pyroptosis effector protein cleaved GSDMD in microglia in CA1 of AD cases.
All proteins of the NLRP3 inflammasome (i.e.
ASC, caspase-1 and NLRP3) together were found in single microglial cells also immunoreactive for cleaved GSDMD (Fig.
To further validate the involvement of pyroptosis activation and its potential execution in AD, we investigated the levels of GSDMD and GSDMD-NT in the temporal cortex of a subset of cases (N = 28) using SDS-PAGE and western blot.
The levels of GSDMD showed an upward trend in the AD group compared to the non-AD (p = 0.1759) and p-preAD group (p = 0.0981) (Fig.
Fig.
Western blotting with an antibody against GSDMD-NT showed decreased levels of GSDMD-NT in AD cases compared to non-AD (p = 0.0278) and p-preAD cases (p = 0.0004) (Fig.
Fig.
To clarify whether the decrease of GSDMD-NT monomers seen after SDS-PAGE is related to possible oligomerization of GSDMD-NT as the final pore-forming executor of pyroptosis, we performed native-PAGE (N = 14) allowing the detection of protein complexes including oligomers.
We detected GSDMD-NT oligomers most pronounced in AD cases, which were significantly enriched compared to p-preAD cases (p = 0.0467) (Fig.
We additionally investigated the levels of ASC, caspase-1 (full length and p20) and IL-18 (full length and cleaved) using SDS-PAGE western blot (Suppl.
Fig.
Fig.
The cleaved and activated form of caspase 1 (p20) showed a trend towards increased levels in AD cases (p = 0.0467) compared to control cases (Suppl.
Fig.
The levels of cleaved IL-18 showed an upward trend in p-preAD cases compared to non-AD (p = 0.1082) and AD (p = 0.0701) cases (Suppl.

DISCUSSION
This study shows activation of the pyroptosis pathway in microglia, astrocytes and neurons, via distinct cell type-specific processes, in human AD brain.
All NLRP3 inflammasome-forming proteins, and cleaved GSDMD were only detected in microglial cells, while astrocytes and neurons exhibited cleaved GSDMD in the absence of the NLRP3 inflammasome, pointing to alternative pyroptosis activation pathways possibly via caspases 8 (astrocytes) or 4 (neurons).
Moreover, microglia and astrocytes positive for cleaved GSDMD were pronounced in close proximity to Aβ plaques, although low levels of microglial cells and astrocytes were also found in the absence of Aβ plaques in nondemented control cases.
NLRP3-positive microglial cells and cleaved GSDMD-positive neurons moderately inversely correlated with the neuronal density in CA1.
Thus, cell type-specific inflammasome and pyroptosis activation is part of the AD pathophysiology and may contribute to the neurodegenerative process (Fig.
The presence of the NLRP3 inflammasome-forming proteins (i.e., ASC, NLRP3 and caspase-1) and pyroptosis-related proteins (i.e.
cleaved GSDMD and IL-18) in microglia is in line with previous reports on NLRP3 inflammasome activation in microglia in vitro, as well as in mouse models of AD pathology and multiple sclerosis (MS), and in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS)
The presence of abundant ASC-positive microglial cells in all clinical groups suggests physiological expression of this protein, while increased NLRP3-and cleaved GSDMD-positive microglial cells in CA1 and the temporal cortex of AD cases point to upregulation of NLRP3 and increased cleavage of GSDMD as a consequence of AD pathology.
In both CA1 and the temporal cortex, a subset of astrocytes and sparse pyramidal neurons exhibited NLRP3 and cleaved GSDMD but lacked detectable amounts of ASC and caspase-1.
Presence of IL-18 was also observed in some neurons.
Although in vitro studies have reported NLRP3 inflammasome activation in astrocytes
A recent study on pyroptosis in ALS reported the presence of cleaved GSDMD in microglial cells within the human ALS motor cortex and spinal cord
Thus, differential pyroptosis activation patterns might underly ALS and AD.
It became clear over the last couple of years that there is a wide spectrum of microglial cell states, extending the more simplified view of M1-M2 polarization
Among these cell states, distinct Damage/Disease Associated Microglia (DAM), antigen presenting response (HLA) and Cytokine and chemokine Response Microglia (CRM), as well as microglia undergoing replicative senescence, have been identified in AD
These microglia are characterized by distinct transcriptional signatures
Reactive and senescent microglial phenotypes are found in ageing and disease, and are both characterized by a pro-inflammatory signature (TNFa, IL-1b, and IL-6)
Whether those microglial cells that show activation of the pyroptosis pathway are senescent or not, or whether pyroptosis activation in microglial cells is independent of senescence cannot be answered on the basis of our data.
However, the published transcriptomic data
The presence of all NLRP3 inflammasome proteins, cleaved GSDMD and IL-18 in microglia suggests NLRP3 inflammasome-mediated activation of pyroptosis in AD brain microglia.
The absence of ASC and caspase-1, key proteins for NLRP3 inflammasome formation, in astrocytes and neurons, suggests that these cell types do not undergo NLRP3 inflammasome-mediated activation of pyroptosis in AD.
Although several other canonical inflammasomes have been described, of which some reported to function without ASC
Interestingly, we observed the presence of caspase-8, a known inducer of the cleavage of GSDMD
Although caspase-8 is also a molecular player in the extrinsic apoptosis pathway
Finally, the observed presence of caspase-4 in cleaved GSDMD-positive neurons potentially indicates non-canonical inflammasome-mediated cleavage of GSDMD and thus pyroptosis activation.
This is in line with earlier reports of caspase-4 being involved in AD pathogenesis, as well as endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stressand Aβ-induced cell death
Cleavage of GSDMD is followed by oligomerization of GSDMD-NT and formation of pores in the cell membrane, leading to cell death
However, GSDMD pore formation can be regulated and does not inevitably lead to pyroptotic cell death
Negative regulation of pyroptosis by the endosomal sorting complexes required for transport (ESCRT) machinery suggests a role for ESCRTdependent plasma membrane repair in the removal of GSDMD pores, restricting pyroptotic cell death while favoring GSDMD-dependent cytokine release
The observed granular immunostaining pattern of cleaved GSDMD, specifically in microglia and astrocytes, might indicate GSDMD-NT oligomerization.
Together with the relatively high number of cleaved GSDMD-positive microglial and astroglial cells, this potentially indicates restricted formation of GSDMD pores in the plasma membrane, without execution of pyroptotic cell death in most microglia and astroglia.
However, it is possible that some of these cleaved GSDMD-positive cells eventually go into pyroptotic cell death, as previously suggested by Friker et al
Execution of pyroptotic cell death has been reported to occur as fast as within 45 min in vitro
The sparse observation of cleaved GSDMD-positive neurons with shrunken nuclei (approximately 1 cleaved GSDMD-positive neuron/mm²) indicative for necrosis
The increase in the levels of GSDMD-NT in the p-preAD group, although not significant, possibly reflects the early AD pathology present in the temporal cortex, presumably acting as a trigger for NLRP3 inflammasome and pyroptosis pathway activation.
Considering the spatial difference in the spread of Aβ and pTau pathology throughout the brain
The biochemical decrease in the level of monomeric GSDMD-NT in symptomatic AD cases might reflect assembly of GSDMD-NT oligomers, as observed in native-PAGE, eventually forming the plasma membrane pores
The upward trend of full length GSDMD levels in the temporal cortex of AD patients seen by western blotting, is in line with a recent study reporting the levels of full length GSDMD in cerebrospinal fluid as an accurate diagnostic marker for AD
Although our findings suggest pyroptosis activation in AD, the involvement of other cell death mechanisms than pyroptosis, such as necroptosis, ferroptosis, and autophagy-related cell death, in AD pathogenesis is likely
While previous studies have reported execution of apoptosis in AD, these lack convincing evidence for the presence of neurons with apoptotic morphology and activated caspase-3 in brains with AD pathology
Activation of the necroptotic cell death mechanism in AD has recently been reported
In this context, necroptosis activation in AD brain was characterized by the presence of necroptosis-related proteins within neuronal vacuoles of GVD.
The extent of this necroptosis-related protein accumulation in GVD was strongly associated with neuron loss
Here, our linear regression analysis revealed an independent contribution of neuronal necroptosis and microglial NLRP3 inflammasome activation to neuron loss.
Notably, caspase-8 has been suggested as a molecular switch between pyroptosis, apoptosis and the necroptotic cell death mechanism, activating the inflammasome and inducing pyroptosis when apoptosis and necroptosis cannot be executed
Our observation of the absence of neurons expressing both cleaved GSDMD and pMLKL makes it tempting to speculate that either necroptosis or pyroptosis activation occurs in distinct pyramidal neurons in AD.
Although intracellular pTau pathology is associated with GVD
This hypothesis is in line with the observed correlation of the number of NLRP3-and cleaved GSDMD-positive microglial cells and cleaved GSDMD-positive astrocytes and neurons, with the pMLKL-GVD stage.
Microglial cells and astrocytes immunoreactive to cleaved GSDMD accumulated around Aβ plaques, while cleaved GSDMD was not observed in neurons in the vicinity of Aβ plaques or in cells with pTau pathology.
Considering the sensor protein NLRP3 is able to detect Aβ
Given that cytokine release is known to impair the clearance of Aβ plaques by microglia
Additionally, Aβ has been shown to interact with ASC released by pyroptotic cells, resulting in increased activation of the NLRP3 inflammasome and subsequent pyroptotic cell death
This suggests a vicious cycle of aggravating Aβ pathology and proinflammatory events.
Moreover, IL-1β and IL-18 activate signaling pathways that further enhance the inflammatory responses and create cytotoxic conditions leading to neuronal injury and death
Collectively, these findings are in line with Aβ pathology driving the inflammatory response, which increases over time
This hypothesis is in accordance with our results showing a correlation between the number of NLRP3-and cleaved GSDMD-positive microglial cells, cleaved GSDMD-positive astrocytes and neurons, and AβMTL phase.
The absence of pTau pathology in cleaved GSDMD-positive neurons and the mediation analysis showing predominant indirect effects of the number of NLRP3and cleaved GSDMD-positive microglial cells, cleaved GSDMD-positive astrocytes and neurons on the Braak NFT stage potentially indicates contribution of NLRP3 inflammasome and pyroptosis activation to the acceleration and propagation of pTau pathology by Aβ-driven effects
This is in line with an earlier study showing Aβ-induced pathological Tau through activation of the NLRP3 inflammasome
However, evidence also exists for pathological Tau as a direct driver of NLRP3 inflammasome activation
Although lipopolysaccharides (LPS) are the best-known interactors of caspase-4, leading to its activation
These stressors could drive caspase-4-mediated cleavage of GSDMD and neuronal pyroptosis activation in AD.
Our findings of cleaved GSDMD-positive astrocytes accumulating around Aβ plaques might indicate that Aβ activates caspase-8-mediated cleavage of GSDMD and consecutive astrocytic pyroptosis activation.
In this study, we used neuronal counts per surface area (mm²) as a surrogate parameter to investigate local neuronal loss and found increased neuronal loss in CA1 of p-preAD and AD cases, as previously reported
Overall, quantification of cells positive for cleaved GSDMD and the proteins of the NLRP3 inflammasome suggests the strongest NLRP3 inflammasome and pyroptosis activation in CA1.
Moreover, the number of NLRP3-positive microglial cells and cleaved GSDMD-positive neurons were moderately associated with decreased neuronal density in CA1, suggesting that the activation of the NLRP3 inflammasome in microglia and pyroptosis in neurons contributes to neuronal loss in AD.
In the temporal cortex, NLRP3 inflammasome and pyroptosis activation was less pronounced, as well as their correlation with the decreased neuronal density in this region.
Taken together, our results suggest selective regional vulnerability for the activation of the NLRP3 inflammasome and pyroptosis in AD-affected MTL, with CA1 being more vulnerable than the temporal cortex of BA36.
Although the mechanisms underlying selective vulnerability in AD remain unclear, these findings are in line with pyramidal neurons of CA1 being particularly vulnerable in the AD hippocampus
Our findings showing activation of pyroptosis in AD and its potential cell type-specific pathways may have impact on the treatment of patients.
First, our findings confirm earlier studies that the NLRP3 inflammasome is a potential target to lower the inflammatory reaction and damage in the brain
Second, we extend the current knowledge by showing that pyroptosis pathway activation occurs in AD and may represent a novel therapeutic target to reduce neuroinflammatory brain damage.
In this context, pharmacological inhibition of GSDMD pore formation could represent an interesting target to interfere with pyroptosis or pyroptosis-regulated cytokine release via GSDMD-NT pores.
Earlier studies have reported necrosulfonamide and the FDA-approved drug disulfiram to inhibit GSDMD pore formation, downstream cytokine release and pyroptosis
Finally, we show that not only microglial cells participate in inflammasome and pyroptosis activation, but also astrocytes and neurons, possibly via caspases 8 and 4, respectively.
This cell type-specific variation of pyroptosis activation highlights the complexity of the neuroinflammatory response in AD.
Distinct pathways may contribute to the neuroinflammatory response and neurodegeneration in AD.
Accordingly, inhibiting NLRP3 inflammasome activation may not be enough to sufficiently reduce neuroinflammation and ADrelated neuronal loss.
It must be noted that comorbidity, agonal conditions and PMI may affect inflammatory responses in the brain, possibly influencing the quantified variables in this study.
Comorbidity and agonal conditions were taken into account in the selection criteria of cases as much as possible.
The PMI showed no significant association with any of the investigated parameters (Suppl.
Tab. 3, online resource), indicating no major influence.
By using an antibody panel targeting the inflammasome as well as pyroptosis pathways, we provided ample evidence for inflammasome-mediated pyroptosis activation in AD.
However, the immunohistochemical stainings for IL-18 and caspase-1 should be interpreted with caution, since the used antibodies are reactive to the full length, as well as cleaved forms of the proteins.
Recently, full length GSDMD was reported in oligodendrocytes of the ADaffected brain cortex
However, we did not further investigate cleaved GSDMD in this cell type based on the lack of histopathological evidence of oligodendroglial cleaved GSDMD found in our samples.
Another limitation of the analysis of human brain tissue is the lack of mechanistic understanding and functional confirmation of the execution of the cell death pathway.
We can only provide association data which require functional validation in future in vitro and in vivo studies.
In conclusion, we show differential activation of inflammatory pathways (i.e., inflammasome and pyroptosis activation) in microglia, astrocytes and neurons in AD.
This study provides new insights into inflammasome and pyroptosis activation in different cell types in the brain in response to AD pathology, potentially contributing to AD-related neurodegeneration.
It is essential to comprehend the complexity and variability of the neuroinflammatory response in AD in order to develop effective therapeutic strategies for AD patients.

Disclosures/Conflict of Interest
DRT is a member of the Acta Neuropathologica Editorial Board.
He was not involved in the assessment or decision-making process for this manuscript.
DRT received speaker honorary or travel reimbursement from UCB (Brussels, Belgium) and Biogen (USA), and collaborated with Novartis        Inflammasome and pyroptosis activation is expected to increase with the progression of AD pathology.
No or very few pyroptotic cells were observed in non-AD cases, while pyroptotic microglial cells, astrocytes and neurons were observed in p-preAD cases, with increased prevalence in AD cases.
It is essential to note that pyroptosis pathway activation not necessarily must lead to cell death.
GSDMD-NT oligomers pores may also serve as pores for cytokine release


).
Overall, the number of cleaved GSDMD-positive microglial cells showed an upward trend with AD progression across disease groups.
Similar to CA1, cleaved GSDMD-positive microglial cells in the temporal cortex were increased in AD cases compared to non-AD cases (p = 0.0254) (Fig1d).Additionally, we quantified microglial cells positive for the components of the NLRP3 inflammasome and IL-18 in CA1 and the temporal cortex.
High numbers of ASC-positive microglial cells were observed in both investigated regions across all groups (Suppl.
Fig.2a, e, online resource), suggesting physiological expression of ASC.
In AD brain, NLRP3-positive microglial cells were increased in CA1 (p = 0.0498) (Suppl.
Fig.2b, online resource) and in the temporal cortex (p = 0.0023) (Suppl.



Fig. 2f ,
Fig.2f, online resource) compared to non-AD brain, while no significant differences were observed in



Fig. 4 ,
online resource).
Correlation analysis showed moderate association of the number of cleaved GSDMD-positive cells and NLRP3-positive microglial cells, with parameters for AD pathology, i.e., AβMTL phase, Braak NFT stage, CERAD score and NIA-AA score, as well as the pMLKL-GVD stage (Suppl.
Table 3 a and b, online resource).
Notably, the number of cleaved GSDMD-positive microglial cells in CA1 correlated with abovementioned parameters, while this was not the case for the temporal cortex.
Since we did not observe pTau-positive material in cleaved GSDMD-positive cells, we performed mediation analysis to analyze the indirect effects of cleaved GSDMD-positive microglia, astrocytes and neurons, and NLRP3-positive microglia on the Braak NFT stage via progression of Aβ pathology, i.e., the AβMTL phase.
We observed significant indirect effects of cleaved GSDMD-positive microglia (p = 0.021), astrocytes (p = 0.035) and neurons (p = 0.001), and NLRP3-positive microglia (p = 0.006) on the Braak NFT stage with the AβMTL phase as mediator variable (Suppl.
Fig. 5, online resource).
The direct effects of cleaved GSDMD-positive microglia (p = 0.152), neurons (p = 0.051) and NLRP3-positive microglia (p = 0.108) on the Braak NFT stage were insignificant, while the direct effect of cleaved GSDMD-positive astrocytes (p = 0.002) on the Braak NFT stage was significant (Suppl.
Fig. 5, online resource).


Fig 6, online resource).
In layer III of the temporal cortex, a significant decrease in the number of neurons per surface area was observed in the AD group compared to the non-AD group (p = 0.0052) and p-preAD group (p = 0.0490) (Suppl.
Fig 6, online resource).
No significant differences were observed between non-AD and p-preAD cases in the temporal cortex (p > 0.9999).Next, we investigated the correlation between neuronal density in CA1 or layer III of the temporal cortex, and cell type-specific presence of the NLRP3 inflammasome and pyroptosis-related proteins.
A moderate negative correlation was found between neuronal density in CA1 and the number of NLRP3-positive microglial cells (r = -0.480,
p < 0.001), as well as with the number of cleaved GSDMDpositive neurons (r = -0.363,
p = 0.003) in CA1 (Suppl.
Table3, online resource).
Starting from a linear regression model including age and sex (RMSE = 26.66,
R 2 = 0.26), hierarchical linear regression was performed using the highest correlating parameters, predicting the neuronal density in CA1 (Suppl.Table 4, online resource).The regression model including NLRP3-positive microglial cells (β = -1.554,
p = < 0.001) and cleaved GSDMD-positive neurons (β = -11.048,
p = 0.003) as predictor variables showed the lowest RMSE value(22.47)
and highest R 2 (0.45) compared to other models (Suppl.
Table


Fig. 10e-f and Suppl.
Fig. 11d-e, online resource), although not reaching significance.



FIGURESFig. 1
FIGURES



Fig. 2
Fig. 2 NLRP3 and cleaved GSDMD, but not ASC, caspase-1 or IL-18 are expressed in astrocytes in the



Fig. 3
Fig.3Caspase-8 is present in cleaved GSDMD-positive astrocytes, and pyramidal neurons, in the MTL



Fig. 4
Fig.



Fig. 5
Fig.5Cleaved GSDMD-positive neurons exhibit caspase-4, but not caspase-8 or pTau pathology.



Fig. 6
Fig. 6 Cleaved GSDMD is expressed in microglia and astrocytes in close proximity to Aβ plaques.
a-b



Fig. 3
Fig.



Fig. 8
Fig. 8 Cell type-specific pyroptosis activation in the MTL of AD brain.
In microglia, the canonical NLRP3



Fig. 8 . 7
Fig.8Cell type-specific pyroptosis activation in AD.